With goals set high, we can point, with modest pride and full awareness of what remains undone, to real and lasting achievements during 1999 for the benefit of all American workers.
UMET (Using your Military Experience and Training) website established to assist military personnel and veterans in matching their service credentials with civilian job requirements and obtaining the licensing and training to qualify for civilian occupations.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) introduced a geometric mean formula for calculating the consumer price index (CPI), providing a more accurate measure of how changing prices impact the average U.S. household.
Business-to-Business mentoring initiative provided employers of more than 600,000 workers with assistance in developing family-friendly workplace policies.
Glass ceiling" reviews increased by 10 percent, resulting in the elimination of illegal salary disparities; monitoring of 29 construction mega-sites promoted employment opportunities for women and minorities.
Under the Fair Labor Standards Act, $131.5 million in back wages was recovered for some 200,000 workers; $2.1 million was collected in civil penalties for repeat and willful violations of the Act.
Employment Standards Administration assisted a national toy chain to implement a self-audit program in its 700+ stores to ensure compliance with child labor laws and to enhance training for managers and young workers.
Ergonomics standard proposed to protect 27 million workers in occupations involving repetitive activity, with the goal of reducing the average of 300,000 work-related musculoskeletal injuries each year.
The report offers insights, based on facts and figures, into the promises and perils of growing globalization, evolving technology, and changing demographics.
The Department met the government-wide deadline of March 31, 1999 by ensuring that its 61 mission critical systems were Year 2000 compliant, and navigated the Year 2000 roll-over with no interruption in services.
Regulation proposed permitting States to use unemployment funds for partial wage replacement to new parents following the birth or adoption of a child.
Enjoying today’s extraordinary economic prosperity, the American worker has come a long way from the Dark Ages of indentured servitude and bonded labor.
Our computerized, high-tech, service-oriented world of work is ready to engage all who are ready, willing, and able to share in the rewards of the unprecedented opportunities that stand on the horizon of the 21st century.
Let us take a closer look at modern America and its workers.
First, the health of the American economy is robust, the best in three decades.
Since January 1993, more than 20 million new jobs have been created; the result is that a greater percentage of the population aged 16 and over is employed now than at any previous time.
Unemployment averaged 4.2 percent in 1999, the lowest rate since 1969.
Also, the new jobs are high quality jobs, with 81 percent of the job growth in those industries and occupations paying above-median wages, and 65 percent in the highest-paying third of those categories.
The best news is that this prosperity has been broadly shared.
Groups that have too often been left behind are making significant gains.
Unemployment among African Americans fell to 7.6 percent in May 1999, the lowest rate on record.
Hispanic unemployment also reached a record low this year – 5.9 percent in March 1999.
The unemployment rate for women is the lowest it has been since 1953.
Unemployment rates have also declined for all educational groups since 1992, with the largest percentage point declines in the groups with the fewest years of schooling.
As unemployment dipped, increases in earnings, adjusted for inflation, were widely shared in the late 1990s, sharply contrasting to the 1980s, when earnings increases went to high-wage workers and real earnings fell for low-wage workers.
Real median household income reached an all-time high of $38,885 in 1998.
The poverty rate fell to 12.7 percent, the lowest since 1979.
The effects of the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) lifted an additional 4.3 million people out of poverty in both 1997 and 1998.
African Americans experienced a 15.1 percent increase in real median household income between 1993 and 1998, and the 26.1 percent poverty rate for African Americans was the lowest ever recorded.
Real median income of Hispanic households grew by 4.8 percent in 1998, and the Hispanic poverty rate dropped to the lowest since 1979.
Overlaying this outs and among record of achievement was the dramatic transformation of the American workforce.
Service and white-collar occupations increasingly dominated the work world, while export-related jobs in manufacturing reflected an America that has become increasingly inter-twined with the global economy.
And small business has proven its vital role in job creation, as the share of workers employed by establishments with fewer than 500 workers rose from 73 percent in 1976 to 8?
The Department's *futurework* report on the trends and challenges for work in the 21st century stated that our new economy was and will be powered by technology, fueled by information, and driven by knowledge.
A far cry from the days when all you needed to hold a job was a willing pair of hands.
Just as historically removed from yesteryear is the traditional male make-up of the workforce.
During the past 20 years, women have increasingly gone to work-they now account for 47 percent of America's 139 million workers.
Three-fifths of women with small children (under age three) were in the labor force in 1998.
While nearly three-fourths of the workforce will remain white and non-Hispanic by 2008, African Americans, Hispanics, Asians, and other minorities will account for about two-thirds of new workers between now and 2008.
The nature of work is also changing.
The employment of temporary help has increased since the early 1980s.
By February 1999, 1.2 million people worked for temporary help agencies.
Since the late 1960s, we have seen a slight increase in the proportion of jobs that are part-time, and the number of employees who do some work at home or telecommute is now estimated as many as 21 million.
Technology will continue to transform jobs and require better skills to do them.
Employment opportunities will favor those who have higher levels of education and training.
For example, a Princeton University study found that workers who use computers earn 10-15 percent more than those whose jobs do not require them.
Workers with college degrees have higher real earnings today than in the late 1970s, while the earnings of those with only a high school education or less have fallen.
The result is that while college graduates earned 38 percent more than high school graduates in 1979, they earned 76 percent more in 1999.
And high school dropouts are three times more likely to be unemployed than college graduates.
Technological change is likely to continue to increase the demand for skilled workers.
The vast majority of current and future jobs will need workers who have acquired knowledge and skills via two-year colleges, vocational schools, on-the-job training, and real work experience.
While overall employment is projected to rise by 14 percent during 1998-2008, professional occupations will grow by 27 percent, followed by technical occupations, such as health and engineering technicians, at 22 percent.
Occupations requiring a bachelor's degree are expected to expand by 24 percent, while those requiring an associate's degree will grow by 31 percent.
Not only will globalization affect the types of jobs in demand in the U.S., but also events and conditions in countries outside of the U.S. will increasingly impact on the well-being of American workers.
The workforce today is the harbinger of the workforce tomorrow.
The Department of Labor is committed to enhancing employment opportunities for all Americans, promoting the economic security of workers and families, and fostering quality workplaces that are safe, healthful, and fair.
The challenge is to prepare all of today's workers to share in the rewards of our new high-tech global economy, so that no individual is ever "obsolete", so that no family is ever bereft of basic benefits, and so that no workplace is ever a danger to health or a source of discrimination.
Enacted in 1993, the Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA) requires Federal agencies to establish standards for measuring the performance and effectiveness of their programs and services.
The law requires agencies to develop strategic plans that describe their long term goals and objectives; annual performance plans that provide goals to assess yearly progress toward meeting these strategic goals; and annual reports to Congress that summarize an agency's success in achieving its annual performance plan.
FY 1999 was the first fiscal year when Federal agencies were required under GPRA to establish performance measures to assess the effectiveness of their programs and services.
Each Department of Labor (DOL) agency developed a FY 1999 Annual Performance Plan.
Of the more than 200 goals included in the agencies' performance plans, 48 performance goals key to the accomplishment of DOL's strategic goals were identified for inclusion in the FY 1999 Departmental Performance Plan, providing a basis for assessing the Department's effectiveness in providing core services to our constituents as well as the performance of individual DOL agencies.
Included in this first annual report are descriptions of the Department's strategic goals, the ensuing outcome goals, and a detailed presentation of program results for each of the 48 performance goals in the FY 1999 DOL Annual Performance Plan.
The appendices provide additional details and explanatory materials supporting the program results.
Of the 48 key performance goals incorporated in DOL's FY 1999 Annual Performance Plan, the Department exceeded or fully achieved 35 (73 percent) of these goals during this first year of managing under the provisions of the Government Performance and Results Act.
The Department also gained a greater appreciation during FY 1999 of the remaining challenges to a complete implementation of GPRA, including strengthening our focus on the intended outcomes of DOL programs, improving the quality and timeliness of the data used to measure our performance, and further increasing the Department's effectiveness in meeting our core mission responsibilities.
To continue to improve the delivery of the Department's core services to America's workers and employers, coordination of DOL's strategic management efforts has been strengthened by the establishment of a dedicated GPRA staff and an interagency working group which meet together throughout the year to facilitate GPRA implementation.
The Department has initiated systems to ensure routine assessment of progress against our performance goals, and the Deputy Secretary and agency executives meet several times each year to review performance results.
In addition, the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) is actively collaborating with the Department on the implementation of GPRA, providing information and advice on how to attain the best possible program accomplishments and accountability.
DOL's functions are organized around three strategic goals, which have provided the focus for the Department's strategic planning and a framework for the annual performance plans.
These goals build on our successes and respond to the challenge of helping every working American participate and prosper in today's economy.
Through these three strategic goals and their supporting outcome goals, DOL staff and the American public can see a direct link between the Department's purpose and its activities.
The three DOL strategic goals are: During this initial year of GPRA implementation, the Department's achievement levels varied among our three strategic goals.
The Department was the most successful in meeting performance goals under Strategic Goal 2, A Secure Workforce: 13 of the 14 (93 percent) performance goals were achieved.
Under Strategic Goal 1, only 50 percent of the performance goals (6 of 12) were met or surpassed.
For Strategic Goal 3, 9 (64 percent) of the 14 performance goals were met.
¹ In this report, FY 1999 performance data and supporting information are presented by strategic goal, following the sequence of information in the Department's FY 1999 Annual Performance Plan.
Each DOL strategic goal serves as a major heading for presenting performance results.
More specific outcome goals further segment the larger objectives of each strategic goal.
This information provides a non-technical orientation on how DOL serves the public in this major area of the overall DOL mission and introduces the detailed performance information that follows.
¹The performance goals under the strategic goals total only 40 because they do not include the departmental management goals; DOL successfully met 7 of the 8 (88 percent).
Following each outcome goal, separate reports of results for individual performance goals or goal narratives provide the following information: * A report and analysis of FY 1999 performance results against the goal.
A description of the program being evaluated.
Highlights of key strategies employed toward achieving the goal.
A capsule summary of any planned changes in the program and performance measures based on FY 1999 results.
Summary comments on audits and evaluations that may have been conducted on the program that year.
The key to successful accomplishment of the performance goals identified in DOL's FY 1999 Annual Performance Plan was appropriate coordination and integration of DOL's programs and activities, both among its component agencies and with other Federal government departments and agencies with overlapping missions and goals.
This section of the Annual Performance Report highlights these linkages and identifies those programs in which DOL has in FY 1999 undertaken a coordinated effort with other Departments and Agencies to eliminate duplication and provide increased value to the American public.
The following appendices provide supporting information for the performance results presented in the body of the report.
Appendix 1* presents the organizational chart for the Department.
Appendix 2* lists each performance goal, indicates whether the goal has been achieved, the agency responsible for meeting the goal, and the measurement period for the performance data.
This section also identifies performance goals that were eliminated or revised subsequent to the release of the FY 1999 Annual Performance Plan to maintain continuity between the two documents.
Appendix 3* includes a listing of audits and evaluations of DOL programs conducted by the General Accounting Office (GAO), the Office of the Inspector General (OIG), and other organizations during FY 1999.
Appendix 4* contains supporting information for each performance goal including the performance indicator, source of data, baseline data, any comments pertinent to data collection, and the previous goal if the goal was revised after the release of the FY 1999 Annual Performance Plan.
Appendix 5* is the glossary of acronyms used in this report.
DOL is committed to enhancing opportunities for America's workforce by providing the tools and assistance necessary for success in today's job market to people new to the labor force or wishing to improve their potential.
Special emphasis is placed on closing the employment gap for out-of-school youth, and providing long term jobs for individuals moving from welfare to work.
In addition, the Department publishes crucial labor market information to support key economic and policy decisions.
Secretary Herman and President Clinton kick off the Youth Opportunity (YOI) Program.
The origin of public programs addressing the need to increase employment, earnings, and assistance may be traced back to the original War on Poverty, with the passage of the Economic Opportunity Act – an attempt to open the door to the American dream of economic self-sufficiency to those who have been disenfranchised, disadvantaged, and largely forgotten.
For too many Americans, this dream is still unfulfilled.
As 1999 concludes, the economy is booming and unemployment is low.
Even though millions of Americans are enjoying economic success, not everyone is sharing in the prosperity.
Among those at risk of remaining in the pockets of poverty are individuals in distressed communities – low income adults, welfare recipients, and veterans who are struggling with homelessness, service-connected disabilities, and readjustment to civilian life.
The Employment and Training Administration (ETA) and Veterans’ Employment and Training Service (VETS) operate a number of programs focused on bridging the gaps and breaking the cycles that lead to poverty and despair.
Earnings and employment measures have been steadily improving in recent years.
DOL anticipates continued progress in achieving the goals of increasing earnings, employment, and assistance to the target populations served by the DOL programs described above.
By July 1, 2000, DOL will complete its transition from JTPA to the Workforce Investment Act (WIA).
While moving from one governing statute to another presents some administrative hurdles, WIA affords the Department an opportunity to strengthen services provided to adult workers through key components such as local Workforce Investment Boards and private sector involvement.
Goal 1.1A: 56 percent of WTW program terminees will be placed in unsubsidized employment.
Results: 73 percent of WTW program terminees were placed into unsubsidized employment.
The unsubsidized placement rate of WTW program terminees, as of the quarter ending September 30, 1999, was 17 percentage points higher than the FY 1999 goal.
Terminees are defined as those participants placed into unsubsidized jobs, plus those participants leaving the program without a job.
Participants in subsidized jobs or those undertaking other program-funded work activities (such as work experience or community service) were not counted as having terminated WTW.
Program Description: The DOL WTW program began in FY 1998 by issuing grants to States and local communities to increase job opportunities for the hard-to-employ recipients of Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF).
Grantees provide welfare recipients with job readiness services, transitional employment activities, job placement services, post-employment services, and other supportive services needed by participants to make the successful progression into long-term unsubsidized employment and achieve economic self-sufficiency.
Analysis of Results: A number of factors contributed to the achievement of the FY 1999 unsubsidized placement goal: (1) innovative strategies to facilitate cross-system collaboration and integrated service delivery at Federal, State, and local levels; (2) aggressive marketing and new outreach initiatives to potential participants and the business/employer community; (3) transitional subsidized employment opportunities such as community service and work experience; and (4) innovative and comprehensive supportive services, such as off-hours child care and transportation, substance abuse treatment, and services for individuals with disabilities.
Strategies: The initial legislated WTW program eligibility and design features proved to be overly complex and not reflective of those individuals remaining on the welfare rolls.
On November 29, 1999, Congress enacted legislative amendments to the eligibility criteria and made other programmatic changes which are expected to improve the original program's overly-restrictive eligibility and design features and enhance performance.
The new amendments became effective in January for grantees awarded funds on a competitive basis and will take effect this July for grantees awarded funds on the basis of a statutory formula.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: In FY 2000, the program focus will shift toward intensive technical assistance, system-building, and oversight efforts.
The design and implementation of the "next generation" of WTW programs will seek to provide wider opportunities for self-sufficiency for the hardest-to-serve, the working poor and their families, noncustodial parents, and other under-served and low-income groups.
In FY 2000, the program will measure participants' retention in the workforce and changes in earnings two quarters after placement in unsubsidized employment.
Audits and Evaluations: Four significant evaluations of the WtW program took place in FY 1999.
Mathematica Policy Research, Inc. published the first report of its ongoing evaluation of the effectiveness of WtW initiatives.
The Office of the Inspector General (OIG) performed three surveys of WtW formula and competitive grantees to assess the capability of grantees' operating systems to deliver WtW services.
Appendix 3, items 1 through 4 provide further information on these evaluations.
Results: The retention and earnings measures show a positive trend.
Program Year 1998 results indicate that 69 percent of JTPA terminees were employed one quarter after exit with average weekly earnings of $338.
Program Description: Title II-A of JTPA, "Training Services for Disadvantaged Adults," establishes programs to prepare economically disadvantaged adults for the workforce, by increasing their occupational and educational skills.
States and local service delivery areas served approximately 300,000 participants under grants totaling $955 million for Program Year 1998.
Ninety percent of the disadvantaged adult terminees age 22 and older received services, which included assessments and case management, direct training, employer training, and special supportive services.
3) the program has leveraged the resources and expertise of Federal, State, business, and related community-based organizations.
Improved retention and earnings were accomplished despite the fact that the number of jobs available to high school dropouts has decreased in the past 20 years.
The partnerships have had many tools and resources, including tax credits, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families and related welfare-to-work programs, and Pell grants.
Finally, the strong labor market and the administration's employment and training investments have positively influenced program outcomes.
Strategies: JTPA, including Title II-A, will be replaced by the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) for all States by July 1, 2000.
WIA will build upon the successful strategies of JTPA, including: extensive partnering with Federal, State, business, and community-based organizations; maintaining strong accountability at local levels; and assuring comprehensive services to address barriers to employment and good jobs for all adults, not only the disadvantaged.
Seven key principles of WIA expand on JTPA's experiences, such as streamlining services, empowering individuals, providing universal access, increasing accountability, operating under strong local control, accommodating State flexibility, and improving youth programs.
JTPA surpassed its baseline goals by a combination of a robust economy, strong accountability at the State and local levels, and improved Federal policies and State management.
In FY 2000, the goal is being revised to focus on longer term employment retention of at least two quarters after program exit and to better measure gains in participants' earnings by comparing two quarters of post-program earnings with two quarters of pre-program earnings.
To obtain more timely information on progress toward attaining goals in the future, the Employment and Training Administration has recently proposed requirements for quarterly reporting by States and other job training grantees.
Goal 1.1C: Assist 300,000 veterans to find jobs; 10,000 will be service-connected disabled veterans, and 1,850 will be veterans who are homeless.
Results: The combined efforts of DOL's Disabled Veterans' Outreach Program (DVOP), Local Veterans' Employment Representative (LVER) program, Veterans' Employment, and Homeless Veterans' Reintegration Projects resulted in 288,404 veterans getting jobs.
Different levels of assistance were provided based on customer needs.
The total included 13,825 service-connected disabled veterans and 1,993 veterans who had been homeless.
Consistent with Congressional mandates, a greater proportion of special-disabled, disabled, Vietnam-era, and other eligible veterans were helped into jobs versus their non-veteran counterparts.
Program Description: The DVOP and LVER programs develop and promote training and employment opportunities for the nation's veterans with special emphasis placed on assisting disabled and Vietnam-era veterans.
These programs operate through a system of State and local public-private partnerships to target veterans who have been unsuccessful in forming long-term job and career attachments.
Analysis of Results: The data reflect that Veterans' Employment and Training Service's (VETS) strategies are working.
Efforts by grantees and staff are directed toward those individuals with the most need for assistance, specifically those veterans with multiple barriers to employment or those veterans' subgroups suffering from higher unemployment rates.
Strategies: A case management approach was used to assist those veterans who had the greatest need.
For veterans with lesser need, more reliance was placed on the mediated or self-service modes of services offered through the public employment service system.
This strategy resulted in fewer veterans getting jobs through the direct assistance of VETS-funded programs, but a much higher number of veterans with multiple barriers to employment receiving the benefit of more intensive efforts, particularly severely-disabled and homeless veterans.
The strategy of concentrating efforts on those veterans with the greatest need was well served.
DOL also encouraged greater efforts to help minority veterans, veterans receiving public assistance, and young veterans.
Increased attention was also devoted to monitoring Federal contractors' affirmative action efforts and veterans' preference in the Federal sector.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: Although the total number of veterans helped into jobs did not meet the goal set, the 4 percent short-fall was balanced by the program exceeding goals for the placement of homeless and disabled veterans into jobs.
Two of the nation's largest manufactures have a better understanding of the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA), thanks to two cases handled by VETS official Dan Schnitz.
One company voluntarily agreed to ensure that its reserve and National Guard employees have their military time included when the company calculates periodic pay increases.
Another agreed to amend its absenteeism policy to ensure that reserve and National Guard employees serving on active duty or participating in training beyond the 15 days of paid military leave are not considered to be absent from their jobs.
Higher targets will be set for those groups of veterans with the most need.
This strategy will allow DOL to be in a position to set goals in FY 2001 that better address the Department's efforts from a program data perspective to help new veterans and those separating from active military duty.
Veterans transfer military skills to civilian jobs using certification and placement programs.
Studies reveal that there are strong correlations among poverty, lack of a high school diploma, joblessness, youth violence, and crime.
The Employment and Training Administration administers programs such as the Job Training Partnership Act, the Workforce Investment Act (WIA), Job Corps, and the School-to-Work initiative along with other research and demonstration projects that address the persistent unemployment problems of at-risk youth both in and out of school.
Over the years, youth education and training programs have often provided only short-term gains in earnings.
Positive outcomes, such as fewer interactions with the criminal justice system, fewer teen pregnancies, and increased school attendance, often dissipated shortly after the program ended or the youth completed the program’s requirements.
More recent DOL experience with youth programs supports a holistic approach to achieve long-term success.
DOL has found that there are nine key ingredients that make a youth program work.
These ingredients are comprehensive services, academic skill attainment – leading to a high school diploma or GED, soft skills and leadership development, job placement, work-based learning, community partnership, caring adults, commitment to excellence, and long-term follow-up.
In addition, statistics support the fact that intensive services for education and training programs are generally effective.
These services are provided by Job Corps, which combines extensive supportive services delivered in a residential setting.
Though millions of Americans are enjoying economic success, not everyone shares in this prosperity – pockets of poverty and unemployment remain.
If the cycle is not broken through employment and hope for a new life, poverty is likely to be passed to succeeding generations.
For this reason, DOL has launched the Youth Opportunity (YO) movement in an attempt to bring together the knowledge and resources of government, community, and faith-based organizations to address youth employment issues.
In February 2000, the Department awarded youth opportunity grants to 36 high-unemployment, high-poverty communities throughout the U.S. to form community partnerships that will apply a “360º approach” by focusing on the whole person and engaging the whole community.
Local areas will be expected to build an integrated, year-round service strategy for youth.
Finally, as the School-to-Work grant initiative comes to an end, there will be a need for communities to transition to ongoing school-to-work activities that help bridge the gap between education and work.
Goal 1.2A: 77 percent of the JTPA Title II-C youth terminees will be employed or obtain advanced education or job skills.
Results: The goal was substantially exceeded.
Eighty-four percent of JTPA Title II-C youth terminees were employed or obtained advanced education or job skills during Program Year 1998 (July 1998 – June 1999).
Program Description: The JTPA Title II-C Program provides year-round training and employment programs and services to economically disadvantaged youth between the ages of 16 and 21 who have significant barriers to employment and are either attending school or are out-of-school.
Employment barriers include a lack of basic skills, dropping out of school, being pregnant or parenting, being homeless or a runaway, and being an offender.
In addition to services that are similar to those provided to adults under Title II-A, youth in II-C programs may be placed in internships, be provided school-to-work transition services, or receive alternative high school services.
Analysis of Results: Positive program outcomes include employment, enhancements in education, and the acquisition of job skills.
While it is difficult to attribute the performance in program outcomes to any one factor, some of the success is attributable to the robust economy and the relatively low unemployment rate.
Though the unemployment rate for youth is higher than any other group, more youth have obtained employment during this period of overall low unemployment than any other age group.
Strategies: With the enactment of the Workforce Investment Act (WIA), the focus will shift towards the provision of more comprehensive, long-term activities for youth.
Program strategies for youth include preparing for post-secondary education and unsubsidized employment, creating strong linkages between academic and occupational learning, and developing effective connections to employers and local labor markets.
A substantial emphasis will be placed on providing services for out-of-school youth.
In addition, youth who exit the program will receive follow-up services for a minimum of twelve months.
These strategies will necessitate new goals and means for performance measurement under the new WIA in our FY 2000 performance plan.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: In FY 2000, the JTPA Title II-C Youth Program will be replaced by the Youth Program under the Workforce Investment Act.
Performance goals for the youth program will reflect this transition and focus on longer-term outcomes for youth.
New goals will be to increase the percent of youth, ages 14-18, served under formula grants, who will either be employed or in advanced training, post-secondary education, military service, or apprenticeships six months after exit from the program.
Goal 1.2B: 75 percent of Job Corps trainees will get jobs or pursue further education, with those obtaining jobs having an average starting wage of $6.50 per hour.
Results: DOL maintained high placement rates for Job Corps trainees in FY 1999, and increased their average starting wage.
Performance data for Program Year 1998 (the Program Year measurement proxy of the FY 1999 goal), revealed that 82.4 percent of Job Corps trainees were placed in jobs with a starting average wage of $6.87 per hour, the military, or pursued further education.
The placement rate exceeded the FY 1999 goal by 7.4 percentage points and hourly wages were 37 cents an hour greater than the target wage rate.
Program Description: The DOL Job Corps Program is a highly intensive, primarily residential training program Future chefs from the Culinary Program at the Hawaii Job Corps Center sharpen their skills.
Job Corps students from the Sacramento Job Corps Center practice skills in the Health Care Occupation Trade.
The program provides skills and academic training, social education, and other support to an estimated 70,400 participants at 121 centers.
Under the Workforce Investment Act, the Job Corps program is expanding the scope of its operations to provide support services for up to twelve months after students graduate from the program.
Retention – Students who are retained longer, acquire more skills and are more likely to be placed in jobs that pay better, are more closely aligned with the training they received, and are provided with long-term security.
Employer Involvement – The direct involvement of employers in the program improves the nature of the jobs offered to the students, the quality of training received, and the kinds of support available to the program and its graduates.
School-To-Work – The integration of academic, vocational, and social skills instruction establishes the foundation for students' success both during and after the Job Corps experience.
Placement – Job Corps focuses on placing students in training-related jobs that pay well and offer long-term security.
Expanded Community Ties – These activities improve the nature of the jobs offered to students, the quality of training, and the support available to the program and its graduates.
DOL has modified its GPRA goal statement for FY 2000 to reflect Job Corps' expanded mission to serve the needs of participants well beyond their departure from Job Corps centers.
The performance target will increase to 85 percent for the percentage of Job Corps graduates who obtain employment or pursue education.
For those who are placed in jobs, the target average entry wage will also increase from the previous year.
As an additional goal, DOL is establishing a target of 70 percent of Job Corps trainees who still have jobs or are pursuing education 90 days after their initial placement.
Work in the Landscaping Trade is one of numerous trade programs available at the Sacramento Job Corps Center.
Results: The number of secondary school youth engaged in School-to-Work activities was 1,055,775 in Program Year 1997, a decline from the previous year's total of 1,265,549.
Participation is defined as the number of youth involved in STW classes in which traditional academic subjects are complemented by career-related instruction.
Due to the lag in data collection, the most recent data available is for Program Year 1997, ending June 30, 1998, and covers 38 States.
The next installment of data expected in July 2000 will include progress for the 1998-1999 school year.
Program Description: The School-to-Work Opportunities Act established a national framework within which States and other grantees (such as Urban and Rural Opportunity Grantees) are creating STW systems.
The program goal is to increase academic achievement, improve technical skills, broaden career opportunities, and prepare all students for high-skill, high-wage occupations.
The STW initiative provides venture capital to support grantees in building their STW systems.
Analysis of Results: The causes of the decline in overall numbers are difficult to identify.
A contributing factor is that the response rate from local partnerships that report these data declined to 76 percent from 81 percent in 1997.
Data supplied by local partnerships is self-reported and voluntary; local partnerships are not required by law to report any data to the Department.
These data reflect only the first 38 States that received STW implementation grants.
The indicator used for School-to-Work, the number of students participating in STW activities, also serves as a proxy for the extent to which the STW initiative is promoting education reform and helping to improve the workforce development system across the country.
Though this figure has declined, other positive results stem from STW efforts: * Academic achievement: The percent of students who took at least three years each of math and science rose from 69 percent in 1996 to 74 percent in 1998.
Transition from high school: In 1996, 87 percent of high school graduates in STW systems successfully transitioned into either college, employment, or the military.
The most recent data also show that: * 25 percent of high schools have implemented key STW components (defined as offering career major programs that require an extended workplace activity).
109,251 employers are providing work-based learning experiences for students.
The National School-to-Work Office (NSTWO) continues to collect best practices from around the country and frequently updates these practices on an STW website.
These examples not only illustrate the progress being made under STW but also provide practical assistance to professionals in the field as they try to develop innovative and effective STW systems in their localities.
A streamlined, more focused questionnaire covering the 1998-1999 school year was developed and distributed to partnerships in all 52 States and territories reporting.
With nationwide reporting, a complete accounting should be available of DOL's success in achieving the FY 2000 goal of engaging two million youth in STW activities.
Provide technical assistance and resources to help grantees develop and sustain STW systems.
Assistance includes: sponsoring a national information center; hosting intensive STW system-building institutes; identifying exemplary STW models and promising practices; and helping to identify sources of support for States to sustain their STW systems after the Federal legislation expires in 2001.
Provide leadership for strategies that support State and local STW system-building, such as: integrating curriculum and linking work-based learning with school-based learning; aligning post-secondary admissions policies with new methods of assessing high school student performance; and increasing the ability of teachers to use STW approaches in their instructional methods.
Provide grants to employer and labor intermediary organizations to increase the number of employers providing intensive work-based learning opportunities that are connected to students' academic and technical course work.
The goal for FY 2000 is to engage two million youth in school-to-work activities.
Goal 1.2D: During the initial year of program operations, 25,000 out-of-school youth will be served in Youth Opportunity Areas.
Results: As of September 30, 1999, the six pilot Youth Opportunity sites have enrolled 4,392 youth and have placed 2,681.
These figures include enrollments and placements for the past two years under these pilot efforts.
In FY 1999, these six sites enrolled 1,763 youth and placed 1,768.
The original performance goal for FY 1999 assumed funding at an earlier stage for a larger, fully-established program.
Program Description: The Department's Youth Opportunity grants are aimed at increasing the long-term employment of youth who live in Empowerment Zones (EZ), Enterprise Communities (EC), and other high-poverty areas.
These grants funnel funds directly into urban and rural areas where the employment efforts are most needed.
Although the focus of the initial five is on increasing employment, other goals include reducing dropout rates and teen pregnancy, increasing enrollment in post-secondary education, and decreasing crime.
DOL also expects to improve systems in poor communities for serving at-risk youth.
The Youth Opportunity initiative has a strong private sector emphasis.
Grantees use case managers and job developers to place and maintain youth in private sector jobs.
Job training, work experience, and education slots will be available for youth not ready for private sector placement.
Youth will be placed in jobs throughout their cities, not just in their target neighborhoods.
Partnerships will be emphasized with local public school districts, community colleges, universities, and faith-based organizations.
Community ownership will be encouraged through community advisory boards and the involvement of parents, residents, and local business owners in program activities.
Youth Opportunity grants will also focus on responsible behavior and personal accountability on the part of enrollees.
Analysis of Results: Funding for the Youth Opportunity grants was not available in time for the program to serve any youth during FY 1999 except in the pilot sites.
The grant solicitation was announced on June 2, 1999.
In February 2000, the Department awarded Youth Opportunity grants to 36 high-poverty urban, rural, and Native American communities to provide education and job training opportunities to young people.
Strategies: The FY 1999 Youth Opportunity performance goal focused on numbers of youth served.
Because Youth Opportunity grants were not awarded fully until February 2000 and sites will go through a planning phase that will last until August, there will only be one month of full operations of Youth Opportunity programs in FY 2000.
Thus, the performance goal for FY 2000 will necessarily focus on initiating new projects and enrolling youth.
The FY 2001 goal will address more substantive results.
The FY 2000 goal reflects the start-up status of the Youth Opportunity grant program.
All sites will be operational and will collectively enroll 3,000 youth by the end of FY 2000.
In FY 2001 when the program is fully operational, the goal for the Youth Opportunity initiative will focus on outcomes rather than outputs.
DOL plans to place 75 percent of participants exiting the program in employment, the military, advanced training, post-secondary education, or apprenticeships and supporting the retention of those opportunities for at least six months.
One of ER's stars, Eriq LaSalle, supporting a recent graduate of the Kulick Program during a roll-out of the YOI Public Service Announcements Event at the WaltStar Theater in Los Angeles.
During the 1930s, millions of Americans searched for employment.
As they crossed paths, information was exchanged as to where work was available; however, the information was usually inaccurate.
Many individuals arrived at prospective job sites to find little or no work.
In response to a nationwide call to the government to help the 15 million unemployed find paying jobs, Congress passed the Wagner-Peyser Act in 1933.
The Act established the U.S. Employment Service and set up a nationwide system of public employment offices.
Over the years, the Employment Service has evolved from a simple labor exchange to an extensive delivery service for job information.
Today, the U.S. Employment Service of the Department of Labor provides labor exchange services such as job search workshops, recruitment and placement services, and labor market information to assist employers in filling vacancies with qualified workers and to assist job seekers in finding appropriate work.
State Employment Security Agencies (SESAs) perform the labor exchange function by providing three tiers of labor exchange services to both employers and job seekers: self-services; facilitated self-help services, such as how to use job search technology; and staff-assisted services, such as job counseling and job referral.
In 1998, the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) amended the Wagner-Peyser Act to require that labor exchange services be provided as part of One-Stop delivery systems.
One-Stops offer a wide array of job training, education, and employment services at a single neighborhood location.
By FY 1999, more than 1,100 SESA local offices were operating in One-Stop centers.
America's Job Bank (AJB), an electronic labor exchange service, is designed to help employers and job seekers find each other via the Internet.
As one of the Employment Service's most recognized national products, AJB provides employers with the widest available distribution for their job openings, and job seekers with the largest pool of active job opportunities available anywhere in the world (approximately 1.2 million to 1.4 million each day).
The numbers of both AJB-registered employers and active resumes in the system are increasing steadily each day.
In addition, customers may now access labor market information through America's Labor Market Information System (ALMIS).
The enactment of the WIA brings unique challenges for the future of the Employment Service.
First is the integration of labor exchange services into the One-Stop career centers as part of the WIA's vision of universal access to workforce investment services.
Second is the incorporation of this new workforce development system with the variety of electronic career services that are part of America's Career Kit.
Finally, the Department will be developing new ways to represent the outcomes and value to the country of the nation's labor exchange activities.
Results: In Program Year 1998, the latest period for which data are available, the Employment Service increased the percentage of job seekers who entered employment (Entered Employment Rate – EER) by 0.45 percent.
In the tight labor market of the past several years, the number of applicants has been declining.
However, the Employment Service has been able to increase the EER of the job seekers it served during that period.
Program Description: The Employment Service matches individuals seeking employment with employers seeking workers.
Each year more than 17 million applicants register with the Employment Service.
The EER was established as a measure of performance to assess the effectiveness of the Employment Service in assisting job seekers to find employment.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: Labor exchange services are universally available to all job seekers to the extent that funds are available.
While the strong U.S. economy during the past several years has provided abundant employment opportunities for many of those seeking work, the population of job seekers remaining without work consists of those requiring a higher level of service.
Still, a significant proportion of individuals who register with the Employment Service do not take advantage of the services available to assist them in a successful job search.
The Department requires that employment services be provided as part of One-Stop delivery systems.
This will allow for the delivery of employment services in conjunction with other workforce services (e.g., skill-training and work experience) to more completely meet the needs of employers and job seekers.
To assess the impact of offering workforce services to the applicant, DOL is planning to institute new performance measures as part of a new labor exchange performance measurement system.
For example, in the FY 2000 Departmental Annual Performance Plan, this performance goal is further refined to address the entered employment rate of those applicants who receive job services beyond registration (e.g., job counseling, resume writing, etc.).
The Employment and Training Administration’s recent proposal to require quarterly progress reports from States and other grantees should also enable the Department to conduct more timely assessments of the Employment Service’s performance.
Audits and Evaluations: In 1999, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) published a report entitled, *The Public Employment Service in the United States*.
In this report, the OECD found that, “If the Public Employment Service is to follow through as the only universal public policy instrument supporting job-seekers, it will need mechanisms to identify and help those most in need of more tailored assistance but who may not self-select for it.”
The report further recommended that staff-assisted services continue to be made available to complement self-services.
The Department issued Interim Final Regulations during FY 1999 requiring that in at least one physical center in each workforce investment area, staff-assisted labor exchange services must be made available.
This is intended to ensure that staff-assisted services are available to those most in need of them.
Also in 1999, Social Policy Research (SPR) Associates published an evaluation report on Worker Profiling and Reemployment Services (WPRS).
In this report, SPR found the Employment Service to be effective in providing unemployment insurance claimants with job search assistance resulting in shorter periods of benefit receipt, but little evidence that WPRS increased the employment or earnings of referred claimants.
Part of this discrepancy may be due to the nature of data collection.
See Appendix 3, items 5 and 6 for further information on the Social Policy Research and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) studies.
The Wagner-Peyser Act was amended by WIA to require that reemployment services be provided to Unemployment Insurance (UI) claimants who are required to participate in reemployment services as a condition for UI benefit receipt.
The Department is now in the process of developing a performance measurement system that will have the capacity to measure the performance outcomes of UI claimants who have received reemployment services.
This will facilitate better management of the delivery of reemployment services.
Results: As of November 1998, more than 1,100 One-Stop centers had been established by the States.
The Department's voluntary One-Stop Initiative was based on four principles: Universal Service; Customer Choice; Integration of Governance, Programs and Services; and increased Accountability for Results.
Under the Workforce Investment Act, these principles evolved into: Streamlined Services; Empowered Individuals; Universal Access; Increased Accountability; Business-led Boards; State and Local Flexibility; and Improved Youth Programs.
Together, they form the centerpiece of each State's Workforce Investment System.
Program Description: The One-Stop initiative was introduced in 1994 and delivered grants-in-aid to State governments to consolidate DOL programs into one access point for all customers.
The One-Stop system offers a wide array of job training, education, and employment services at a single neighborhood location using a customer-friendly system.
The grants were awarded with few restrictions; universal access, customer choice, governance and program integration, and increased accountability were the only requirements.
These resources also allowed States to introduce or strengthen electronic services for customers.
By the fall of 1998, all States had received an implementation grant.
The voluntary One-Stop initiative positioned the Federal-State-local partnership to more effectively undertake its responsibilities under the Workforce Investment Act.
The passage of WIA embodied the original goal of converting Employment Service offices and JTPA service delivery points into full-service One-Stop offices, and also introduced new requirements for partnerships and services.
States are now obliged to examine the current delivery system, including the established Centers, to ensure that the legal and regulatory requirements are met, especially the inclusion of the mandatory One-Stop partners.
For this reason, the Employment and Training Administration ceased collecting information on the number of operational Centers under the voluntary One-Stop initiative.
The last survey produced an estimate of 1,100 Centers in November 1998.)
The partnership currently faces the task of integrating partner programs and funding streams under both the "bricks and mortar" and "electronic" service delivery strategies.
Under WIA's decentralization, the States and local workforce investment boards will be responsible for establishing the location and number of full-service One-Stop Centers in each local workforce investment area.
Approaches to designation and certification of operations for these Centers – as well as the networked participation of other partner and affiliate sites – are now being defined as part of the overall WIA strategic planning process.
Goal 1.3C: Increase by 20 percent the total number of job openings listed with the public employment service, including both those listed with State Employment Security Agencies (SESAs) and those listed directly with America's Job Bank (AJB) via the Internet.
Results: In Program Year 1998, the last period for which data are available, the number of job openings listed with the Employment Service increased by 16.5 percent over the previous year.
Program Description: The Department's Employment Service serves employers by providing labor exchange, recruitment, and technical services.
In response to technological advances, the electronic labor exchange is becoming an important part of the system.
America's Job Bank is a computerized national job system designed to help employers and job seekers find each other via the Internet.
AJB provides employers with the widest pool of active job opportunities.
Analysis of Results: An indication of how much employers value the services provided by the Employment Service is the number of job openings listed in both the AJB and SESAs.
Each year employers list more than six million job openings with the SESAs and more than one million on AJB.
Since its inception, AJB has been experiencing rapid growth and currently is the largest Internet job bank, providing high quality, free job matching services to employers and job seekers.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: In the current labor market, where there are many available options for filling vacancies, employers have listed an increasing number of their job openings with the public Employment Service.
The Employment Service has achieved this success through outreach to employers from the SESAs and through the explosive growth of AJB.
In the Planning Guidance and Instructions for Submission of the Strategic Five-Year Plan for Title I of WIA and the Wagner-Peyser Act, DOL requires States to describe how the needs of employers will be determined and how Wagner-Peyser Act services will be provided to employers.
This requirement is intended to emphasize the importance of services provided to employers, as well as those provided to job seekers.
ETA's recent proposal to require quarterly progress reports from States and other grantees should also enable the Department to conduct more timely assessments of the Employment Service's performance.
AMERICA'S JOB BANK SATISFIES USERS (www.ajb.org) America's Job Bank is one of the largest Web-based employment sites.
The site has been a huge success, receiving many positive comments.
One visitor wrote: "Job categories are nicely prepared. It's easy for any job seeker."
Performance of this goal is measured in two dimensions: timeliness and quality.
The first, timeliness, addresses how often the Department’s Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) meets the release dates in the published schedule of its Principal Federal Economic Indicators.
The second dimension measures reliability.
Decision-makers need to know how well BLS statistics reflect the economic activity described.
Results: Timeliness results are based on an evaluation of the Office of Publications and Special Studies report of release dates against the release schedule of BLS Principal Federal Economic Indicators.
Four of the seven Principal Indicators—the Employment Situation, the Consumer Price Index (CPI), the Producer Price Index (PPI), and the Employment Cost Index (ECI)—are addressed in the goals of the DOL Annual Performance Plan.
Analysis of Results: There were 40 scheduled releases in 1999, including quarterly releases of the ECI, and monthly releases of the CPI, the PPI, and the Employment Situation Release (which contains both the National Labor Force Statistics and Employment, Hours, and Earnings series).
BLS missed its target of 100 percent when two data releases occurred earlier than scheduled—the November 1998 Employment Situation Release and the December 1998 Producer Price Index Release were released early on the BLS public-access website.
As a result, BLS changed its procedures for issuing Principal Federal Economic Indicators.
Results: Each of the four Principal Federal Economic Indicators has a unique quality measure.
Except for the PPI, all the series met their quality targets in 1999.
Appendix 4 provides information on individual program quality measures and performance.
Analysis of Results: Due to a delay in the publication of a new index, Retail Food Stores, the PPI did not achieve its percentage of domestic output target covered by the PPI for services produced and total production.
Questions about methodology delayed publication of the index.
Retail Food Stores is expected to be published in July 2000.
In 1999, the PPI introduced Life Insurance and Wireless Communication.
Publication of these two new indexes increased services coverage from 40.0 percent to 41.2 percent and total production coverage from 53.5 percent to 54.3 percent.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: For the Department’s FY 2000 Annual Performance Plan, a sixth quality measure, the average number of Internet site user sessions each month, has been added.
In addition, the quality measures for Employment, Hours, and Earnings and the CPI have been replaced by statistically preferred measures of standard error.
Audits and Evaluations: In 1999, the General Accounting Office and the Office of the Inspector General completed several audits and evaluations of BLS.
These reviews pertained to a number of topics, including pre-release security, and information and collection burden.
Appendix 3, items 7 through 11 provide further details on these audits and evaluations.
This goal measures the progress of significant milestones that reflect the Department’s Bureau of Labor Statistics’ (BLS) commitment to continuous improvement of its statistical processes and products.
Results: BLS continued to implement the standard industrial classification revision known as the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS).
Specifically, refiling for the Covered Employment and Wages (ES-202) program began by surveying all establishments with more than 50 employees and 1.7 million establishments with fewer than 50 employees.
Many BLS statistical programs use the ES-202 program output as a sampling frame source.
Analysis of Results: The 1999 survey round was successfully completed in August 1999.
Thirty-six States achieved a 90 percent response rate target for both employment and units.
Results: As part of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) revision, a revised housing sample and estimation methodology was introduced beginning with the official January 1999 CPI.
In a separate change that was not part of the revision as originally conceived, effective with data for January 1999, the geometric mean formula has replaced the arithmetic mean formula in selected categories of the index.
The new formula better accounts for consumer substitution in response to relative price change.
Analysis of Results: The above changes to the CPI were designed to make the index a more accurate and reliable reflection of economic conditions.
Results: BLS expanded the sample size of the Consumer Expenditure (CE) Survey by approximately 50 percent.
The new sample contains 7,800 households each in the diary and interview surveys, up from the 1997 baseline year of 5,400 households in each survey.
Analysis of Results: Using the expanded sample, the Bureau of the Census began collecting interview data for BLS in November 1998 and began collecting diary data in January 1999.
This two-year project is on schedule for completion by the end of 2000.
1. Accelerated the process of updating the CPI market basket.
2. Expanded the amount of information collected on prices of certain goods and services.
3. Produced supplementary measures of changes in consumer prices that are regarded as providing closer approximations to cost-of-living measures than the currently published CPI.
Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) program.
BLS developed the program’s conceptual framework, established a basic program infrastructure and data collection center, and began the development of a computer system for the program.
Analysis of Results: Establishing the JOLTS program was a significant milestone towards the goal of releasing JOLTS data.
BLS will begin publishing experimental job openings and labor turnover series in 2001, and plans to begin publishing official series in 2003.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: All of the milestones have been reached or progress is on schedule as planned.
DOL is committed to promoting the economic security of workers and their families by protecting workers hours, wages, and other job conditions; providing unemployment and compensation benefits when workers are unable to work; and expanding, enhancing, and protecting pension, health care, and other benefits.
Priorities are to increase compliance with minimum wage and overtime requirements, promote secure retirements for working Americans, provide more pensions for women and employees of small businesses, broaden access to health care, and shorten periods of unemployment in those areas suffering from rapid economic change.
Mid-century workers on the picket line (DOL Library collection).
The Department of Labor administers and enforces more than 180 Federal laws.
These mandates and the governing regulations cover more than ten million employers and 125 million workers in various workplace activities.
In 1999, DOL celebrated the 61st anniversary of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) which established minimum wage, overtime standards, and child labor restrictions.
DOL also celebrated the 25th anniversary of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) which protects the integrity of private pension, health, and other employee benefit plans.
While these hallmark worker protection laws have continued to serve their goals, they have also grown increasingly difficult to administer given the dynamic and complex changes that are occurring in America’s workforce.
In furthering the economic security and welfare of workers and families, the Department seeks to achieve and promote compliance with worker protection laws through administrative and educational programs and enforcement activities.
While regarded as a tough, no-nonsense enforcement Agency, DOL actively promotes voluntary compliance throughout its various programs.
A multi-pronged approach to achieving increased compliance includes enforcement, education, partnership, and recognition, involving all segments of business and industry – contractors, manufacturers, retailers, consumers, worker advocacy groups, financial and health care communities, and unions.
The primary Agencies and programs dedicated to achieving this goal are the Employment Standards Administration’s (ESA) Wage and Hour Division and Office of Labor Management Standards, and the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration.
Both DOL Agencies have developed compliance assistance programs that encourage up-front compliance through public education and outreach, while at the same time conducting complaint-based investigations and other enforcement techniques.
In addition, significant resources are devoted to increasing public access to vital information used to monitor and secure entitlements.
DOL believes that an informed public enables individuals and practitioners to better understand their rights under the law and recover any benefits or wages owed.
Each year, the Department distributes hundreds of thousands of publications and pamphlets that provide basic information about voluntary compliance, and staff conduct hundreds of educational meetings, conferences, and seminars, as part of the DOL outreach effort.
The primary challenge for DOL’s worker protection agencies in the 21st century will be to adapt to the multiple changes occurring in the American workforce.
Virtual workplaces, aging workers, increased numbers of women and minorities, immigration, organized labor, the growth of small businesses, and the ongoing shift from a manufacturing to a service economy will all be important factors as U.S. businesses comply with worker protection laws in the future.
Program Description: DOL's Employment Standards Administration (ESA) is responsible for administering and enforcing a number of laws that establish the minimally acceptable standards for wages and working conditions in this country.
These labor standards statutes—including the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), which establishes the minimum wage, overtime standards, and child labor restrictions—protect the most vulnerable in the workplace, low-wage workers and the working poor.
Results: The level of compliance in the San Francisco and New York City garment industries is essentially unchanged.
Analysis of Results: Industry-wide compliance rates are measured through investigation-based compliance surveys of a representative, random sample of employers in the industry or sector every two to three years.
Garment manufacturing compliance surveys in both New York City and San Francisco in 1999 found no statistically significant change in the overall level of compliance.
The rate of compliance in San Francisco is /4 percent.
The 1997 level was 79 percent; up from 57 percent in 1995.)
The rate of compliance in New York City is 35 percent.
The first survey in 1997 found a compliance level of 37 percent.)
Results: Compliance baselines were established in three agricultural "salad bowl" commodities—cucumbers, onions, and lettuce—by investigation-based compliance surveys.
Analysis of Results: The 1999 data establishes the baseline and will be used to measure changes in the level of compliance in the future and attribute causality to the changes.
Results: A compliance baseline of 57 percent was established for the residential health care sector of the health care industry by an investigation-based compliance survey.
Analysis of Results: The 1999 data will be the basis for measuring changes in the level of compliance in the future and attributing causality to changes.
Strategies: In low-wage industries such as garment, agriculture, and healthcare, ESA pursues a multi-prong strategy of enforcement (targeted investigations, invoking the ‘hot goods’ provision of FLSA, assessment of penalties, and development of cases for civil and criminal prosecution), education/outreach (compliance seminars for employers, town hall meetings for workers, and distribution of a variety of compliance assistance materials) and partnerships (compliance agreements involving multi-establishment employers, interventions by commercial suppliers/customers of products made in violation of FLSA, and development/maintenance of relationships with nonprofit organizations, States, and other Federal agencies).
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: While the long-term goal of increasing compliance in the garment manufacturing, agriculture, and health care industries remains unchanged, this specific performance goal has been modified in the Department’s FY 2000 Annual Performance Plan to measure compliance levels in different sectors of those industries and to allow for two to three years of intervening strategies in those sectors.
In particular, specific activities are being carried out for new and small businesses because the compliance surveys showed lower rates of compliance for these firms.
It is expected that the intervening year strategies to improve compliance will be reflected in subsequent compliance surveys.
In FY 2000, a compliance survey will be conducted in the garment manufacturing industry in Los Angeles to determine if the level of compliance has increased to the next interim target.
In agriculture, a compliance survey will be conducted of another ‘salad bowl’ commodity—garlic—to determine a baseline.
Similarly, a baseline will be determined for forestry.
In FY 2000, the poultry processing industry and the nursing home sector of the health care industry will also be measured to determine if compliance has improved by five percent.
Program Description: DOL's Employment Standards Administration is responsible for administering and enforcing a number of laws that establish the minimally acceptable standards for wages and working conditions in this country.
These labor standards statutes—including the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), which establishes the minimum wage, overtime standards, and child labor restrictions—protect the most vulnerable in the workplace, low-wage workers and the working poor.
Results: Compliance baselines of 86 percent in San Francisco and 52 percent in New York City were established for employers that were previous violators and the subject of repeat investigations.
Analysis of Results: The 1999 data establishes the baseline and will be used to measure changes in the level of compliance in the future and attribute causality to the changes.
Results: Compliance baselines of 43 percent were established for lettuce, 42 percent for onions and 37 percent for cucumbers.
Analysis of Results: The 1999 data will be the basis for measuring changes in the level of compliance and attributing causality to changes.
Results: A compliance baseline of 55 percent was established for previous violators in the residential health care industry.
Analysis of Results: The 1999 data will be the basis for measuring changes in the level of compliance and attributing causality to changes.
Strategies: In low-wage industries such as garment, agriculture, and health care, the Employment Standards Administration (ESA) pursues a multi-prong strategy of enforcement (targeted investigations, invoking the "hot goods" provision of FLSA, assessment of penalties, and development of cases for civil and criminal prosecution), education/outreach (compliance seminars for employers, town hall meetings for workers, and distribution of a variety of compliance assistance materials) and partnerships (compliance agreements involving multi-establishment employers, interventions from commercial suppliers/customers of products made in violation of FLSA, and development/maintenance of relationships with nonprofit organizations, States, and other Federal agencies) Goal Assessment and Future Plans: While the long-term goal of increasing compliance among previous violators in the garment manufacturing, agriculture, and health care industries remains unchanged, this specific performance goal has been modified for FY 2000 to measure compliance levels in different sectors of those industries and to allow for two-to-three years of intervening strategies in those sectors.
In particular, specific activities are being carried out for new and small businesses because the compliance surveys showed lower rates of compliance for these firms.
It is expected that the intervening year strategies to improve compliance will be reflected in subsequent compliance surveys.
In FY 2000, a compliance survey will be conducted in the garment manufacturing industry in Los Angeles to determine if the level of compliance has increased to 45 percent from the 25 percent baseline established in 1998.
In agriculture, a compliance survey will be conducted of another “salad bowl” commodity—garlic—to determine a baseline.
Similarly, a baseline will be determined for forestry.
In FY 2000, the poultry processing industry and the nursing home sector of the health care industry will be measured to determine if compliance has improved by five percent.
The time frames for measuring progress in this goal is the same as in the previous goal.
When ESA investigators found 50 children, some as young as five, working in the onion fields in Texas’ Rio Grande Valley in 1998, the Department was determined to do as much as possible to keep that from happening again.
In 1999, ESA found no violations of child labor in the valley’s fields.
The Department negotiated compliance agreements with local growers requiring them to monitor their fields and farm labor contractors for compliance with child labor laws.
The Department also brought together the Texas Produce Association, local school districts, the United Farm Workers, and a group of growers to establish Child Care Management Services, a day care program for migrant family children.
Now more children of migrant workers have a healthy alternative to going to the fields with their parents, an alternative that could lead to a better life for them.
Results: The Department significantly exceeded its FY 1999 performance targets, by closing 958 investigations of employee pension and health benefit plans where assets were restored, an increase of 56 percent over FY 1998.
An additional 389 cases were closed where prohibited transactions were corrected, an increase of 62 percent over FY 1998.
Program Description: Where plan assets have been endangered by an imprudent act on the part of the fiduciary or have been otherwise misused, the Department's Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration (PWBA) seeks to have the transaction corrected to minimize potential loss or to have the plan made whole through the restoration of assets.
Increasing the number of cases with fiduciary results is a partial indicator of the Department's success in protecting plan assets.
Analysis of Results: In FY 1999, the Department increased by 26 percent over the previous year, the number of limited investigations converted to full-fledged cases.
In addition, cases closed with positive results were up 44 percent over FY 1998, a primary strategy to achieving the Department's goal.
In FY 1999, the Department restored approximately $494 million to benefit plans as a result of its investigative efforts.
In the absence of investigative efforts, these assets would have been lost to the participants and their beneficiaries.
The restored amount represents an increase of approximately 45 percent since 1995.
Due to the volatile nature of recoveries, past performance is not indicative of future performance in any given year nor is the trend constantly increasing.
However, over the past several years, there has generally been an upward trend.
Strategies: The Department intends to continue improving its targeting of cases and investigative processes, ensuring that limited resources are utilized in an efficient and effective manner.
In FY 2000, the Department will maintain this performance goal but will set a more ambitious target given the recent experience.
To protect against irregular fluctuations, DOL will also begin utilizing a two-year rolling average to measure the results.
In FY 2001, the Department intends to begin reporting separate and distinct measures for pension and health enforcement to reflect the increased responsibilities in the health related enforcement arena.
Results: This goal was exceeded in FY 1999.
Among unions with receipts greater than $200,000 required to file Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA) annual financial reports, 89.8 percent filed on time.
One month of data, October 1998, was not available.)
Program Description: The LMRDA establishes safeguards for union democracy and financial integrity.
This performance goal is central to a principal objective of the LMRDA, that labor organization annual financial reports be made available for public disclosure to promote union democracy and financial integrity.
Analysis of Results: For FY 1999, the performance goal was to increase, to 85 percent, the number of unions with annual receipts greater than $200,000 that timely file the required LMRDA union annual financial reports for public disclosure access.
The timely filing rate for FY 1999 exceeded this goal as well as the target established for FY 2000.
The FY 1999 result also is a substantial improvement over the timely filing rates of 83 percent in FY 1998 and 79 percent in FY 1997.
Performance results will be monitored in FY 2000 to determine whether performance targets should be adjusted.
For FY 2000, the Department will strive to achieve timely union reporting compliance such that a minimum of 87 percent of labor organizations with annual receipts greater than $200,000 file union annual financial reports in a timely manner.
Strategies: Various strategies were used to achieve the performance target: compliance assistance was provided to union officials; a liaison was established with a number of international unions to encourage their assistance in promoting timely LMRDA report-filing by their affiliates; and special contacts were made to remind unions delinquent in the prior year to file their reports on time.
These program efforts will be continued in FY 2000 and beyond.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The timeliness and sufficiency of union annual financial reports are particularly significant in light of the new electronic report filing and Internet public disclosure system under development for implementation in 2001 that will expand public access to reported information.
Continued improvement in the timely filing of labor organization annual financial reports will be sought.
¹Goal 2.1D was not measured during FY 1999.
An explanation is provided in Appendix 2.
Employment and labor laws were created to protect a variety of benefits for American workers.
The Department of Labor plays a large role in ensuring that worker benefits are protected and that employers pay wages and administer benefit programs appropriately.
The Department’s key benefit areas include unemployment insurance, support for displaced workers, assistance to Federal employees who sustain work-related injuries/diseases, and health and pension benefits programs.
DOL’s role in protecting worker benefits arose in response to specific concerns about the well-being of American workers and their families.
The Department’s Employment and Training Administration, Employment Standards Administration (ESA), and the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration are responsible for administering the programs that protect worker benefits.
The protection and monitoring of employee benefits systems is vital to both America’s workers and the national economy.
Americans are living and working longer and will be dependent on pension and health care benefits for longer periods of time.
Educating workers about their benefits, as well as about targeted issues such as retirement planning, offer significant challenges for DOL in the future.
Results: In FY 1999, nearly all State agencies met the Secretary's Standards for promptness of first payments and appeals, while overall, the percentage of timely first payments and appeals exceeded the Secretary's Standards.
Program Description: The Department's Unemployment Insurance (UI) program establishes the first economic line of defense for workers who lose their jobs through no fault of their own.
Authorized by the Social Security Act of 1935, UI was created to alleviate personal and family hardship due to involuntary unemployment and to stabilize the economy.
The Secretary's Standards for promptness of first payments and appeals were established to measure whether UI benefits were issued and appeals decided as quickly as possible to provide unemployed workers with prompt temporary income to replace their lost wages.
Strategies: States failing to meet the Secretary's Standards must include corrective action plans in their annual performance plan.
In FY 1999, the Department issued key performance measures and criteria and instructions for a new performance planning and budgeting system, the State Quality Service Plan (SQSP).
The SQSP process puts more emphasis on continuous improvement and joint DOL-State cooperation.
Thirty-four States used the SQSP in their FY 2000 program improvement planning and all will use it in FY 2001.
Additionally, the Department trained some 300 State staff in the non-monetary determinations process and another 130 in Benefit Accuracy Measurement.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: Although the number of States meeting the Standards for the promptness of intrastate payments rose from 1998 to 1999, the FY 1995-1999 erosion is disturbing.
This trend is even more problematic as intrastate payments comprise over 95 percent of all payments.
The erosion is due in part to the tightening of the labor market wherein a higher percentage of claims raise issues regarding reasons for separation from work.
Such issues require time-consuming adjudication.
This goal will be modified for FY 2000 and FY 2001 to "Unemployed workers receive timely and fair benefit determinations and timely benefit payments.
This goal explicitly includes the dimension of fairness and reflects the new UI PERFORM performance measures and minimum performance criteria issued in 1999. The indicators will be the number of States meeting the new minimum performance criteria for quality in non-monetary determinations and timeliness in initial payments for UI benefits. Audits and Evaluations: After the Department's Office of the Inspector General reviewed the Internal Revenue Service's (IRS) administrative charges for collecting and processing Federal unemployment taxes for FY 1996, 1997, and 1998, the audit concluded that the trust fund had been overcharged by $48 million. After its own review, the Treasury Department credited the Unemployment Trust Fund (UTF) $71 million for excess administrative charges in prior years. The Department is working to convene a multi-agency workgroup in FY 2000 to devise a better method for determining IRS administrative charges. Research completed in FY 1999 demonstrated that, on average, the UI system reduced the severity of the economy's recessions by 15 percent over the past three decades, cutting job loss by more than 130,000 workers per recession. A one-time study found that satisfaction with UI is very high--an average of 4.0 on a 5.0 scale, with 42 percent of respondents "extremely satisfied.
See Appendix 3, items 12, 13, and 14, for details of these evaluations.
Results: The Department met its FY 1999 performance target in FY 1998 and exceeded it in FY 1999 as the AWBA continued its upward path.
Program Description: The UI program helps stabilize economic activity by providing temporary income to those who are involuntarily unemployed.
Other things equal, higher AWBAs mean larger benefit payments and greater income available to the unemployed.
The influx of income to the unemployed also ensures that the economy remains stable by keeping the money supply relatively constant.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: For FY 2000, the Department is replacing this goal with a more explicit goal of promoting the Federal-State UI system's economic stabilization capacity by: * Maintaining or increasing the rates of benefit recipiency and wage replacement; * Maintaining system solvency; and * Improving the fairness with which the UI tax burden is distributed among subject employers.
These combined indicators give a much fuller sense of the system's capacity to stabilize economic activity.
The Department's UI Reform initiative emphasizes expanding UI eligibility for low-wage and part-time workers and increasing States' solvency.
In FY 1999, 13 States received Significant Improvement grants to improve reemployment services to UI claimants.
For FY 2000, States received an additional $35 million to improve program integrity.
Audits and Evaluations: Research completed in FY 1999 demonstrated that, on average, the UI system reduced the severity of the economy's recessions by 15 percent over the past three decades, cutting job loss by more than 130,000 workers per recession.
See Appendix 3, Item 14, for further details.
Goal 2.2C: Increase by one percent the number of workers who are covered by a pension plan sponsored by their employer, particularly women, minorities, and workers in small businesses.
Result: The Department of Labor’s performance exceeded this goal.
The number of private wage and salary workers in pension programs increased from 45.1 million in 1997 to 47.6 million in 1998, an increase of five percent.
With respect to those groups where pension coverage has been historically lower, the increase among women was five percent; among minorities, six percent; and among workers in small businesses, eight percent.
Program Description: Improving the financial security of Americans during their retirement years is a major priority of the Secretary.
More specifically, expanding pension coverage to those Americans who have historically experienced low pension coverage is of particular concern.
Analysis of Results: This goal is measured by calculating the number of private wage and salary workers in pension programs.
The data suggests that the Department was successful in achieving a primary performance goal that directly helps improve the lives and conditions of American families-ensuring better security in retirement.
Strategies: Many factors contribute to the expansion of pension coverage, including the structure and health of the economy (e.g., level of employment and economic growth, sectoral shifts in economic activity) and demographics (aging population, increasing numbers of women and minorities).
In addition, the Department contributes through aggressive educational strategies, such as the Retirement Savings Education Campaign, targeted public service announcements, promotional cards in tax returns, an 800 telephone line, interactive websites and videos for small businesses.
In addition, the Department partners with other organizations to discuss ways to reach out to their members regarding health and pension benefits, coverage and rights.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: In FY 2000, the Department plans to pursue education and outreach and anticipates continued expansion of pension coverage.
The Department will continue to aggressively educate stakeholders regarding the importance of retirement planning, particularly participation in pension plans.
Result: The Department made significant progress during FY 1999 by issuing interim final regulations under the NMHPA.
Interim final rules under the other two laws were issued prior to FY 1999.
In addition, to coordinate efforts with other Federal agencies responsible for administering their respective portion of the laws, the Department entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with the Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of the Treasury.
The Department also launched a Health Benefits Education Campaign and issued new and updated health care publications.
Program Description: The Congress passed landmark legislation in 1996 governing certain health benefit entitlements that impact more than 125 million people receiving health benefits under ERISA plans.
The Department was assigned regulatory, interpretative, enforcement, and disclosure responsibilities under these laws.
Analysis of Results: These new laws establish Federal requirements for virtually all of the nation's private health benefits programs.
These initial steps, while not quantified, establish the foundation for addressing important issues like improved portability and continuity of health insurance coverage among employers, preexisting condition exclusions, special enrollment rights, and prohibition of discrimination against individuals based on health-related factors.
Strategies: The Department developed a compliance guide checklist for enforcement personnel and conducted a limited pilot to ascertain the initial degree of compliance with the new health care laws.
The Department is currently analyzing the results of the pilot and will further tailor the enforcement efforts, as appropriate, based on the results.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The Department will not maintain this goal but will begin reporting on health initiative results as a separate and distinct measure in FY 2001.
For FY 2000, the Department has included a new goal to measure the results of customer assistance efforts by measuring health and pension benefit recoveries as a result of Benefit Advisers' assistance.
In FY 1999, the Department achieved benefit recoveries in excess of $62 million.
When a breast cancer survivor was denied health coverage for post-mastectomy reconstructive surgery, her doctor was outraged and contacted the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration (PWBA).
She could not believe that a health plan would refuse coverage for reconstructive surgery when the partial mastectomy and radiation treatment left her breast severely deformed.
The Women's Health and Cancer Rights Act of 1998 was enacted to protect such patients by requiring health plans to provide benefits for post-mastectomy effects.
PWBA made sure this breast cancer survivor got the coverage she was entitled to and she had the reconstructive surgery.
Result: The average number of production days lost in Quality Case Management (QCM) cases was reduced by 8.5 percent to 173 calendar days in FY 1999, a 16-day reduction compared to the FY 1997 baseline, resulting in a savings of approximately $9.6 million in compensation benefit costs.
Program Description: DOL administers, through the Employment Standards Administration (ESA), three primary disability compensation programs that provide benefits to workers who experience work-related injury or disease, and survivors of employees who die from job-related injury or disease.
One of these programs, the Federal Employees' Compensation Act program, affords income and medical-cost protection to civilian employees of the Federal government and certain other groups.
Analysis of Results: Reducing lost production days promotes Federal workforce security.
The objective is to reduce disability in the early stages following a work injury through better medical care and reemployment assistance.
In FY 1999, ESA intervened in more than 12,000 QCM cases, assigning nurse case managers to coordinate among medical providers, ESA's claims and rehabilitation staff, and Federal employers.
Statistics indicate that with this assistance, 90 percent of the injuries resolved and the injured return to work within 30 months.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The indicator used for this goal, (average calendar days of disability in QCM cases) is an interim measure covering only long-term cases for which the Department maintains full disability data.
On February 7, 1999, three Federal agents of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF) were seriously injured in a crash of their small plane as they attempted to take off from the airport in Medina, Ohio.
By the next day, staff members from the Department's Employment Standards Administration were at the hospital, working with the claimants and their families.
While the agents and their families concentrated on recovery, ESA staff members and ATF handled the paperwork and made sure the agents received all the care they required and all the benefits they were due.
The Presidential Initiative, Federal Worker 2000, established several goals for Federal agencies including reducing injuries, speeding reports of injuries, lowering injury rates in high incidence work sites, and lowering the average number of lost production days.
In conjunction with the latter goal, DOL will refine its lost production measurement in FY 2000 and establish a baseline for measuring all disability cases, including measurement of time lost during the "Continuation-of-Pay" period.
Result: The Department’s performance exceeded this goal.
The Periodic Roll Management (PRM) teams completed case actions on nearly 7,000 long-term cases, and saved $20.8 million in compensation costs during FY *1999.
Program Description: The Department of Labor administers, through the Employment Standards Administration (ESA), three primary disability compensation programs that provide benefits to certain workers who experience work-related injury or disease, and survivors of employees who die from job-related injuries or diseases.
The Federal Employees’ Compensation Act (FECA) program affords income and medical-cost protection to civilian employees of the Federal government and certain other groups.
Analysis of Results: PRM is aimed at quality management of the long-term disability roll, improving service to disabled beneficiaries, rehabilitating and reemploying the partially disabled, and adjusting benefits to accurately reflect eligibility.
Periodic Roll Management has proven highly successful in identifying the potential for return to work and resolving cases leading to greater savings in compensation benefits (an additional $317 million between 1992 and 1998).
PRM case actions continue to contribute to the significant reduction in the size of the permanent disability roll (a decrease of 8.2 percent since FY 1992).
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The performance indicator for this goal previously measured the net additional contribution of PRM to FECA’s long-term disability case management operation.
The measurement compared benefit savings produced in each measurement year with PRM to savings produced in a baseline year without PRM.
This method was considered valid while PRM operated in “project” status.
In FY 1999, PRM was expanded to all 12 ESA/FECA district offices.
Reflecting this expansion and PRM’s permanent status in ESA operations, the savings goal was revised in the first quarter of FY 2000 to directly measure the compensation benefit savings produced by PRM case actions in each measurement year without comparison to a base year.
Goal 2.2G: Save 19 percent annually versus amounts billed for Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA) medical services.
Results: The Department's performance exceeded both the original and final goals for cost savings.
Use of a medical fee schedule has been successful in controlling physician and other outpatient medical costs since 1986.
In January 1999, a fee schedule for pharmacy bills and the Diagnostic Related Group (DRG) approach (used by the Department of Health and Human Services for Medicare bills) was adopted for hospital inpatient services.
Implementing these new cost controls saved $16.5 million over the amounts billed in FY 1999.
Program Description: Through the Employment Standards Administration, the Department administers three primary disability compensation programs that provide benefits to certain workers who experience work-related injury or disease, and survivors of employees who die from job-related injuries or diseases.
The FECA program affords income and medical-cost protection to civilian employees of the Federal government and certain other groups.
Analysis of Results: Using a specialized review process, the Correct Coding Initiative (CCI) for improper billings for physician/professional services, and new fee schedules, the original FY 1999 goal was to save $10.7 million.
The new fee schedules (not effective until January 1999) alone exceeded the target by 54 percent, producing $16.5 million in savings.
Combined with the savings of $106.4 million by the fee schedule for physician services, total medical billings were reduced by 22 percent in FY 1999.
The Department revised the original 1999 savings goal to more fully reflect the impact of cost control by broadening it to include the results of physician/professional fee schedules which have been in effect for several years.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: As a result of further assessment of performance and cost control objectives, DOL is revising the medical savings goals for the FY 1999 - FY 2004 planning period.
These revisions will capture the cumulative results expected from several medical savings initiatives: full implementation of the inpatient hospital and pharmacy fee schedules; CCI reviews; Focus Reviews; and internal process and quality control revisions.
The CCI bill review is an automation-assisted process that detects improperly coded bills (such as bills "unbundled" into component services to enhance revenue), duplication, overuse or inappropriate use of services to treat given conditions, and other abuses.
Implementation of the CCI medical bill review was delayed in FY 1999 and the full complement of Medical Coding Specialists was not brought on board and trained until September.
CCI is expected to save in excess of $1.5 million annually, over and above the fee schedule savings in FY 2000.
Focus Reviews will identify improper treatment and payment for selected medical conditions and will ensure that billed services are reasonable and related to condition.
Goal 2.2H: Implement new data collection form and an automated printing and mailing process, and test whether automation can increase the accuracy and timeliness of the survey process and wage determinations.
Results: The Department's Employment Standards Administration (ESA) successfully completed a number of milestones to further the long-term goal of issuing timely and accurate wage determinations including all the specific short-term goals established for FY 1999.
Program Description: The Employment and Standards Administration is responsible for determining and issuing wage rates for covered Federally-funded and assisted construction projects.
The primary purpose of the Davis-Bacon Act is to assure, by requiring the payment of locally prevailing wages, that Federal contracting practices do not undercut workers' wages in the community and do not place local contractors, and local workers, in an unfair competitive situation.
Analysis of Results: ESA completed a number of milestones and short-term goals to further the long-term goal of issuing accurate and timely wage determinations.
For this overall initiative, the following reinvention steps were completed: * The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) conducted fringe benefit pilot surveys in Jacksonville, FL and Tucson, AZ in FY 1998 and in Salt Lake City, UT and Toledo, OH in FY 1999.
BLS published the results of the Salt Lake City survey in the third quarter of FY 1999 and expects to publish the results of the Toledo survey in the near future.
BLS' Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) program collects data on wage and salary workers in non-farm establishments to produce employment and wage estimates for more than 750 occupations.
The OES program surveys approximately 1.2 million establishments (400,000 per year over three years) and produces occupational wage estimates for geographic areas at the national, State and metropolitan area levels.
In FY 1999, BLS calculated OES survey results for the construction industry in selected metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs).
The results are based on two-thirds of the full OES sample.
Results from the full sample will be available in the third quarter of FY 2000.
A preliminary evaluation of the first three fringe benefit pilots and the two-thirds OES sample data has been conducted.
Although both surveys produced results by occupation for the construction industry as a whole, the surveys produced only a small amount of data broken down by type of construction.
A more detailed final analysis of the BLS data will be conducted in FY 2000, after data from the full OES sample are available.
Also, ESA completed reengineering implementation objectives to: * Implement the new Report of Construction Contractors' Wage Rates (Form WD-10) and have the electronic version prepared for clearance.
Davis-Bacon wage surveys.
An electronic version of the WD-10 form has been drafted and will be submitted to OMB for clearance during FY 2000.
Test the efficiency and effectiveness of the new automated printing and mailing process using the Census Bureau.
These processes will be used for all future Davis-Bacon wage surveys.
Test a computer application which provides for the display of automated contractor information and associated WD-10s at the beginning of the business process to help analysts manage WD-10s during the entire cycle of collection, analysis and followup.
This application was successfully pilot-tested during the fourth quarter as part of the Colorado survey and demonstrated the advantages of analysts receiving pre-keyed WD-10s electronically rather than in paper form.
Test the imaging process.
An imaging program has been developed to facilitate data entry from the imaged document.
The program was successfully tested with sample data and pilot tested with actual data during the fourth quarter as part of the Statewide survey of Colorado.
Implement a field test of the Computer Assisted Telephone Interview (CATI) system.
A preliminary review of the hardware and telephony capabilities of ESA's Wage and Hour regional offices has been conducted.
A prototype CATI system, applying screen-based telephony technology utilizing the analyst's computer terminal to facilitate the processing of both incoming and outgoing calls, was successfully tested during the fourth quarter as part of the Colorado survey.
Strategies: Alternative data sources will be evaluated, while new technologies will be tested for feasibility.
Finally, procedures to improve the timeliness and accuracy of wage determinations will be implemented.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: In the Department's FY 2000 Annual Performance Plan, the goal is to complete an analysis of both Davis-Bacon reengineering and reinvention options.
During the year, an evaluation of alternative data sources will be completed and new automated computer-assisted processes will be tested.
Audits and Evaluations: In 1999, the General Accounting Office (GAO) released two reports analyzing the Department's Davis-Bacon wage survey process.
In its January 1999 report, GAO reviewed the wage survey verification process and found that the verification efforts completed to date may have a significant impact on improving the accuracy of future wage determinations by deterring the submission of fraudulent and inaccurate data, educating contractors on how to complete wage data forms, and providing the Department with information to use in its long-term reengineering efforts.
Nevertheless, GAO made three recommendations on the verification procedures.
All three have been implemented by the Department.
In May 1999, GAO evaluated the Department's procedures for improving the wage determinations process and concluded that the ongoing initiatives have the potential to improve the timeliness and accuracy of Davis-Bacon wage determinations.
The Nation’s unemployment rate for January 2000 stands at four percent, its lowest level in 30 years.
Even with a robust economy creating more than 20 million jobs since 1993 and real wage growth occurring at its fastest rate in more than two decades, there are still high rates of displacement.
Worker dislocations – including those stemming from plant closures, corporate restructuring, and foreign trade – continue to occur, and are estimated at 3.3 million annually.
While many recently displaced workers are finding new jobs quickly due to transferrable job skills and the strong economy, more than 60 percent are unemployed for ten weeks or longer and need reemployment assistance.
These dislocated workers must be retrained for jobs with long-term potential, while also overcoming such barriers as low skills levels and English language deficits, which must be addressed in order for them to re-enter the labor force.
Within the Department, the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) provides worker retraining through various programs, including Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) Title III (Dislocated Worker Assistance), Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) and North American Free Trade Agreement Transitional Adjustment Assistance (NAFTA-TAA).
These programs provide occupational, on-the-job and remedial training, job search assistance, relocation assistance, and income support for workers in training in an effort to maximize placement and wage replacement.
The Department is also working to see that employers’ needs for skilled labor are more directly integrated into local workforce development system operations.
The primary goal of the President’s five-year Universal Reemployment Initiative is to provide dislocated workers who need and want employment and training assistance with access to the resources necessary to become reemployed and earn wages comparable to their previous jobs.
The current dislocated worker program serves only a portion of those who lose their jobs and need additional assistance to obtain employment.
Strong economic conditions offer the optimum conditions for improving efforts to help displaced workers.
Based on research and experience, there are several core principles to successful reemployment.
These are: * Prevention, where possible; * Early intervention; * Effective service provision; and * Outreach and partnerships.
The DOL vision is that workers, employers, and communities will have the tools and services they need to plan for and manage worker dislocation successfully in a dynamic economy.
Easy and universal access to these tools and services will ease workers’ anxiety about job changes and help them quickly find new jobs with wages and benefits that match their previous employment.
Goal 2.3A: Under JTPA Title III for dislocated workers, 74 percent of program terminees will be employed, at an average wage replacement rate of 93 percent at termination (compared to their wage at dislocation); 76 percent will be employed one quarter after program exit at an average wage replacement rate of 97 percent.
Results: DOL met and in a number of respects exceeded the goals targeted.
Based on data for Program Year 1998, 73 percent of program terminees were employed at an average wage replacement rate of 99 percent at termination, and 76 percent were employed one quarter after program exit at an average wage replacement rate of 102 percent.
Program Description: Though the unemployment rate is currently low, worker dislocations continue to occur, and are estimated at 3.3 million annually.
The dislocated worker program seeks to maximize placement and wage replacement through community adjustment and retraining.
Analysis of Results: The trend for these performance measures has been positive for several years.
Increases in appropriations for the program have allowed more participants to be served and a wider range of services to be offered.
A good economic climate has helped many dislocated workers find jobs more quickly after receiving services and/or training.
Strategies: A major program initiative to improve rapid response assistance began in Program Year 1998.
Under DOL leadership, a national workgroup was created to put on a conference to disseminate effective practices.
Themes included layoff aversion strategies, meeting the challenge of dislocated workers from different cultures, and working with employers and organized labor.
Another major effort involved strategies to respond promptly and effectively to employer-identified skill shortages.
DOL also funded a major demonstration program aimed at responding to shortages in manufacturing industries.
As a prelude to the incumbent worker training authority that States have under the Workforce Investment Act (WIA), DOL funded grants to upgrade skills of incumbent workers employed in low-skill jobs or with obsolete job skills.
Also, 29 states received incumbent worker training system building grants.
The main goals of these projects are to raise employer awareness of the value of incumbent worker training, identify appropriate linkages between the public workforce system and incumbent worker training activities, and to promote greater involvement by the public workforce system in such activities.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: Measures and goals have been revised for Program Year 2000 to reflect the requirements of WIA.
These measures and goals will focus on employment, employment retention in the third quarter after exit, and post-program earnings replacement.
To obtain more timely information on progress toward attaining goals, ETA has proposed requirements for quarterly reporting by States and other job training grantees.
Results: FY 1999 was a year for gathering baseline data for TAA and NAFTA-TAA programs.
Based on 5,917 complete and valid participant records submitted by 45 states (several states had difficulty implementing the new system) during FY 1999, the TAA/NAFTA-TAA reemployment rate was 74.7 percent.
Program Description: DOL's TAA and NAFTA-TAA programs provide readjustment services and benefits for workers whose dislocations are related to increased imports and foreign trade as well as shifts in production to Mexico or Canada.
These services and benefits include occupational, on-the-job, and remedial training, job search assistance, relocation assistance, and income support for workers in approved training.
In FY 1999, $94.3 million was provided to States for TAA training, job search and relocation.
This funding was used to enroll an estimated 23,553 workers in classroom and on-the-job training; to provide job search assistance to an estimated 207 workers; and to provide relocation allowances to an estimated 429 workers.
An additional $36.9 million was provided for similar assistance under the NAFTA-TAA program, primarily to enroll an estimated 3,906 workers in classroom and on-the-job training.
Finally, $225.6 million in Trade Readjustment Allowance benefits and $19.3 million in NAFTA-TAA Readjustment Allowance benefits were provided to States in FY 1999.
Analysis of Results: The Department instituted new participant outcomes and a new performance measure reporting system during FY 1999.
For the first time since its inception in 1974, the Division of Trade Adjustment Assistance (DTAA) is developing the ability to analyze demographic data on Trade Act participants, the benefits delivered to them, and the outcomes achieved by those who have finished their reemployment plans.
Since there is no historical performance data at this time, no trend analysis is possible.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: With the emerging availability of program data, the outcome goals for the program will be revised to focus on earnings replacement and longer-term employment.
The outcome goals for FY 2000 State that 72 percent of program participants will be employed upon termination and will achieve at least 80 percent of their pre-separation wage.
During FY 2000, DTAA will be revising its performance measures data system to make it congruent with the system used for the Dislocated Workers Services programs under the Workforce Investment Act.
For FY 2001, the outcome goals and targets will be increased.
The goal will provide that 73 percent of participants be employed by the first quarter after exit; and participants' total post-program earnings in the second and third quarters after exit represent 82 percent of their total pre-dislocation earnings in the second and third quarters prior to dislocation.
The Department is committed to fostering workplaces that are safe, healthy, and fair.
To meet this objective, the Department is dedicated to increasing the representation, advancement, and promotion of women, people of color, veterans, and the disabled in the workplace; providing access to quality child care for working families; and improving worker safety and health.
As today’s workplace is increasingly affected by global markets, DOL will also address core international labor standards and child labor issues.
Miners’ families wait for news outside the Monongah No. 6 and 8 Mines after a massive explosion in 1907.
The coal mine disaster was to be the worst in the nation’s history, claiming more than 362 lives.
Reducing workplace injuries, illnesses, and fatalities is a core mission of the Department of Labor.
In 1913, the Bureau of Labor Statistics documented approximately 23,000 industrial deaths among a workforce of 38 million, equivalent to a rate of 61 deaths per 100,000 workers.
By 1998, the workforce had grown to approximately 130 million and occupational deaths had declined to 6,026 or fewer than five per 100,000 workers.
This decline in occupational fatalities reflects the progress made in identifying and correcting the many factors that contribute to occupational safety and health hazards.
A coal mine explosion in Monongah, West Virginia led to the passage of the Organic Act of 1910, which called for research in reducing mine accidents and established the U.S. Bureau of Mines.
One year later, the Triangle Shirtwaist factory fire resulted in the establishment of the Bureau of Fire Investigation, an organization with the power to impose and enforce safety regulations.
A more recent mine disaster, the 1968 Farmington, West Virginia explosion, killed 78 miners and spurred passage of the 1969 Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act.
One year later, the Congress established the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA).
Since the establishment of OSHA and the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA), the Nation has made substantial progress in occupational safety and health.
For example, since 1970, the work-related fatality rate has been cut in half, brown lung disease has been virtually eliminated in the textile industry, and trenching and excavation fatalities have been reduced by 35 percent.
Mining fatalities that numbered in the 200-300 range in the 1970s now average fewer than 100 per year.
Even with this progress, significant hazards remain for America’s workers.
Each year, 6,000 Americans die from workplace injuries, an estimated 50,000 workers die from illnesses caused by workplace exposures, and six million people suffer non-fatal workplace injuries.
Injuries alone cost U.S. businesses more than $127 billion annually.
The challenge of making satisfactory progress toward the accomplishment of the Department’s goal is affected by a number of emerging factors: the number of workers OSHA is responsible for protecting has expanded dramatically; rapid technological advances and a dynamic workplace environment have changed the nature of work, leading to new health and safety issues; and industry restructuring and global competition have put pressure on employers to reduce costs and increase productivity, which may impact safety and health conditions.
In responding to the challenges of an expanding base of workers needing protection, changing workplace conditions, and complex emerging issues, the Department must find new approaches, improve efficiency, and leverage resources to achieve the greatest possible positive impact on worker safety and health.
Goal 3.1A: Reduce the number of mine fatalities and the non-fatal injury rate to below the average for the previous five years.
Results: The 79 mine fatalities in FY 1999 is the lowest number ever recorded and is well below the baseline figure of 92.
Analysis of Results: The number of mining fatalities has continued to fall.
In FY 1998, there were 80 fatalities, the lowest in the nation’s history at the time.
FY 1999 statistics continued this positive trend.
While coal mine fatalities have decreased due to a declining workforce, improved technology, and shifting production, the metal and nonmetal mining sector has shown increasing occurrences of fatalities.
Results: The Nonfatal-Days-Lost (NFDL) Incidence Rate of 3.47 is below the baseline annual rate of 4.07 and below the FY 1998 rate of 3.75.
Analysis of Results: As with fatalities, the mining injury rate has continued its downward trend.
Coal mining has a higher injury rate due to the greater percentage of work hours spent in the more hazardous underground environment.
Strategies: The Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) conducts mandated inspections four times per year at underground mines and two times per year at surface mines.
Additional inspections are conducted as provided by the Mine Act.
MSHA targets the leading causes of injuries and fatalities through “safety sweeps,” training, and extensive compliance assistance efforts.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: This performance goal remains in the Department’s FY 2000 Annual Performance Plan.
To reduce irregular fluctuations in annual results, a five-year moving average will remain the basis for measurement.
MSHA strategies will continue targeting roof Teams of volunteers trained to rescue in mine emergencies compete at the National Mine Rescue and First Aid Contest.
Results: The Department exceeded the goal for reducing the percentage of noncompliant coal dust samples.
The FY 1999 coal dust sampling results indicated that 11.4 percent of samples are not in compliance with the coal mine dust standard (679 out of 5,969 inspector samples).
This represents an 11.6 percent reduction from the FY 1998 baseline where 12.9 percent of samples were not in compliance.
Analysis of Results: The 11.6 percent reduction in the percentage of noncompliant samples is more than twice the five percent FY 1999 target.
Since this is the first year of measured results, the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) will review future goals as a trend develops.
Results: FY 1999 silica dust sampling results show an index point reduction of 24.9 versus a goal of 10 index points – or a 75.1 index compared to a target of 90 as a measure of samples not in compliance compared to the baseline.
Analysis of Results: The silica dust result is an index measurement – a weighted comparison between the current year samples and a Trained mine rescuers move out in response to a 1968 coal mine explosion near Renswood, W. Va.
None of the 119 miners underground survived.
A 100 index result means that current year samples have the same compliance-noncompliance ratio as a comparable set of baseline samples.
The FY 1999 target was to reduce noncompliant samples to below a 90 index figure.
The 75.1 index figure is based on 124 noncompliant samples out of 980 samples (due to the weighted computation, the 75.1 index figure is not a straight calculation).
Strategies: In FY 1999, MSHA campaigned against coal miner's black lung disease by: releasing a publication on strategies to control dust in longwall mining; posting selected coal mine dust sampling data on the MSHA website; and taking confidential x-rays to collect data on black lung cases.
In addition, MSHA continued its cooperative effort with the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) to develop a new technology for real-time continuous dust monitoring in underground coal mines, worked with metal and nonmetal mine operators to improve silica dust sampling, published an operators' guide to improve operator sampling, and continued a cooperative effort to train operators to conduct their own silica dust sampling.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: During FY 2000, MSHA plans to continue the strategies used to successfully reduce coal and silica dust in FY 1999.
Coal and silica dust metrics are new, so trends still need to be established.
Since operators are currently being trained on methods to improve their sampling, MSHA intends to continue using inspector samples rather than operator samples to ensure reliability and consistency.
Smoke poured from the entrance of the Farmington, W.Va.
No. 9 mine in the wake of a 1968 explosion that killed 78 coal miners.
The disaster spurred passage of the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969.
Source: Copyright 1968 The Charleston Gazette.
Used with permission.
Goal 3.1C: Reduce three of the most prevalent workplace injuries and causes of illnesses by three percent in selected industries and occupations.
Results: DOL met its goal for reducing silica and lead exposure severity.
Based on the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Calendar Year (CY) 1997 data, it appears that DOL will likely also meet its goal for reducing amputations.
Program Description: The three hazards listed in the accompanying table continue to be prevalent in many workplaces.
Analysis of Results: *Silica* – In FY 1999, average exposure severity at establishments with silica interventions was 39 percent below the baseline.
In order to reduce silica exposures, a nationwide Special Emphasis Program (SEP) was implemented in FY 1996 to focus inspections on areas where high silica exposure was likely.
In addition, training grants addressing silica exposures in general industry and highway and bridge construction were funded.
A Silica Technical Advisor available on the Department’s website provides training and information to assist employers and workers in identifying potential silica hazards in their workplaces, as well as selecting control options.
Lead Exposures* – In FY 1999, the average lead exposure severity at establishments with lead interventions was 17 percent less than the baseline.
Potential exposures include construction work involving welding, cutting, or brazing on lead paint surfaces, smelting operations in which lead is recovered from batteries, and radiator repair shops.
A nationwide SEP focusing on lead in construction was implemented with plans to expand it to all industries.
An outreach program to the automotive radiator repair industry was in effect during FY 1999.
An expert system addressing lead in construction and a general industry test version became available on the DOL website.
Amputations* – DOL expects to surpass the goal of a three percent reduction in the amputation rate from the CY 1993-1995 average level.
DOL is using a three year moving average to measure the goal, which is a more stable estimate of performance since the variability that occurs from year to year is reduced.
The rate of amputations has been decreasing since CY 1993 as shown by three-year moving averages on the next page.
Safety inspections are being targeted to employers with machines that cause the greatest number of amputations: power presses, shears, slitters, slicers, and saws.
In FY 1999, several outreach efforts to address amputations were initiated, including an expert system ¹Online expert systems elicit information from users and advise them how the regulations apply to their situations.
The Department plans to improve its regulation of occupational exposure to crystalline silica by publishing a proposed revised standard in FY 2002.
In addition, DOL will continue to focus on reducing amputations through more on-site consultation, training, education and outreach programs.
Results: Based on CY 1998 data on lost workday rates, the latest available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Department exceeded its goals for a three percent reduction for all five industries.
Program Description: The Department selected the five industries based on the number of employees exposed, their injury and illness experience, and the Department’s ability to most effectively impact workers’ safety and health based on successful ongoing agency programs.
Analysis of Results: *Shipyards* – The three-year average rate declined by 22 percent.
Local emphasis programs (LEPs) targeted inspections in shipyards on the east and west coasts as well as the Gulf of Mexico.
The Department also awarded targeted training grants and initiated partnership and outreach activities which addressed shipyard safety and health.
Food Processing* – The three-year average rate has decreased by 12 percent.
Through training grants, many people received training, while others have been involved in food processing partnerships, including one which is creating models of safety and health excellence resulting in injury and illness rate reductions.
Nursing Homes* – Progress toward reducing the lost workday injury and illness rate in this area has been uneven.
The lost workday injury and illness rate declined for the three-year periods of CY 1993-1995 and CY 1994-1996, but increased in the three-year period of CY 1995-1997.
However, the rate for days away from work declined in CY 1996-1998, which suggests that fewer workers sustained injuries or suffered illnesses severe enough to remove them from the workplace.
Implementation of safety, health and ergonomics programs are also contributing to the decrease in the severity of injuries and illnesses.
A nationwide Special Emphasis Program was established in the nursing home industry, which included a model safety and health program.
Logging* – For each three-year period, the lost workday injury and illness rate has fallen.
The decrease can be attributed to a number of factors, including: the implementation of many LEPs and partnerships for logging; the presence of a Logging Technical Advisor and Technical links page on the Department’s website; and training 3,800 people through training grants.
Construction – The three-year averages for this goal have also been steadily declining.
Over 2,000 employers and 10,000 employees are expected to benefit from cooperative programs, agreements, grants, and partnerships that were continued or approved in FY 1999.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The Department intends to publish regulations to reduce ergonomics-related injuries, which will most affect the nursing home and food processing industries.
Workers suffer more than 600,000 ergonomic-related injuries annually, which are serious enough to cause them to miss at least one day of work, costing their employers $15 to $20 billion in workers compensation.
However, only 16 percent of employers nationwide have voluntarily developed ergonomics programs.
The Department expects these ergonomics regulations to foster a significant reduction in injuries in the nursing home and food processing industries.
Results: Since FY 1995, Lost Workday Injury and Illness (LWDII) rates have been reduced by at least 20 percent in an estimated 50,100 workplaces following an Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) intervention.
Program Description: Under the Department's objective of fostering quality workplaces that are safe and healthy, all workplaces subject to safety and health interventions (including inspections, on-site consultations, partnership programs, high injury/illness rate notification letters, targeting, Voluntary Protection Program (VPP), and corporate settlement agreements) should experience a measurable improvement.
Analysis of Results: Dr. Wayne Gray of Clark University and Dr. John Mendeloff of the University of Pittsburgh examined injury and illness data for establishments that had inspections, consultations, or received high injury/illness rate notification letters.
The study analyzed prior- and post-intervention injury and illness rates for selected interventions and from the results, projected that lost workday injury and illness rates were reduced by at least 20 percent in 50,100 workplaces with interventions from FY 1995-FY 1999.
An estimate of the Department's progress was calculated, since much of the follow-up data from the interventions conducted between FY 1995 and FY 1999 will not be available until FY 2001.
The Department targeted its enforcement program to workplaces with the highest injury and illness rates.
This targeted effort produced four times as many significant cases (inspections where safety and health hazards were so serious that more than $100,000 in penalties were proposed) as all other inspections.
Other factors contributing to the reduction in injuries include increased compliance assistance, especially for small businesses; consultations offering free on-site assistance in identifying hazards and establishing a safety and health program; safety and health training; and increased partnership participation in organizations such as the VPP.
The VPP, which grew to over 338 sites covering 206,668 employees, recognizes firms with exemplary safety and health records and those which voluntarily implement programs that go beyond regulatory requirements.
In FY 1999, the Department finished the redesign of OSHA's Area Offices under the Getting Results and Improving Performance initiative.
The new design focuses resources on solving real problems at the local level.
In FY 1999, Area Offices undertook more than 100 projects aimed at reducing injury and illness rates.
Programs to reduce injuries and illnesses will continue, with a goal of reducing injury and illness rates by 20 percent or more in 100,000 workplaces by the end of FY 2002.
A sample of establishments undergoing an intervention will be tracked prospectively and the changes in their injury and illness rates will be calculated as a part of the Department's performance measurement system.
A FY 1999 audit of the validity and reliability of workplace injury and illness data used in part for this measure was completed.
See Appendix 3, item 15, for additional information.
Results: The most recent three-year average fatality rate, based on the Bureau of Labor Statistics' Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries for CY 1996-1998, shows a two percent decline from the baseline.
Program Description: This program, consisting of inspections, compliance assistance, and training, concentrates on the construction sector since this sector has the most fatalities of any covered sector.
Analysis of Results: The three-year average is used to limit fluctuations in the data, thereby highlighting trends in the performance measure.
For the last two periods, the three-year average fatality rate has been trending down.
It is uncertain whether the Occupational Safety and Health Administration will meet the three percent reduction goal when the data is reevaluated.
The average fatality rate for CY 1997-1999 period needs to decline to 14.1 fatalities per 100,000 to meet the target.
The fatality rate for construction in CY 1998 was more than three times as high as that for general industry (14.5 versus 4.5, respectively).
The fatality rate may not be decreasing as quickly as anticipated due to the increased employment in the construction industry which exposes less experienced workers to serious hazards.
During FY 1999, 18,634 construction inspections, including 635 fatality investigations and 1,774 complaint investigations, were completed.
At sites qualifying for focused inspections, inspectors concentrate on the hazards most likely to cause fatalities rather than conducting more time-consuming "wall-to-wall" inspections.
Hazards shown to most often cause fatalities include falls from elevations, being struck by machines or materials, being crushed (in a trenching collapse or being pinned under a vehicle), and electrical shock.
The focused inspection approach reduces the time spent at construction sites with good safety and health programs.
Strategies: Eleven grants to teach workers and employers about specific hazards associated with scaffolding, bridge and highway construction, and electrical work were funded, and numerous construction partnerships and cooperative programs were put into place in FY 1999.
The Department is examining methods to identify the most hazardous construction worksites.
DOL also plans to evaluate the impact of the current fall protection policy for residential housing and develop compliance strategies, including outreach efforts, to encourage more attention to fall protection systems and proper scaffold erection.
A nationwide partnership involving the Department of Transportation and the National Safety Council, among others, is being developed to address hazards associated with heavy and highway construction.
Falls are one of the most common causes of death and serious injury on the job and OSHA requires employers to provide fall protection where it is needed.
The use of fall protection devices has saved many workers' lives.
An iron worker – the victim of two previous falls – slipped on an icy bar joist and fell toward the ground.
But his fall was broken by a harness and he went right back to work.
In another case, a man working to install a deck was leaning forward and fell.
He was caught by a cable that was part of a fall protection system.
He climbed back up on the deck by himself, rechecked his safety equipment, and went back to work.
Without the cable, he would have fallen 42 feet and likely died.
These workers appreciate the value of fall protection every day of their lives.
Equal pay, sexual harassment, limited advancement opportunities, and a persistent wage gap are issues that remain as vital today as they were twenty or thirty years ago.
DOL is committed to fostering workplaces that guarantee equal opportunities and fairness to all working Americans.
The Department actively monitors compliance by its grantees and contractors with laws such as the Civil Rights Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and assures that minorities, women, individuals with disabilities, and veterans are afforded an equal opportunity by Federal contractors to compete for employment and receive equal pay.
More than 25 percent of the labor force in America, 26 million workers, work for Federal contractors or subcontractors subject to the laws enforced and administered by the Department of Labor.
The requirement that government contractors refrain from discriminating in employment has been an established part of Federal contracting policy since 1941, when President Roosevelt signed Executive Order 8802.
The underlying principle is that Federal tax dollars may not be used to perpetuate discrimination in the workplace.
The DOL Employment Standards Administration (ESA) and the Office of Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management (OASAM) enforce regulations requiring Federal contractors and DOL grant recipients to develop affirmative action programs and to take action to eliminate discrimination from the workplace.
ESA has the responsibility of assuring that employers doing business with the Federal Government comply with the equal employment opportunity (EEO) and affirmative action provisions of their contracts.
ESA also administers and enforces several EEO programs, and shares enforcement authority for the regulations requiring EEO and affirmative action in apprenticeship programs; Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act; and the Immigration Reform and Control Act.
OASAM enforces civil rights laws that pertain to DOL grant recipients and beneficiaries receiving DOL financial assistance.
One strategy used is to educate and provide technical assistance to the states to promote voluntary compliance with applicable non-discrimination laws.
Accountability is placed on grant recipients to ensure they carry out the public policy mandate that federal financial assistance programs will be operated in a nondiscriminatory manner.
The Department's focus on voluntary compliance will continue, and appropriate component agencies will enhance outreach, education, training, and technical assistance programs.
In addition, DOL will continue to work in partnership with industry liaison groups and one-on-one with employers and contractors so they understand their obligations under the law and to ensure America's workforce is treated in an equitable manner.
Results: The Employment Standards Administration (ESA) met 93 percent of the above stated goal with 2,648 Federal contractors brought into compliance with EEO provisions.
Program Description: The Department's Employment Standards Administration administers and enforces three equal employment opportunity laws that apply to Federal government contractors and subcontractors supplying goods and services, including construction, to the Federal government: * Executive Order 11246, as amended; * Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 as amended; and * Section 4212 of the Vietnam Veterans' Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974, as amended.
ESA monitors compliance with these laws through compliance evaluations, during which a compliance officer examines the contractor's affirmative action efforts and employment practices.
ESA also investigates complaints filed by individuals alleging employment discrimination on the basis of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, disability, or status as a protected veteran.
Analysis of Results: The proportion of contractors found to be in compliance has increased by 66 percent since FY 1994.
A number of factors have led to increased awareness among Federal contractors and contributed to this outcome, including the Department's outreach programs, public education, voluntary compliance awards, industry best practices, and technical assistance efforts.
In addition, work hours expended on technical assistance to Federal contractors increased by 30 percent over FY 1998, from 29,222 hours in FY 1998 to 37,966 hours in FY 1999.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: In FY 1999, DOL planned to conduct 5,820 compliance evaluations and reviews.
The Department exceeded this goal by completing 5,875 compliance evaluations.
As projected, the Department conducted 40 corporate management or "glass ceiling" reviews, 100 percent of the FY 1999 goal, and closed 313 complaints of discrimination.
During this past year, the program secured $41,627,834 in monetary benefits for victims of discrimination — up from $35,491,014 in FY 1998.
This amount represents the most ever collected in the history of the program.
Of the total collected, $13,935,431 constituted back pay and benefited 8,493 employees.
A wholesaler learned the hard way that it's never a good idea to judge anyone by appearance alone.
Dallas compliance officers found that the wholesaler, which has a contract with the Army and Air Force Exchange Service to supply alcoholic beverages, didn't even consider hiring women who applied for jobs at its warehouse.
The company predetermined that women could not lift liquor boxes - but no company should ever predetermine what a woman can or can't do. That's discrimination," said Al Padilla, regional director of the Dallas ESA office.
The company paid $56,000 in back pay to 81 women.
Results: The Department’s Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management (OASAM) was charged with the responsibility of drafting regulations guiding the implementation of the nondiscrimination provisions of Section 188 of the WIA.
OASAM drafted these regulations in close coordination with a host of other Federal agencies – requiring significant consultation and collaboration – and issued interim final regulations in November of 1999.
Program Description: The WIA brought significant change to the nation’s employment and training system and required the development of new regulatory guidance to support its effective implementation.
Among its provisions, Section 188 directed the Department to develop and issue regulations related to the nondiscrimination and equal opportunity requirements outlined in the law by August 7, 1999.
Analysis of Results: To ensure the timely completion of the regulatory process, OASAM undertook the task of drafting the Interim Final Rule associated with Section 188, with the active participation of several Cabinet-level agencies.
Specifically, OASAM worked in close consultation with the Department of Justice, the Department of Health and Human Services, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, and the Office of Management and Budget.
These collaborative efforts led to the publication of the Interim Final Rule on November 12, 1999.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: Final regulations were published and became effective on November 12th.
In FY 2000, DOL will initiate reviews to facilitate State compliance with the nondiscrimination provisions of Section 188 within 180 days of submission of State Methods of Administration.
With the dramatic shift of women from households to workplaces, the hours American families spend working in paid jobs, and not at home, have increased dramatically.
The patterns of women's work lives now more closely resemble those of men's.
Women are less likely to drop out of the labor force for significant periods of their lives, and more and more women are responsible, alone or with a spouse, for the economic security of their families.
Between 1969 and 1996, the number of working married women with children increased by 84 percent, while the percentage of single mothers with children increased from 53 percent to 66 percent.
For families with working mothers, issues such as child care and job flexibility become paramount as they balance their work and family responsibilities.
The Department is committed to increased access to affordable, quality child care and initiatives that improve workers' ability to perform their job responsibilities without sacrificing their commitment to their dependents.
Within DOL, the Women's Bureau and the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) are responsible for the programs associated with balancing work and family.
Since its inception, DOL has been working to highlight and address child care needs, starting in the 1930s and 1940s by publishing reports on working women with children and the arrangements they were able to make to care for their children.
Since then, DOL has worked to help employers become more responsive to their employees' child care needs, including surveying the concerns of working women and establishing a clearinghouse that offers employers customized assistance on the most appropriate policies for responding to the dependent care needs of employees.
In April 1998, DOL implemented a national Business-to-Business Mentoring Initiative designed to connect employers providing effective child care programs with employers considering child care options for their workers.
DOL is also promoting a national initiative that will improve the quality of the child care workforce, enhance a system for training and certifying child care providers, and assist in the development of a voluntary set of nationally recognized skills standards for the child care industry.
Strengthening the availability and quality of child care for working parents will take all levels of government working together with businesses, experts, advocates, child care providers and parents.
Only then will parents have peace of mind that their children are getting the care they need to learn and grow into healthy, able, young adults.
To make the most positive impact on child care issues, DOL must continue to search for innovative approaches, maximize resources through private and public partnerships, and stay abreast of the best information available about effective child care programs and practices.
Goal 3.3A: By replicating the West Virginia and other successful child care models, increase the number of States with child care apprenticeship programs to 29 and increase the number of child care apprentices by 10 percent (to at least 2,114).
Results: The Department met the target for the number of States with child care apprenticeship programs and exceeded by six percent the goal with respect to the number of registered child care apprentices.
Program Description: The Quality Child Care Initiative addresses the need to provide working families with safe, affordable, quality child care and an adequate supply of competent, professional child care providers.
This initiative is part of an upgrading effort currently taking place in the child care industry.
The program is designed to: establish a nationwide system of registered apprenticeship training, based on a blending of models and best practices; facilitate the integration of mechanisms for information dissemination contributing to continuous improvement; provide technical assistance to States in the development of their Child Care Development Specialist Apprenticeship programs; and support a life-long career track for child care workers to be employed at a child care center and/or become child care provider entrepreneurs.
Strategies: In order to successfully meet the goals of the Quality Child Care Initiative, the Department has undertaken numerous strategies, including: * Engaging national child care organizations and State partners in this initiative; * Facilitating the development of States' consortia of representatives from the child care industry and government entities; * Establishing working relationships with the consortia; * Exchanging the most current information on child care; * Providing consultative and technical assistance to the States; and * Initiating cross-cutting workforce development efforts with other Federal entities and national labor organizations.
In addition, ten states – Kansas, Washington, New York, New Hampshire, Iowa, Nevada, Wisconsin, Indiana, Vermont, Colorado – and the District of Columbia were awarded grants totaling $3.4 million to develop statewide self-sustainable child care apprenticeship systems.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: Increasing the number of states with child care programs remains a performance goal for FY 2000.
However, in order to more accurately determine the impact of this initiative on the number of apprentices, the indicator for this goal will be revised to the number of newly registered apprentices, rather than the total number of apprentices.
Results: At the end of FY 1999, approximately 17 percent of the 398 employers enrolled in the Business-to-Business Mentoring Initiative on Child Care were at various stages in implementing family-friendly policies and programs for their workers.
Program Description: At a White House ceremony on April 23, 1998, President Clinton announced the Department of Labor’s “Business-to-Business Mentoring Initiative on Child Care.”
The public/private partnership was designed to increase the nation’s supply of quality, affordable, and accessible child care.
The initiative encourages businesses with established child care and work/family programs to serve as “mentors” to other businesses seeking guidance and direction in establishing similar programs.
Through the initiative, DOL also promotes awareness among industry leaders that affordable and safe child care is a top concern for families.
4) effective implementation by employers of their child care policies and programs.
At the end of FY 1999, the Women’s Bureau (WB) had just begun Phase three.
Phase two required extensive outreach and publicity through regional and national media to attract the attention and participation of the business community and took longer than planned.
As a result, Phase three – the process of effectively matching employers who enrolled as mentors and mentees – fell behind schedule.
At the end of FY 1999, approximately 17 percent of the 398 employers were working toward implementation of work and family initiatives for their workers.
Thus, the projected target of 420 employers implementing policies and programs for their workers by the end of FY 1999 was not reached.
Strategies: Successes during Phase one included the installation of a Business-to-Business Mentoring Initiative on Child Care website, an electronic database with sign-up capability and the distribution of an enrollment brochure to over 2,000 employers.
Also, through the dissemination of the Department’s new Work-Family Employer Exchange periodical, as well as numerous events and partnerships throughout the nation, the Women’s Bureau was able to enroll 398 employers with a total workforce of more than one-half million employees into the program.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: For FY 2000, the Women’s Bureau’s goal was revised to require 20 percent of enrolled employers to fully implement their family-friendly policies and programs by the end of FY 2000.
In preparation for Phase four, WB is distributing employer assessment forms to identify employers who have implemented a child care policy or program.
The critical task of matching employers with appropriate business mentors will also continue to ensure that the Bureau attains its FY 2000 goal.
Only by making effective matches can the Women's Bureau contribute to the expansion of quality child care and work/family policies and programs.
Awareness of the severity of the worldwide child labor problem has increased dramatically in recent years.
According to the International Labor Organization (ILO), as many as 250 million children under the age of 15 around the world are employed full – or part-time.
The United States views exploitative child labor as a human rights abuse and an impediment to economic development.
Recently, the U.S. increased its contribution to the ILO’s International Program for the Elimination of Child Labor (IPEC) tenfold, to $30 million, making it the largest contributor to the IPEC program.
To increase efforts to eradicate exploitative child labor worldwide, the U.S. has an active outreach program to American businesses, international organizations, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and trade unions.
DOL’s Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB) is responsible for developing policy and programs relating to international labor activities, and coordinating Departmental international activities involving other U.S. government agencies, intergovernmental organizations, and NGOs.
ILAB’s international labor programs focus on developing core labor standards, working with other nations to implement these standards, and operating technical assistance programs that help countries in transition, particularly newly emerging democracies, develop stable labor systems.
ILAB has been instrumental in funding IPEC-country and regional projects to promote the progressive elimination of child labor by raising awareness to the plight of working children; documenting the extent and nature of child labor; and removing children from exploitative work situations.
ILAB also works to provide these children with educational alternatives and their families with income generating opportunities.
Child labor is frequently caused by poverty, and long-term solutions can only be achieved through sustained economic growth.
Reducing poverty and providing access to free education, while at the same time addressing the needs of families, offers a significant challenge.
The 1998 Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work commits 174 member countries to respect four principles embodied by seven ILO "core" conventions: freedom of association and collective bargaining; elimination of forced labor; elimination of exploitative child labor; and non-discrimination in employment.
The Declaration recognizes that all ILO member states, whether or not they have ratified the conventions, have an obligation to respect these fundamental workers' rights.
A critical challenge will be the Department's ability to influence governments to comply with the Declaration and to take corrective action once violations have been identified.
Results: The Department did not meet its target of increasing IPEC membership to 39 countries.
As of September 30, 1999, 35 countries had signed MOUs with ILO-IPEC.
Program Description: The ILO's International Program on the Elimination of Child Labor (IPEC) was created in 1992 to implement technical cooperation activities in countries with significant numbers of child laborers.
The program is funded through voluntary contributions of ILO member nations.
DOL, through its Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB), encourages countries to become IPEC members by providing funding and public support for these programs.
IPEC encourages member participation through research, design, and implementation of a common plan of action to address child labor problems within a particular country.
Analysis of Results: In FY 1998, there were 29 IPEC member countries.
Of the six additional countries that joined IPEC during FY 1999, only Uganda was funded by the Department.
IPEC membership for the remaining five countries was supported by other IPEC donors.
Throughout FY 1999, the Department committed substantial resources to increasing country participation in the IPEC program.
In addition to funding the membership of Uganda, DOL funded six additional country programs: Ghana, Haiti, Mongolia, Nigeria, Romania, and Zambia.
In October 1999, Mongolia officially became an IPEC member.
It is expected that the remaining five countries will soon sign MOUs and become IPEC members, increasing IPEC membership to a total of 41 countries.
Strategies: The Department's FY 1999 budget contained $30 million to continue work on international child labor issues, including funding for IPEC.
The funding has allowed DOL to: * Enlist the participation of more countries in IPEC's technical assistance programs; * Develop statistical surveys and baseline information to assess future progress in reducing child labor; * Support programs that encourage innovative partnerships between governments, industry, workers, and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) that address the problems of child labor; and * Remove children from work and provide them with educational opportunities and their parents with viable economic alternatives.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The Department determines the success of this goal based on the number of countries signing MOUs with IPEC, since this number indicates support among countries for taking action to address child labor.
DOL anticipates additional countries seeking IPEC membership in the near future.
In FY 2000, however, this goal will be revised to better reflect anticipated outcomes and results and to help assess the extent to which public awareness about the plight of working children rises and international support to combat child labor increases.
Results: The Department met its FY 1999 goal of doubling the number of ILAB-funded IPEC child labor elimination projects by funding 14 IPEC country projects and four IPEC regional projects during the fiscal year.
Analysis of Results: New country programs were established in Ghana, Haiti, Mongolia, Romania, Uganda, and Zambia.
Additional FY 1999 country programs include a project focusing on child domestic servants in Haiti; a project in Guatemala focusing on the fireworks industry; and national child labor surveys—based on IPEC's Statistical Information and Monitoring Program (SIMPOC) program—in Brazil, Ghana, Nigeria, Romania, Uganda, and Zambia.
Regional projects include a project focusing on the trafficking of children for exploitative work in West and Central Africa; a project targeting children employed in the fishing industry in Southeast Asia; a project addressing children working in the informal footwear sector in Southeast Asia; and a regional SIMPOC program in Central America and the Caribbean covering eight additional countries.
In addition to the country and regional programs, DOL committed resources to removing children from hazardous work in the fireworks industry of El Salvador; the garbage dumps of Nicaragua; commercial plantations in Central America; small mines of South America; and trafficking for exploitative work in South Asia.
Strategies: The FY 1999 program focused on funding country and regional projects that removed children from exploitative and hazardous work and provided educational alternatives for children and income generating opportunities for their families.
In addition, DOL funded national child labor surveys to develop baseline data on the incidence of child labor.
Successful strategies supporting these IPEC projects involve innovative partnerships among governments, NGOs, and workers' and employers' organizations.
These groups play key roles in carrying out direct action projects that target children in hazardous industries, and will continue to be important as a global awareness campaign to increase understanding about international child labor issues and promote basic education for working children is being developed for the next year.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The Department has revised its FY 2000 goal to better reflect outcomes and anticipated results and to more accurately assess the extent to which projects prevent children from participating in exploitative and hazardous work.
Since the development of baseline data is vital to goal assessment and planning, DOL is intending to fund the development of child labor baseline information through the SIMPOC program.
Audits and Evaluations: ILAB has supported efforts to more accurately document the extent and nature of child labor through SIMPOC.
The program collects, analyzes and disseminates information, while building local capacity to carry out child labor surveys.
While SIMPOC measures the extent and nature of child labor at the national level, individual country and sector-specific projects collect baseline information and have built-in evaluation components to measure progress in reducing the incidence of child labor.
Results: The Department successfully met this goal.
Core labor standards were implemented in four countries – Cambodia, Haiti, Mexico, and South Africa.
Moreover, the adoption of the Convention on the Worst Forms of Child Labor and its ratification by all 174 International Labor Organization (ILO) member countries will help reduce child labor in developing countries.
Analysis of Results: The adoption by the ILO in June, 1998 of the Declaration on Fundamental Rights and Principles at Work, was a major political and moral affirmation of the importance of core labor standards to the global economy.
The Declaration introduced a new mechanism to hold member states accountable for providing basic labor rights.
While many countries have made a commitment to improve the implementation of core labor standards, many lack the organizational and technical capabilities necessary to address the problem.
To assure implementation, the Department's Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB) is working with the ILO and other agencies to enhance the capacities of Labor Ministries to address standards issues; to build partnerships between governments, businesses, and workers; to effectively adopt standards in the workplace; and to provide information to all parties on standards.
In Cambodia, ILAB initiated a program with the ILO to monitor and report on working conditions in the garment industry.
DOL obtained funding commitments of $1.6 million to date - including $600,000 from the Government of Cambodia and the Cambodian Manufacturers Association – to initiate a program to assess the degree to which working conditions comply with Cambodian labor law, consistent with Cambodia's international obligations.
The project will also educate employers and workers about their responsibilities under the labor code and help strengthen the inspection services of the Cambodian Ministry of Labor.
In Haiti, ILAB, in concert with the ILO and the Haitian Association of Garment Manufacturers, local unions, and the Ministry of Labor, has developed a program to improve working conditions in the garment sector.
On September 30, 1999, the Department awarded a $1 million grant to the ILO to implement the project over a two year period.
The ILO is in the process of recruiting for a chief technical advisor to direct the project, with the expectation that project activities will commence in early 2000.
In Mexico, ILAB's National Administrative Office's (NAO) labor law enforcement review process and public cooperative activities, is working to address allegations that freedom of association and collective bargaining rights are not sufficiently respected, and that many workers are being subjected to employment discrimination and inadequate occupational safety and health conditions.
NAO reviewed and publicly reported on pregnancy-based employment discrimination in Mexico’s maquiladora sector and the Secretary of Labor consulted with her Mexican counterpart on the matter.
These consultations led to a recognition of the illegality of such activity and a commitment to increased public education and enforcement efforts.
Mexico and the United States conducted public outreach sessions to educate workers and employers about the rights of women in the work place.
Reviews also focused on the certification of independent trade unions, the process for gaining bargaining rights, and safety and health conditions.
In South Africa, the Department’s International Labor Affairs Bureau and Employment Standards Administration are working to build the institutions necessary for eliminating discrimination in the workplace.
For the past two years, DOL has provided technical advice to the South African Department of Labor (SADOL) team responsible for drafting the country’s recently-passed Equity Law.
The Department is currently training South Africa’s Equity Office to implement the law’s affirmative action and anti-discrimination measures by teaching SADOL staff how to train national, provincial and local staff how to implement operations.
DOL has helped SADOL design and develop an operations manual (including recommendations on Information Technology support systems).
DOL also assisted in the development of a training plan, draft materials, and a training curriculum outline for SADOL workgroup review.
On June 17, 1999, the 174 member countries of the ILO unanimously adopted the Convention on the Worst Forms of Child Labor (No. 182).
The Department played a major role in drafting the Convention.
On November 5, 1999, the U.S. Senate gave its consent for ratification, and on December 2, 1999, President Clinton formally signed the Convention, calling it “a victory for the children of the world.”
Unanimous adoption of Convention 182 by the ILO represents an important step forward in eliminating exploitive child labor.
The new Convention encourages action by countries around the world to address child labor and conform to international labor standards.
The Department will revise its goal in FY 2000 to better reflect outcomes and anticipated results.
The FY 2000 goal will more accurately assess the application and implementation of core labor standards and the improvement of social safety net programs in developing countries.
A multilateral and bilateral technical cooperation program is being launched in FY 2000 to strengthen labor standards and improve social safety nets.
2) number of regional economic integration initiatives that make progress in enhancing implementation of core labor standards.
The Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Human Resources Development Conference Ministers accepted a DOL proposal to conduct a project on child labor.
This acceptance represents the first time that the 21 economies of APEC have agreed to cooperate on one of the core labor standards.
Analysis of Results: At the Third APEC Human Resources Development Ministerial Conference held in Washington, D.C., in July 1999, the Department successfully secured passage of a new commitment by APEC to address the issue of child labor.
In addition, DOL secured passage of key provisions laying the foundation for APEC to more closely link human resources and core labor standards issues to APEC's central objective of promoting economic growth and trade liberalization.
The ground-breaking APEC initiative on child labor – a high Administration priority – represents a significant change in APEC's approach to core labor standards issues.
The Joint Ministerial Statement, agreed upon by a consensus of all 21 APEC economies, committed that APEC members would explore "ways of eliminating the worst forms of child labor."
The agreement directed APEC's Human Resources Development working Group "to give priority to this issue and to implement an activity in support of this work."
The Ministers directed the Working Group to develop a project to exchange information on best practices for eliminating the worst forms of child labor and to promote youth educational opportunities.
Finally, the U.S. successfully gained passage of several provisions that call for greater participation in APEC activities by all sectors of society.
Strategies: Following U.S. suggestions, Ministers agreed that "Governments cannot achieve social agendas alone. They need the cooperation of other social partners, such as businesses, workers, community groups, and other organizations."
The Plan of Action adopted by the Ministers called for APEC members to identify effective strategies of cooperation.
These initiatives marked the first time that APEC has addressed the broad issue of participation.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: This goal will be replaced in FY 2000 by goals addressing the advancement of core labor standards and social safety nets through multilateral and bilateral technical assistance.
DOL is committed to improving mission performance, through better utilization of information technology, effective stewardship of DOL resources, and maintaining an environment in which employees are encouraged to develop their individual skills and pursue career goals.
To achieve these objectives, the Department has increased the electronic distribution of training and other human resources information, continued upgrades to the payroll systems, expanded continuous learning and career management programs, and increased participation in "employee-friendly" programs.
This section highlights progress toward achieving the Department's internal management goals in the program support areas of human resources, finance, and information technology.