This report, prepared in accordance with the Reports Consolidation Act of 2000, presents the results of the Department of Labor’s (DOL) program and financial performance for Fiscal Year 2000.
The report features how the Department of Labor – in service to the American public – is “Making a Difference for Working Men and Women.”
Looking ahead, as we move into the 21st century, the Department will continue to be challenged to anticipate and respond to the many-dimensioned changes affecting the workplace, and to prepare all of America’s workers for secure, productive employment in a safe and healthy environment.
Wanda, a 28-year-old single mother of three children, had been an assistant to an inspector at a small production company in Massachusetts, since she was a teenager.
Her keen perception and on-the-job training convinced her employer to enroll her in incumbent worker training under the Manufacturing Training Alliance Project, a DOL grantee in Springfield, Massachusetts, when the company installed a new production line.
Soon, Wanda was promoted to full inspector, responsible for ensuring the quality of large castings used by the aerospace industry.
Through training, she not only increased her skills and value to her company but also helped the company compete more successfully.
The FY 2000 Annual Report is divided into three major sections.
The Annual Performance Report reflects continuing progress toward the achievement of the Department’s three strategic goals – a prepared workforce, a secure workforce, and quality workplaces – illustrating through statistics, analysis and the stories of individuals the impact of DOL programs on improving the lives of workers and their families in America and around the world.
The Financial Performance Report demonstrates our commitment to effective stewardship over the funds DOL receives to carry out the mission of the Department, and includes the FY 2000 financial statements and the Inspector General’s audit of those statements.
The costs of achieving the Department’s strategic and outcome goals are reported in the financial statements, establishing a link between the Annual Performance Report and the Financial Performance Report.
The Management and Performance Challenges section of this report summarizes the top 10 challenges identified by the Department’s Inspector General and the Department’s progress and plans to meet these challenges, as required for the first time in the preparation of the Annual Report.
FY 2000 marks the second year that the Department of Labor along with other Federal Agencies has reported program results against the goals in the annual performance plan.
In addition to the Department's Annual Performance Plan, each DOL agency developed an Annual Performance Plan.
Over 200 performance goals included in these plans have provided a basis for targeting and measuring the accomplishments of DOL programs.
Those goals that are key to the accomplishment of DOL's programs were selected from these agency plans and included in the FY 2000 Departmental Performance Plan, providing a basis for assessing the Department's effectiveness in providing core services to our constituents, as well as the performance of individual DOL agencies.
The FY 2000 Annual Report includes descriptions of the Department's strategic goals, the ensuing outcome goals, and a presentation of program results for two measurement years, Fiscal Year 2000 and Program Year 1999.
The Department's Employment and Training Administration includes some programs which are forward funded and follow a program year that begins nine months after the fiscal year for which program funding was received.
These goals were included in the FY 1999 Annual Performance Plan and addressed programs funded in the FY 1999 budget for a program year beginning July 1, 1999 and ending June 30, 2000.
The Appendices provide additional details and explanatory materials supporting the program results.
Of particular note is Appendix 2, which lists the performance goals included in this report and identifies the time period of measurement and a summary assessment of the results reported for each goal.
A Vietnam veteran lost his job as an installer repairman after 22 years when his communications company restructured.
Even with his experience, he could not find regular work and had to take low-paying temporary jobs.
Discouraged, he slipped into a downward spiral of homelessness, addiction and depression.
Finally, he sought help from a VA medical center, where a Disabled Veterans' Outreach Program (DVOP) specialist started him on the long road to recovery.
Funded by grants from the Veterans' Employment and Training Service (VETS) at DOL, the DVOP program assisted him in finding a "survival" job and shelter at a halfway house.
He completed a recovery program, and, after purchasing tools with the help of a local Workforce Investment Act program, he was referred to a fiber optic contractor, which hired him as a field line technician.
He is now installing new scanner devices for a chain of large retail stores at a starting wage of $16.00 an hour with full employee benefits.
And he has never looked back.
Of the 53 performance goals presented in the DOL FY 2000 Annual Performance Report, the Department exceeded or fully achieved 76 percent of its goals, substantially achieved 15 percent, and did not achieve 9 percent.
Performance results have slightly improved over FY 1999, our first year of managing under the provisions of the Government Performance and Results Act, when 73 percent of the targeted goals were achieved.
To acknowledge program performance where reported results were close to achieving the target, an assessment category of substantially achieved (attained 80 percent or more of the targeted goal) has been included in the FY 2000 report.
In FY 2000, the Department gained a greater appreciation of the remaining challenges to a complete implementation of GPRA, including strengthening its focus on the intended outcomes of DOL programs, improving the quality and timeliness of the data used to measure performance, and further increasing the Department's effectiveness in meeting its core mission responsibilities.
During the past year, the Department initiated significant steps to address these challenges, bringing DOL closer to the ultimate objective of a performance-based organization — one that manages programs by using performance information to achieve planned results.
Building toward this objective, DOL's first priority has been to establish enduring outcome goals which target continual improvement in the achievement of the core results to which the Department is committed on behalf of working men and women.
In FY 2000, DOL agencies, in close collaboration with the Office of Inspector General (OIG), reviewed performance goals with a view toward sharpening the focus on the intended outcomes of DOL programs.
FY 2000 goals are now more results oriented, and for several programs address multiple indicators that offer a more comprehensive assessment of the program being measured.
The Department also further strengthened its oversight of the performance management process.
Mid-year and year-end reviews conducted by the Deputy Secretary focused on performance progress and results, providing a capstone to a management oversight process that is supported by regular program reviews at lower levels of management in individual DOL agencies.
At the program level in DOL, the challenges to performance measurement vary.
Data sources and the agencies' level of control over the reporting systems represent the primary factors influencing the reliability and usefulness of the Department's performance information.
DOL agencies have made steady progress this past year toward obtaining from the States and other third parties performance data that is timely, accurate, and relevant.
The Employment and Training Administration, for example, has engaged contract assistance to assess State-based performance data collection systems that support its performance measures.
The Department has also recognized the important role of program evaluation in ensuring the accuracy and reliability of performance data, Cristina, the daughter of a migrant farm worker in southern California and Arizona, knew she wanted a better life for herself and her family.
She enrolled in Job Corps, completed the clerical occupations program, and obtained her General Education Degree (GED).
Determined to succeed, Cristina used her Job Corps training as a springboard to college.
She graduated from Mesa Community College, and three years later, she graduated from Arizona State University.
As a result of returning to school, Cristina landed a job as a youth officer with the Arizona Department of Juvenile Corrections.
Now, she has come full circle, working as a counselor at a Job Corps Center, where she is a role model and mentor, and is making a Spanish language videotape on the program.
Strategic Goal 1, a Prepared Workforce, includes 14 performance goals.
Thirteen of the 14 goals were fully achieved and 1 goal was substantially achieved.
In FY 1999, only 50 percent of the performance goals for a Prepared Workforce were met.
Increased management attention to program performance in the Department’s employment and training programs yielded significant improvements in performance.
Particularly noteworthy are program results reported for the Department’s Welfare-to-Work Program.
Of the Welfare-to-Work participants placed in unsubsidized employment in FY 2000, 84 percent remained in the workforce for six months or longer – substantially exceeding the targeted six month or longer retention rate of 60 percent.
Strategic Goal 2, a Secure Workforce, includes 16 performance goals.
Eleven of the 16 goals were achieved or exceeded, 3 substantially achieved, and 2 were not met.
Compared to FY 1999 when 93 percent of goals were achieved, program performance in this area declined somewhat.
The two performance goals not achieved in this strategic area involve compliance of selected industries with labor standards governing wages and work hours.
Although overall compliance did not increase, some areas of progress were identified.
The Department is analyzing the performance data to determine which strategies were more successful, and will use the results to refine its continuing initiatives to improve DOL’s functions are organized around three strategic goals, which have provided the focus for the Department’s strategic planning and a framework for the annual performance plans.
These goals build on our successes and respond to the challenge of helping every American participate and prosper in today’s economy.
Through these three strategic goals and their supporting outcome goals, DOL staff and the American public can see a direct link between the Department’s purpose and its activities.
The three DOL strategic goals are: supplementing performance information available through existing data collection processes, and addressing the causes of shortfalls in performance results.
The limited discussions of program evaluations in areas other than the employment and training programs reflect the Department’s need to increase the use of this valuable tool.
DOL anticipates expanding the use of program evaluations in support of its performance-based management initiatives.
In this report, performance data and supporting information are presented by strategic goal, following the sequence in the Department’s FY 2000 Annual Performance Plan.
Each DOL Strategic Goal serves as a category for presenting performance results.
Under each Strategic Goal, outcome goals that segment the larger objective of the Strategic Goal into more specific objectives are discussed.
This information provides a non-technical orientation on how DOL serves the public in each major area of the overall DOL mission and serves as an introduction to the detailed performance information that follows.
Following each Outcome Goal, separate reports of results for individual performance goals provide the following information: • A report and analysis of performance results against the goal.
A description of the program being evaluated.
Highlights of key strategies employed toward achieving the goal.
A capsule summary of any planned changes in the program and performance measures in the Department’s Revised Final FY 2001 Annual Performance Plan, published in December 2000, based on performance results.
Summary comments on any evaluations relevant to the performance goal that were conducted during the year.
The following appendices provide supporting information for the workplace protections for the employees in these industries.
Ten goals had results that achieved or exceeded the target, two goals were substantially achieved, and one goal was not met.
The 77 percent of Quality Workplace goals exceeded or fully achieved in FY 2000 reflects improvement over the 64 percent of quality workplace goals that met the FY 1999 targets.
Among the more significant results reported under this Strategic Goal is OSHA’s success in reducing illnesses and injuries where the agency initiated an intervention.
Interventions include inspections, consultation visits and high injury/illness letters sent to employers.
OSHA targeted reducing injuries and illnesses by 20 percent in at least 50,000 workplaces.
OSHA’s FY 2000 study identified approximately 67,900 work places that had achieved at least a 20 percent reduction in the Lost Workday Injury and Illness rate where interventions occurred, exceeding the target of 50,000 workplaces by 34 percent.
Appendix 5 is the glossary of acronyms used in this document.
In FY 2000, the Department of Labor maintained its outstanding record in financial management.
Under the Government Management Reform Act (GMRA), and the Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 (CFOA), all Federal agencies are required to produce annual financial statements and to have those statements audited.
The Department's Inspector General issued an unqualified, or "clean," opinion on DOL's FY 2000 Consolidated Financial Statements – the fourth consecutive year that DOL has attained this highest level of financial performance.
The audit report also states that no material weaknesses were found in the Department's system of internal controls that would affect the financial statements' accuracy.
The Department strives to ensure that all financial systems comply with the requirements of the Federal Financial William manages the Voluntary Protection Program (VPP) in Region VI for the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and was on a certification visit to Chevron Phillips' Cedar Bayou Plant in Baytown, Texas, when his co-worker, Oliver (OJ), had a massive heart attack and collapsed.
Paramedics from the Emergency Response Team and the plant's nurse immediately diagnosed OJ's condition and stabilized him before he was rushed to the local emergency room.
Quick action, preparation, and correct treatment not only saved OJ's life but also greatly reduced the damage to his heart.
OJ's family, friends, and co-workers are grateful to Chevron Phillips for believing in the VPP principle of "above and beyond" the basic OSHA compliance requirements for safety and health.
Says Bill: "When companies ask me how much this voluntary OSHA program will cost, I tell them: 'It's worth every dime you invest, every second you spend, and all the effort you can muster, because I know it has saved at least one life. How many lives do we need to save to make it worth while?'" performance results presented in the body of the report.
Appendix 1* presents the organizational chart for the Department.
Appendix 2* lists each performance goal and identifies whether or not the goal has been achieved.
This section includes performance goals that were eliminated or revised subsequent to the release of the FY 2000 Annual Performance Plan.
The Appendix also lists the measurement period for the performance data addressed in the performance goal.
Appendix 3* includes a listing of significant evaluations of DOL programs conducted by the General Accounting Office (GAO), OIG and other organizations during FY 2000.
Appendix 4* contains supporting information for each performance goal including the performance indicator or, source of data, baseline data, any comments pertinent to data collection, and the previous goal if the goal was revised after the release of the FY 2000 Annual Performance Plan.
Management Improvement Act of 1996 (FMIA).
During this past fiscal year, DOL brought three of five remaining systems requiring modifications into compliance with the Act.
Fifteen of 17 systems now comply with the standards established by the Act.
Significant progress was also made on the two remaining systems – the Employment Standards Administration’s Back Wage Collection and Disbursement and Civil Money Penalty systems – and it is anticipated that both will be in compliance during FY 2001.
Additionally, the Department began looking to the future by Randall met his crew at the No. 1 portal elevator early on May 8, 2000 to begin installing eight-foot iron bolts in the roof of a mine in Alledonia, Ohio.
It was a typical workday—drive the bolts in, hang the wire mesh using four-foot bolts to ensure that the roof would stay up when mining operations began.
Suddenly, Randall was lying face down on the mine floor, near a crosscut entrance, and his gas detector was squawking.
His mate, Bill ran to help him but was also overcome.
Machine operator Kevin quickly found the compact emergency breathing equipment, called self-contained, self-rescuers (SCSR), which he and other miners donned to rescue the fallen men.
Bill regained consciousness, but Randall’s breathing was laborious and his pulse shallow.
The miners administered oxygen and returned to the surface, where Randall was rushed to a local hospital.
The SCSRs, which are mandatory in underground mines, once again had proven their worth.
As a result, plans have begun for a multi-year effort to modernize the system for DOL to maintain its leadership position in this area.
Significant progress was made in FY 2000 toward implementation of managerial cost accounting principles and practices.
A number of pilot projects are underway in several program agencies, and plans are underway to expand the application of cost accounting principles to the Department’s programs.
The Department also improved its performance in the areas of debt referrals and electronic payments.
By the end of the fiscal year 2000, DOL agencies had reported 92 percent of eligible delinquent debt to Treasury, and had reached over 97 percent performance in electronic payments for salaries, travel and grants.
The Office of Inspector General (OIG) has identified the following areas to be the most serious management and performance challenges facing the Department of Labor: * Financial Management * Implementation of the Workforce Investment Act * Effectiveness of the Welfare-to-Work Initiative * Quality of Program and Cost Data * Security of Pension Assets * Protection of Worker Benefit Funds * Stewardship over DOL Information Technology Resources * Integrity of Electronic Benefit Claims Management * Targeting of the Dislocated Workers Program * ILAB Expansion The Department recognizes that the ten challenges posed by the Inspector General represent issues of importance to the effectiveness and efficiency of the Department’s programs and operations.
The Department’s responses identify the substantive actions which have been completed or are currently in progress to address these challenges.
Several of the challenges reference specific concerns reported in detail in recent OIG audits, and the Department's corrective actions for the majority of these findings should be completed within the next year.
Other challenges require legislative action at the Federal or State level, as explained in management's response.
Finally, some challenges are broad issues of sound management, such as the need to exercise stewardship over significant information technology and benefit program resources.
Management's response to these issues provides detailed information about the existing and developing management systems and actions taken over a number of years to effectively manage these challenges.
The Department will work with the Inspector General to develop an approach for reaching agreement that the Department's actions sufficiently meet each of the challenges, or what specific actions the Inspector General considers essential to resolving the challenge in future years.
The Department's annual performance plan incorporates some, but not all, of the Inspector General's major management challenges.
For those challenges arising from OIG audits, resolution is usually expected to occur within six months of audit issuance, a timetable that does not coincide with the performance planning cycles.
The established audit resolution process tracks the status of each OIG audit recommendation, ensuring that all audit related challenges will be addressed.
When a sustained effort is required over several years and the challenge relates to a core program or management priority, performance goals and strategies are targeted in Departmental and agency plans.
Challenges which are referenced in the Department's FY 2001 Annual Performance Plan include financial management, the effectiveness of the Welfare-to-Work initiative, the quality of program and cost data, protection of worker benefit funds, and stewardship over information technology resources.
In January 2001, the General Accounting Office issued a report on the Department's Major Management Challenges and Program Risks, as part of its High-Risk and Performance and Accountability Series.
None of the Department's programs were identified on the list of high-risk Federal programs.
The Department has not dedicated a separate section of the FY 2000 Annual Report to GAO's challenges since many of GAO's challenges focus on the need for improving performance data, which is discussed extensively in the Annual Performance Report and the Management and Performance Challenges, and others duplicate OIG's challenges.
The Department will reassess both the GAO report and OIG's challenges during the preparation of DOL's FY 2002 Annual Performance Plan to determine whether any of the issues require further attention in the planning process.
Enhance Opportunities for America's Workforce DOL is committed to enhancing opportunities for America's workforce by providing the tools and assistance necessary for success in today's job market to people new to the labor force or wishing to improve their potential.
Special emphasis is placed on closing the employment gap for out-of-school youth and providing long term jobs for individuals moving from welfare to work.
In addition, the Department publishes crucial labor market information to support key economic and policy decisions.
Ed, a High School guidance counselor in Harford County, Maryland, helps a student navigate through the Bureau of Labor Statistics Online Occupational Outlook website.
The National unemployment rate remained at a low 4 percent average throughout 2000.
Nevertheless, a significant portion of the American population still lives at or near poverty level and faces barriers to achieving steady employment and livable wages.
With rapid technological advances, the knowledge and skills to participate in the new digital economy increasingly predict individual success.
Among those particularly lacking critical skills and at special risk of a life of poverty are low-income adults, welfare recipients, individuals with disabilities, and veterans who are struggling with homelessness, service-connected disabilities and readjustment to civilian life.
The Employment and Training Administration and the Veterans’ Employment and Training Service (VETS), with support from the Women’s Bureau, operate a number of programs focused on breaking the cycles that lead to poverty.
The challenge for the 21st century is to develop a framework for lifetime learning that encourages workers to acquire and update the basic and technical skills needed for long-term, successful employment.
As a key component of this framework, WIA which was fully implemented on July 1, 2000, offers opportunities for any adult, regardless of income, to advance his/her career through the One-Stop system.
The unparalleled State and local flexibility and participant control over training decisions afforded under WIA will challenge the Department to effectively guide the new system in preparing the workforce to meet the demands of the new century’s high-tech workplaces.
Goal 1.1A: Of those Welfare-to-Work (WTW) participants placed in unsubsidized employment, 60 percent will remain in the workforce for six months with 5 percent average earnings increase by the second consecutive quarter following the placement quarter.
Results: This goal was exceeded.
Of those WTW participants placed in unsubsidized employment, 84 percent remained in the workforce for six months with 59¹ percent average earnings increase by the second consecutive quarter following the placement quarter.
Program Description: The WTW program began in FY 1998 by issuing grants to States and local communities to increase job opportunities for the hard-to-employ recipients of Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF).
Grantees provide welfare recipients, noncustodial parents, and low-income custodial parents with job readiness services such as work culture preparation, pre-employment job training, and vocational educational training.
Job placement services and work based activities such as community service and on-the-job training are also provided.
WTW program participants also receive post-employment services such as General Educational Development (GED) preparation, occupational skills training, and supportive services, such as emergency housing, child care, and transportation assistance.
Analysis of Results: The 84 percent retention rate is attributed largely to the WTW emphasis on post-employment and other supportive services.
The 59 percent earnings increase rate is likely to be inflated due to misinterpretations of the reporting guidance by a number of grantees.
A major technical assistance effort is underway to determine the degree to which grantees may be reporting incorrectly, to correct inaccurate reports, and to resolve grantees' reporting challenges.
DOL will issue shortly revised WTW reporting instructions and formats to incorporate changes from the WTW Amendments of 1999 and to clarify the reporting instructions.
Strategies: In FY 2001, DOL will focus on identifying and improving WTW participants' longer-erm retention, career advancement, and wage gains.
First, the Department plans to implement a pilot program that provides funding to employers to upgrade the skills of their TANF employees, providing these employers backfill the entry level positions with WTW participants.
DOL also plans to work to assure that the TANF reauthorization process incorporates local, State and Federal lessons learned in WTW implementation.
¹ The 59 percent earnings increase is being reviewed.
It appears to be inflated due to inconsistent grantee reporting.
Lastly, DOL plans to target the development of whole family programs that help participants, primarily fathers, focus on their children and help the custodia.
DOL will use corrected data to establish new baselines and to evaluate the need to revise the targets for the goals upward.
Michael had been in and out of jobs when he enrolled in a self-improvement program at the Institute for Responsible Fatherhood and Family Revitalization in Washington, D.C. The Institute, a DOL Welfare-to-Work grantee, provides supportive services to help people on welfare make the transition to work and self-sufficiency.
Due to the help he received at the Institute, Michael took charge of his life and set ambitious goals, including a post-secondary degree.
He now works at a restaurant, rising from entry-level cook to kitchen manager making $14 an hour.
His supervisor frequently praises his work habits and job performance.
In addition, Michael is helping other fathers to become more responsible parents and productive citizens.
Photo by: Michael Carpenter Program Evaluation: The Balanced Budget Act of 1997 instructed the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) to evaluate the effectiveness of WtW initiatives, including those undertaken by WtW formula and competitive grantees.
In February 2000, DHHS' Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation released a new report in this evaluation of WtW, *Early* *Implementation of the Welfare-to-Work Grant Program: Findings From Exploratory Site Visits and Review of Program Plans.
A second report on this evaluation was issued in May 2000, *Further Progress, Persistent Constraints: Findings From a Second Survey of the Welfare-to-Work Grants Program.
The report includes findings that WtW program implementation has advanced, but participation levels still lag and the projected scale of WtW programs remains modest.
In response, in 2000, the period over which grantees may expend their WtW funds was extended by two years.
This extension enables all grantees to continue enrolling new participants longer and thus improve their chances of meeting WtW participation targets.
Appendix 3 provides further information on these evaluations.
Goal 1.1B: Sixty four percent of Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) adult disadvantaged terminees will be employed one quarter after program exit with average weekly earnings of $292.
Results: This goal was fully achieved.
The entered employment rate at follow-up was 66 percent, 2 percent more than the targeted level of 64 percent.
The average weekly earnings at follow-up were $347, which significantly exceeded the goal of $292.
Program Description: The Workforce Investment Act (WIA) replaced the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) on July 1, 2000, but WIA data will not become available until July 1, 2001.
The Department is continuing to report performance under JTPA in the interim.
JTPA Title II-A, Training Services for Disadvantaged Adults, establishes programs to prepare economically disadvantaged adults for the workforce by increasing their occupational and educational skills.
States and local service delivery areas historically serve approximately 300,000 participants annually under grants totaling $955 million.
Participants receive services including career assessments, classroom and on-the-job training, and special supportive services, such as child care and transportation assistance.
Analysis of Results: Although the Program achieved its goals, one possible explanation for the decline from Program Year 1998 in the follow-up employment rate is the fact that the States implementing the WIA early, which were high performers in previous years, did not report JTPA data.
Because of the incremental nature of the transition from JTPA to WIA, six states implementing WIA early – Vermont, Kentucky, Florida, Indiana, Texas and Utah – established new WIA participant tracking procedures.
Their omission from JTPA reports may have affected the Program Year 1999 National average.
To assure greater data integrity, DOL has launched a major data validation and quality initiative designed to improve the overall validity, reliability, and timeliness of its program data.
The Department is pursuing an approach that promotes data quality throughout the workforce development system.
DOL's activities include: (1) developing common data definitions and common data formats; (2) delivering a consistent message concerning these definitions to the system; and (3) providing system-wide staff training, where necessary.
This approach is similar to the method now employed for validation of Unemployment Insurance data.
3) the program leveraged the resources and expertise of Federal, State, business, and related community-based organizations.
WIA builds upon the successful strategies of JTPA, including: extensive partnering with Federal, State, business and community-based organizations; maintaining strong accountability at all levels of Government; and assuring comprehensive services to address barriers to employment.
The new features of the WIA program include universal access to program services by all adults with priority given to low-income individuals, and the use of Individual Training Accounts to give customers maximum choice in selecting quality training to further their career objectives.
Under WIA, eligibility for adult services is expanded beyond JTPA, which focused on the economically disadvantaged population.
This change to universal access is significant, and its impact on program design, services, and outcomes will be studied.
Moreover, under WIA, customers use Individual Training Accounts to select a training provider, based on consumer report information that includes performance data.
The expectation is that market forces will lead to more effective utilization of training providers and services.
Goal Assessment: The WIA performance goals focus on longer-term retention.
Specifically, the measures include employment retention and earnings change two quarters after program exit.
These new measures better capture gains in participants' earnings by comparing two quarters of post-program earnings with two quarters of pre-program earnings.
DOL is also measuring employment retention and earnings change twelve months after program exit.
The Unemployment Insurance wage record system is the primary source for the new outcome measures.
The FY 2000 Annual Performance Plan reflects the change to WIA and the FY 2001 Report will report on achievements under WIA.
Results: The goal was exceeded.
14,508 special disabled veterans have been assisted to enter employment.
Program Description: The DOL's Disabled Veterans' Outreach Program (DVOP) and Local Veterans' Employment Representative (LVER) programs develop and promote training and employment opportunities for the Nation's veterans, with special emphasis on assisting disabled and Vietnam-era veterans.
These programs operate through a system of State and local public-private partnerships to target veterans who have been unsuccessful in forming long-term job and career attachments.
This goal targets employment assistance for special disabled veterans who have a disability rating of 30 percent or more, and represent the most difficult to serve portion of the special disabled veteran population.
Analysis of Results: The data reflect that the strategies of the Department's Veterans' Employment and Training Service (VETS) are working.
Efforts by grantees and staff are directed toward those individuals with the greatest need for assistance, specifically those veterans with multiple barriers to employment or those subgroups of veterans suffering from higher levels of unemployment.
Consistent with this strategy for increasing our emphasis on the harder to serve veterans, more job-ready veterans are now being assisted by the mainstream public employment service system.
A total of 62,131 special disabled veterans registered for assistance during the fiscal year.
Of these, DVOP and LVER staff served 43,642 while the remainder used self-help facilities or were assisted by the mainstream public employment service system.
Some of those served by the DVOP and LVER staff were not readily available for referral to employers, others were referred to training or supportive services, and some were in the process of completing their vocational rehabilitation programs.
Nevertheless, the 14,508 special disabled veterans helped into jobs by DVOP and LVER staff represents 33 percent of those seeking their assistance.
Francis, a 42-year-old veteran, had not held a job since 1995.
He was a long term welfare recipient.
That all began changing when the Director of the Veterans' Employment and Training Service in Hawaii was contacted by the personnel officer in the Coast Guard to fill a laborer position with a starting salary of $11.27 an hour.
Francis was participating in a VA program and was referred to the Coast Guard by a Disabled Veterans Outreach Program specialist.
He got the job.
And he was not the only one.
Eight other welfare-to-work veterans were also hired, and have earned nothing but praise from the Coast Guard.
Today, Francis is a maintenance technician earning $15.67 an hour.
He's off the welfare rolls and on the payroll for good.
¹ Goal 1.1C was dropped from the Department's FY 2000 Annual Performance Plan.
An explanation is provided in Appendix 2.
The data upon which the outcome is based is collected by the States' public employment service system as individuals register for assistance.
Data are maintained on each individual registering for services, and the Employment and Training Administration monitors the validity of the data.
Strategies: A case management approach is proving successful in assisting special disabled veterans.
With this approach, the disabled veteran's job search efforts are closely assisted by the DVOP and LVER staff and more intensive services such as diagnostic testing, career planning, and individual counseling are available.
Veterans facing fewer employment barriers are encouraged to take advantage of the extensive array of self-service or assisted services offered through the public employment service system.
VETS also conducted joint training with Department of Veterans Affairs' Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment staff to ensure the successful transfer of veterans from vocational rehabilitation to job search assistance; over three-quarters of special disabled veterans referred from the VA were assisted into jobs.
Goal Assessment: For FY 2001, VETS has targeted employment for homeless veterans, another group which requires a higher level of service and assistance to secure employment.
Goal 1.1E: The new Work Incentive Grant program will be implemented by September 30, 2000, with plans for 20 to 40 awards in State and local areas to enhance services for people with disabilities in the One-Stop Center environment.
Results: This goal was fully achieved.
DOL completed the development of the Work Incentive Grant program and awarded grants to 23 State and local entities.
Program Description: The Work Incentive Grant program is a $20 million competitive grant program to enhance the employability, employment, and career advancement of people with disabilities.
The program addresses multiple barriers to employment by providing expanded availability of information and services, including Medicare, Medicaid, housing, transportation, developmental disability, and mental health services at the State and local level.
Analysis of Results: The Work Incentive Grants utilize the comprehensive services provided under the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) One-Stop system and build upon initiatives set forth in the Ticket to Work and Work Incentive Improvement Act of 1999.
Technical Assistance/Bidders Conferences were conducted jointly with the Social Security Administration and the Health Care Finance Administration to promote collaboration across respective grant programs being awarded by each agency.
Consultations were also held with the Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with Disabilities as well as other Federal agencies to incorporate their issues and concerns in the grant program design.
Strategies: The Workforce Investment Act includes universal access as one of its primary principles.
Historically, the mainstream employment and training programs have not had the ability or resources to serve individuals with disabilities in a comprehensive or consistent manner.
The One-Stop Centers opening under WIA have the potential to be the primary resource for improving skill development and employment opportunities for this population.
The Work Incentive Grant program will be a significant tool to actualize this potential.
Goal Assessment: In FY 2001, the Department will institute an evaluation component to assess the Work Incentive Grant program’s success in expanding services and information available to individuals with disabilities in the One-Stop Center environment.
Results: The goal was fully achieved.
For DVOP and LVER staff, the entered employment rate was 32 percent.
The entered employment rate for veterans helped by the public employment service system was 32 percent.
Program Description: The Department of Veterans’ Employment and Training Service (VETS) develops and promotes training and employment opportunities for the Nation’s veterans, with special emphasis on assisting Vietnam-era veterans and those who are disabled or disadvantaged.
Disabled Veterans Outreach Program (DVOP) staff deliver the program locally, providing veterans with employment, placement, job development and supportive services.
Local Veterans Employment Representatives (LVERs) monitor and assist local offices to provide services on a priority basis for veterans.
Analysis of Results: The data validates the strategy of relying upon the mainstream public employment service system to provide most of the assistance to job-ready veterans, allowing the DVOP and LVER staff to concentrate their efforts on the harder to place veterans.
Efforts by grantees and staff are directed toward those individuals most in need of assistance, specifically those veterans with multiple barriers to employment or those veterans’ subgroups suffering from higher unemployment rates.
A report on the quality of the data used by VETS to measure performance outcomes identified shortcomings that VETS is addressing.
The report confirmed that the current reporting system under-reports the accomplishments of VETS funded staff.
VETS relies on data collected by the States for reporting to the Department’s Employment and Training Administration (ETA); this system was in place prior to the passage of the Government Performance and Results Act and the Workforce Investment Act, and is not conducive to the measurement of performance outcomes.
Two recent studies highlighted the use of Unemployment Insurance (UI) wage record data as offering greater validity in determining the number of veterans who enter employment.
The first study conducted in Maryland compared VETS data with wage record data and concluded that DVOP/LVER staff are assisting veterans to find jobs for which the reporting is not receiving full credit.
A second study conducted in California corroborates the Maryland study.
Data provided on the Employment Service Program Report for Program Year 1998 showed that 3.7 percent of registered veterans assisted by the public employment system (including the DVOP and LVER staff) in California became employed, whereas California UI wage record data showed that 59.9 percent of veterans who had registered with the public employment service obtained jobs in the first quarter after registration.
Because of these studies, VETS and ETA are revising their performance outcome measures and anticipate using UI wage record data to measure the effectiveness of services provided to our Nation’s veterans.
Strategies: A case management approach is used to assist those veterans with the greatest need; this involves constant monitoring and the provision of intensive services to the client.
Veterans facing fewer employment barriers are encouraged to take advantage of the wide array of self-service or assisted services offered through the public employment service system.
This strategy has resulted in a higher number of veterans with multiple barriers receiving the benefit of more intensive services, particularly special disabled and homeless veterans.
DOL continues to encourage efforts to enable minority veterans, veterans receiving public assistance, and young veterans to find jobs.
Increased attention also continues to be devoted to monitoring Federal contractors' affirmative action efforts and veterans' preference in the Federal sector.
Goal Assessment: In FY 2001, the equivalent FY 2001 goal targets: 27 percent of those veterans and other eligible persons registering for public labor exchange services will enter employment each year through assistance provided by VETS funded staff and the Wagner-Peyser funded systems.
As VETS gains experience with the improved measurement approaches, the goals will be adjusted accordingly.
Program Description: The mission of DOL's Women's Bureau is to advance opportunities for women in the workforce.
As the trend of female participation in the workforce increases, the Department seeks to provide information, skills, and support networks to women trying to enter or advance in the workforce.
Analysis of Results: The 31,588 women reached directly include women provided individual assistance or consultation, women aided through service providers, employers educated or provided information, women provided assistance to gain entry into apprenticeships and non-traditional occupations through grant programs, and women provided information and assistance to gain entry into high-wage, high-tech careers.
One example is a Women's Bureau joint advocacy effort with the New York Women's Foundation.
Together, the organizations worked with the Welfare Rights Initiative, an association of City University of New York students on public assistance, to build leadership and career readiness among its members.
In FY 2000, more than 20 of its alumnae left the welfare rolls and entered graduate school, law school, or employment in jobs in community based organizations throughout the city.
In another initiative, the Women's Bureau, in collaboration with the Pennsylvania Women Work, Vocational Technical Education, National Industry of Metal Working Standards Association, and DOL's Employment and Training Administration, developed a Workforce Investment Act Machining Careers Awareness Project.
This project resulted in approximately 20 women increasing their earnings through entry into this higher paying non-traditional occupation.
The 31,588 women reached directly, as measured by the Women's Bureau, are a sub-set of the estimated 1.3 million women reached indirectly through DOL's influence in changing policies and programs as well as other advocacy activities.
For example, the Women's Bureau presented fact-based information to the Atlanta City Council on the experience of other cities in the region that have a Commission on the Status of Women.
As a direct result of the presentation, a City Ordinance was passed and a new commission established to address employment and health policies for women throughout the Atlanta metropolitan area.
Several sources of data are used for collecting performance information: an automated tracking system to collect data for technical assistance provided to women; an evaluation form used at workshops, conferences, symposiums, and forums; contractor reports of results; comment cards distributed with all Departmental publications as well as at some sponsored and/or co-sponsored events and exhibits; and, unsolicited information, such as letters from constituents.
Strategies: Joining in collaborative ventures and partnerships with public, private, and academic sectors, the Women's Bureau leverages its resources to reach out to the widest possible audience through vehicles such as workshops, training sessions, and public forums.
Goal Assessment: More careful tracking of the number of women reached in FY 2000 and continuing efforts to refine program outcome measurement indicates that targeting another significant increase in accomplishments for FY 2001 would be unrealistic.
Accordingly, the goal for FY 2001 has been revised to a five percent increase over the FY 2000 level.
Women in nontraditional jobs make good economic sense.
Studies reveal that there are strong correlations among poverty, lack of a high school diploma, joblessness, youth violence, and crime.
The Employment and Training Administration administers the Workforce Investment Act (WIA), including the Job Corps program and Youth Opportunity grants, as well as the School-to-Work Initiative, and research and demonstration projects that address the persistent unemployment challenges of at-risk youth both in and out of school.
Experience shows that narrowly focused training and employment programs have primarily resulted in only short-term gains in earnings.
Positive outcomes, such as fewer interactions with the criminal justice system, fewer teen pregnancies, and increased school attendance, often dissipated shortly after the youth completed the program requirements or the program ended.
More recent DOL experience with youth programs supports a holistic approach with a comprehensive array of services to achieve long-term success.
DOL has found the following 10 elements are key ingredients of effective youth programs: tutoring and study skills training, alternative secondary school services, summer employment opportunities linked to academic and occupational learning, paid and unpaid work experiences, occupational skill training, leadership development, supportive services, adult mentoring, comprehensive guidance and counseling, and long-term follow-up.
WIA substantially reforms formula-funded youth programs to provide this comprehensive array of assistance to meet the employment and career goals of youth.
Statistics support the fact that education and training programs when delivered with extensive support services are generally more effective.
Job Corps delivers its programs in a residential setting and provides a wide range of supportive services, including a secure, drug-free learning environment, medical care, and career and personal counseling.
Despite the strongest economy in 30 years, there remain pockets of poverty and high unemployment in the country.
To bring together the knowledge and resources of government, community and faith-based organizations to solve the problems of some of the Nation's most hard-core disadvantaged communities, the Department established Youth Opportunity Grants.
Now in its second year, a total of 36 Youth Opportunity Grants have been awarded, and these pilot communities are rising to the challenge of building a more promising future for their young people.
Preparing all youth for future careers in a rapidly changing, technologically driven economy presents special challenges, that will be overcome with evolving strategies to ensure that no young people enter the labor market without the skills to succeed in the digital society.
Results: The goal was fully achieved.
A total of 80.4 percent of JTPA Title II-C youth terminees were employed or obtained advanced education or job skills.
Program Description: The JTPA Title II-C Program provided year-round training and employment programs and services to economically disadvantaged youth between the ages of 16 and 21 who had significant barriers to employment and were either attending school or were out-of-school.
Employment barriers included a lack of basic skills, dropping out of school, being pregnant or parenting, being homeless or a runaway, and being an offender.
In addition to services similar to those offered to adults under Title II-A, some youth in Title II-C programs were guided into internships that broadened their horizons by introducing these disadvantaged young people to an array of career opportunities while encouraging the interns to further their education.
For other youth, school-to-work transition or alternative high school services, provided the most valuable options for enhancing educational attainment and opportunities for a fulfilling work life.
Analysis of Results: While it is difficult to attribute the positive performance in program outcomes to any one factor, JTPA's focus over the last few years on basic academic Jesus, a 19-year-old high school graduate, had worked in several fast-food restaurants, most of the time for minimum wage, but really wanted to get into the construction industry.
He enrolled in a pre-apprentice training program that paid him a $100-a-week stipend.
However, he couldn't afford the car insurance he needed so he could get to the training.
Jesus turned to the San Diego Youth @ Work project, a Youth Opportunity grantee serving out-of-school young people in San Diego.
With monetary and motivational assistance from this program, and his hard work, Jesus completed his training and is now able to earn up to $15 an hour building concrete forms.
Photo by: Thomas Araya skills, work ethics and applied job skills contributed to the positive result.
Some of the success is also a result of the robust economy and the relatively low unemployment rate.
Although the Department exceeded its goal for Program Year 1999, there was a 3.6 percent decrease in performance from Program Year 1998.
This drop in performance was most likely related to programs in transition from JTPA to the Workforce Investment Act (WIA).
The Department and the States have developed data quality systems, including standard controls and diagnostic procedures, to ensure the collection and reporting of coherent, internally consistent information on the results of the program.
In addition, the Department conducts periodic monitoring and technical assistance reviews of States' quality control processes.
Strategies: Beginning with Program Year 2000 (July 2000 - June 2001), the Job Training and Partnership Act Title II C was replaced by the WIA Title I Youth Program which will further improve assistance to disadvantaged young people by substantial reforms to programming, with an emphasis on more comprehensive, long-term activities.
Program strategies for youth include preparing for post-secondary education and unsubsidized employment, creating strong linkages between academic and occupational learning, and developing effective connections to employers and local labor markets.
A substantial emphasis is placed on providing services for out-of-school youth.
In addition, youth who exit the program will receive follow-up services for a minimum of 12 months.
Goal Assessment: Program Year 2001 performance goals for the WIA youth program target a comprehensive, long-term approach to youth development and collaboration among partners.
50 percent of the 14-18 year old youth will be in employment, post-secondary education, advanced training, apprenticeships or in the military in the third quarter after program exit; and * 70 percent of 19-21 year old youth will be employed in the third quarter after program exit.
Results: The goal was exceeded.
Eighty-eight percent of Job Corps Graduates pursued further education, or entered employment including the military with a starting average hourly wage of $7.49.
Program Description: The DOL Job Corps Program is a highly intensive, primarily residential training program for severely disadvantaged youth ages 16 through 24.
The program provides skills and academic training, social education, and other support to over 70,000 participants at 119 centers.
Under the Workforce Investment Act, the Job Corps program is expanding the scope of its operations to provide support services for up to 12 months after students graduate from the program.
Analysis of Results: The graduate placement rate exceeded the Program Year 1999 target by 13.3 percent and average hourly wages were 99 cents higher than the previous year's target wage, continuing the trend of increased starting wage rates for Job Corps graduates.
The positive performance results achieved by Job Corps in Program Year 1999 most likely resulted from an emphasis on training innovation and partnership building.
Job Corps' collaboration with the School-to-Work initiative encouraged the integration of academic, vocation, and social skills curriculum to improve the foundation for student success.
Additionally, Job Corps aggressively worked to establish strong partnerships with employers and community representatives to ensure that our training programs are "state of the art" and consistent with economic trends, and that students experience the importance of voluntary service to one's community.
Goal Assessment: DOL has modified its GPA goal statement for Program Year 2000 to reflect Job Corps' extended time horizon for serving the needs of graduates.
DOL's long-term retention target will state that 70 percent of Job Corps graduates will still have jobs or be pursuing education 90 days after their initial placement.
In anticipation of the more challenging long-term performance goal, Job Corps is in the process of bolstering its student support services system.
The Career Development Services System (CDSS) is designed to expand and intensify services provided after students leave the centers, enhance on-center strategies for meeting the needs of students, and build more inclusive and mutually beneficial relationships with our WIA partners.
Audits and Evaluations: An evaluation completed by Mathematica Policy Research, Inc, entitled *Short-Term Impacts of Job Corps*, found Job Corps substantially increases education and training services, improves educational attainment, generates positive employment and earnings impacts, and significantly reduces youths' involvement with the criminal justice system.
The study also showed particularly positive impacts for 16- and 17-year-old youth, including earnings gains, educational achievement, and reduced arrest rates.
Smaller impacts on the receipt of public assistance and on self-assessed health status were found, and the data do not show an impact on illegal drug use, family formation or mobility.
The above study of short-term impacts affirms Job Corps' current program strategies.
Thus, no actions have been taken to modify our strategies based on these findings.
Please refer to Appendix 3 for more details or for information about obtaining a copy of the evaluation.
Results: This goal was fully achieved as 1.6 million secondary students participated in School-to-Work (STW) activities.
Program Description: The School-to-Work Opportunities Act established a national framework within which States and other grantees (such as Urban and Rural Opportunity Grantees) are creating STW systems.
Students participating in STW classes receive career-related instruction as a complement to their traditional academic classes.
The goal of the program is to increase academic achievement, improve technical skills, broaden career opportunities, and prepare all students for high-skill, high-wage occupations.
The STW initiative provides venture capital to support grantees in building their STW systems.
Analysis of Results: Program Year 1999 results reflect a 39 percent increase over the previous year's participation, when 1,055,775 students were enrolled in the STW program.
The growth in STW participation is due to the increase in the number of States and local communities seeking and receiving grants to implement STW initiatives for students.
Positive results of participation in STW programs included a 5 percentage increase, from 69 percent in 1996 to 74 percent in 1998 of students who took at least 3 years each of math and science.
Data are collected in alternate years.
Note: This information reflects data obtained from studies conducted in eight States which implemented the program early.)
The most recent data also show that: * 27 percent of high schools have implemented key STW components (defined as offering career major programs that require an extended workplace activity).
Why are all these people smiling?
Because DOL recognized their success in running exemplary youth employment and development programs at the PEPNet, the Promising and Effective Practices Network, annual awards ceremony.
PEPNet, managed by the National Youth Employment Coalition, and funded by DOL's Employment and Training Administration, is a premier resource for youth.
Its tools for effective practices are used by policy makers and other youth professionals in building quality training programs.
150,000 employers are providing work-based learning experiences for students.
The National School-to-Work Office continues to collect best practices from around the country and frequently updates these practices on a STW website.
These examples not only illustrate the progress being made under STW; they also provide practical assistance to professionals in the field in developing innovative and effective STW systems in their localities.
Goal Assessment: The goal for Program Year 2000 is to further expand participation by engaging 2 million youth in STW activities.
The STW supporting legislation expires in 2001.
Audits and Evaluations: Each year the National School-to-Work Office (NSTWO) reports the results of a performance measurement survey of School-to-Work partnerships in implementation states.
Summary statistics for progress measures included in the survey's report indicate the degree to which schools, students, employers, and post-secondary institutions have engaged in specific activities associated with School-to-Work.
Appendix 3 provides further information on this report.
Results: The goal was achieved.
As of September 30, 2000, 36 communities were awarded grants and 5,194 youth were enrolled.
Program Description: The Department's Youth Opportunity Grants are aimed at increasing the long-term employment of youth who live in Empowerment Zones, Enterprise Communities, and other high-poverty areas.
These grants target funds through the Workforce Investment Act to those urban and rural areas most in need of employment assistance.
Although the focus of the initiative is on increasing employment, other goals include reducing dropout rates and teen pregnancy, increasing enrollment in post-secondary education, and decreasing crime.
DOL also expects to improve existing systems in poor communities for serving at-risk youth through this initiative.
For the Youth Opportunity initiative, placing and maintaining youth in private sector jobs is a priority.
Job training, work experience, and education slots will be available for youth not ready for private sector placement.
Youth will be placed in jobs throughout their cities, not just in their targeted neighborhoods.
Local schools, community colleges, universities, and faith-based organizations will play key roles as program partners, and community ownership will be encouraged through advisory boards and the involvement of parents, residents, and local businesses in program activities.
Youth Opportunity Grants will also foster the responsible behavior and personal accountability essential to career success.
Analysis of Results: The Youth Opportunity Grants were awarded in the spring following an intensive applicant screening and pre-award site visit process.
Typically, large community-wide projects require a six-month or longer planning period before services start.
DOL staff made an intensive effort to work closely with sites to get them started quickly, resulting in over 5,000 youth being enrolled at more than 100 sites by September 30.
Strategies: DOL has assigned persons with years of experience operating youth programs to serve as coaches to help each site implement the youth opportunity program.
These coaches work closely in a supportive manner that includes training case managers, teaching strategies for developing youth, and assisting sites to coordinate with other organizations that serve youth.
Goal Assessment: The Program Year 2000 goal targets 50 percent of 19-21 year-old participants to be employed in the quarter after exit.
This goal takes into account serving a highly at-risk youth population living in communities of concentrated poverty in urban and rural areas and on Indian Reservations.
Wagner-Peyser Act funded employment services are as critical to meeting the needs of today's employers and job seekers as they were when originally authorized by Congress in 1933.
This landmark legislation continues as the foundation for the nation's public labor exchange system, providing a key tool for returning unemployed individuals to work quickly.
The Workforce Investment Act (WIA) places Wagner-Peyser Act funded employment services at the heart of local One-Stop service delivery systems that integrate a broad range of programs and services.
WIA also places new emphasis on employment statistics and labor market information and the need for the infrastructure, technology, and products to deliver timely and valuable information with maximum convenience to a broad range of customers.
The ultimate goal for these services is to assist employers in finding qualified workers and to help all job seekers to secure suitable employment.
At the State and local levels and within local One-Stop systems, Wagner-Peyser Act employment services include a range of core services such as access to resource rooms with the latest technology job seekers use to obtain employment, such as resume preparation tools; staff-assisted job search assistance and counseling; job referral and placement; recruitment and screening services for employers; and labor market and career information.
Depending on their needs, customers may use self-help tools or receive minimal or intensive staff-assisted services.
Technology has dramatically increased the Department's ability to offer services and products to customers in a broad range of formats and at almost any time.
National, State, and local job matching systems, labor market information, resource directories, and occupational and career information are online to enable direct customer access or to assist staff in providing services.
These tools are available anywhere personal computers can be found such as public libraries, colleges and universities, shopping malls, churches, and customers' homes and businesses.
Electronic information is available to bring together job seekers and employers nationwide under the umbrella of America's Labor Market Information System, including America's Job Bank, America's Career Information Network, America's Learning Exchange, and a wide variety of labor market and workforce development tools.
There are now approximately 2.6 million registered job seekers and 1.5 million jobs available in America's Job Bank.
The challenge for the Nation's workforce development system is to work collaboratively within the One-Stop framework to continuously improve our services.
Working with our partners, strategies need to include leveraging resources, taking advantage of available technology, continually measuring performance and customer satisfaction, infrastructure and capacity building, and seeking new ways to break down the barriers to integrated One-Stop service delivery.
Our collective goal is to provide high quality and timely services and information about work that best serves the nation's job seekers and employers.
Goal 1.3A: Increase the percent of job seekers registered with the employment service who enter employment by 1 percent.
Results: The goal was exceeded.
The number of job seekers entering employment after registering with the employment service increased by 2.75 percentage points in Program Year 1999 to 21.6 percent.
Note: Guam not reporting).
Program Description: In assisting job seekers to find employment, public employment service staff provide job search, referral, and placement services, and other activities and services such as counseling, testing, assessment, and occupational and labor market information.
Additionally, the public employment service provides job seekers with access to automated services through America's Career Kit (America's Job Bank, America's CareerInfo Net, and America's Learning Exchange).
During Program Year 1999, State agencies continued the transition to providing labor exchange services through One-Stop delivery systems.
In the One-Stop environment, labor exchange service delivery is coordinated with the provision of other Federally-funded workforce development services as required under the Workforce Investment Act.
Analysis of Results: The results reported for this measure represent the proportion of job seekers registered with the employment service who entered employment during Program Year 1999.
State Employment Security Agencies collect information on the number of applicants registered with the public employment service and the number who enter employment, which they in turn report to the Department in the form of summary statistics.
The Department is in the final stages of developing a comprehensive Labor Exchange Performance Measurement System that will include newly developed performance measures and an improved system of obtaining outcome information based on unemployment insurance wage record data.
A pilot project using wage record data shows the actual entered employment rate is substantially higher than the rate reported by the data collection and verification procedures currently in place.
DOL expects to transition to this new performance measurement system during Program Year 2001.
Goal Assessment: The Department is in the process of revising the metrics by which it measures the performance of the public employment service.
For Program Year 2000, the Department again has targeted a one percentage point increase over the Program Year 1999 entered employment rate.
On-the-job training in this CVS facility helps these workers acquire skills that can pave the way to career advancement and greater earnings.
Results: The goal was fully achieved.
The number of job openings listed with the public employment service increased by 21 percent over the previous year.
Program Description: As part of providing labor exchange, recruitment, and other technical services to employers, the public employment service publishes job openings.
Employers can advertise their job openings with State Employment Security Agencies (SESAs), job seekers can research these opportunities, and staff can screen and refer suitable candidates to these jobs at the request of the employer.
Employers also can publish their job openings on America’s Job Bank (AJB), which is a national Internet-based job system that facilitates connections between employers and job seekers.
Most jobs listed with the SESAs are subsequently uploaded and posted on AJB.
Jobs uploaded from the SESAs are excluded from the AJB count in the table.)
America’s Job Bank www.AJB.org America’s Career Information Network www.ACINET.org America’s Learning Exchange: www.ALX.org At the Naylor Road One-Stop Center in Washington, D.C., job-seekers may peruse job listings and career information, get career counseling, receive GED training, and participate in workshops on such topics as resume development, job-search techniques, and dressing for success.
Right photo by: Michael Carpenter Mark, a 34-year-old Army veteran, feared he would never walk again after a serious motorcycle accident.
Despite his injuries, he was determined to support his family of four.
While still in a wheelchair, he told his hospital social worker that he wanted to continue his education.
He was referred to Workforce Essentials, the local One-Stop Center in Clarksville, Tennessee.
His case manager at the center helped Mark return to college.
Two years later, he received his associate degree and is close to obtaining a bachelor’s degree in public management.
While studying, he also launched his own real-estate firm, Eagle’s Nest Harris Realty.
Mark is now able to walk again—he is proof positive that, through hard work and determination, anything is possible.
Customers get information on unemployment insurance benefits, one of many employment and training services available at One-Stop Centers throughout the nation Photo by: Michael Carpenter Analysis of Results: The expansion of employer services provided by AJB, combined with the tight labor market existing during Program Year 1999, resulted in a record number of jobs being listed with the public employment service.
Job opportunities published annually through the SESAs remain over 7 million for the second consecutive year.
The increases in the total listings with the public employment service can be attributed to the role of AJB in successfully capturing a large share of the burgeoning market for Internet job postings.
The number of job opportunities listed with the public employment service has increased by over 72 percent during the past 5 program years, indicating the growing reliance by America's employers on the public employment service to meet their workforce needs.
Data on AJB job openings include jobs entered manually by employers, jobs entered through employer batch processing, and jobs uploaded from the SESAs.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: For Program Year 2000, the Department has set a goal for continued growth in the number of job listings, with a targeted 15 percent increase over this past year's total.
The Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) is responsible for producing some of the Nation's most sensitive and important economic indicators.
These indicators are key sources of data used for economic planning and analysis by the President, Congress, and other Federal policy-makers, as well as public and private institutions.
In addition, BLS information is used by individuals who are seeking to improve their chances to succeed in today's job market.
Seven BLS data series have been designated as Principal Federal Economic Indicators: the Employment Situation, Consumer Price Index, Producer Price Index, U.S. Import and Export Price Indexes, Employment Cost Index, Real Earnings, and Productivity and Costs.
The effectiveness of BLS data is determined through a number of criteria pertaining to timeliness, reliability, and access.
BLS is committed to continuous improvement of its statistical processes and products.
Substantial challenges face BLS, including the changing economy, maintaining sufficient response levels, and evolving technology.
To respond to the challenge of changing technology, BLS must remain on the cutting edge and adapt emerging technology to BLS processes while maintaining a steady flow of economic information.
Keeping abreast of improvements and using these improvements to deliver data in a more timely and useful manner are essential ingredients to providing the quality of service our customers expect.
Performance of this goal is measured in three dimensions: timeliness, quality, and access.
The first, timeliness, addresses how often the Department's Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) meets the release dates in the published schedule of its Principal Federal Economic Indicators.
The second dimension measures reliability.
Decision-makers need to know how well BLS statistics reflect the economic activity described.
The third dimension, access, is measured by customer usage of the BLS Internet site.
FY 2000 Results: The goal was substantially achieved.
Performance measures were fully met for two of the goal's dimensions, timeliness and relevance, but the target for quality was not achieved.
The access measure increased.
Analysis of Results: Timeliness measures for all programs were met except for that of the Employment Cost Index (ECI).
The December 1999 ECI news release was delayed for one day in January 2000 by a weather emergency.
Timeliness results are based on an evaluation of the Office of Publications and Special Studies report of release dates against the release schedule of BLS Principal Federal Economic Indicators.
Four of the seven Principal Indicators -- the Employment Situation, Consumer Price Index (CPI), Producer Price Index (PPI), and Employment Cost Index -- are included.
There were 40 scheduled releases in 2000.
This figure is comprised of quarterly releases of the ECI, and separate, monthly releases of the Employment Situation, CPI, and PPI.
Since the delay in the ECI resulted from a weather emergency, the Department made no changes to its strategies for achieving this performance measure.
The new procedures instituted by DOL following the early releases of reports discussed in the FY 1999 Annual Report have proven effective in solving this concern.
Analysis of Results: The quality targets for the Employment Situation and ECI were met, but not for the PPI.
For the CPI, although the standard error measure was met, there was an error that necessitated the issuance of corrections to the published all-items index.
In order to increase the relevance of BLS information, BLS consults with advisory councils and other researchers.
In FY 2000, the Federal Economics Statistics Advisory Committee was inaugurated, a research conference on price statistics was held, and meetings of the BLS Business and Labor Research Advisory Councils took place.
Each of the four Principal Federal Economic Indicators addressed in this goal has a unique quality measure.
Appendix 4 provides information on individual program quality measures and performance.
Shortfalls in performance stemmed from problems in the following areas: * In September 2000, BLS issued corrections to published CPI data for January to August of 2000 due to an error discovered in the housing component of the CPI.
BLS is analyzing the processes behind this error to determine how they can be improved in the future.
Due to a publication delay of new indexes covering Miscellaneous Retail Trade and Stockbrokers, the PPI did not achieve its quality goal.
Methodological problems have been resolved and the indexes were published in February 2001.
Analysis of Results: The average number of Internet site user sessions each month is used as a proxy measure of the number of customers accessing BLS information.
In FY 2000, the number of user sessions increased 33 percent.
Goal Assessment: The performance goals for all three dimensions are the same in FY 2001.
Program Evaluation: The OIG completed a follow-up on an earlier prerelease information security audit.
Appendix 3 provides further details on the audit.
Ed is a high school guidance counselor in Edgewood, Maryland, a suburb of Baltimore.
Every year he administers an in-depth career interest inventory to the 10th grade English classes.
Based on the students' responses, he then links them up with the Occupational Outlook Handbook, a National source of career information covering more than 250 types of jobs published by DOL's Bureau of Labor Statistics.
In the past, Ed had to ask students to share a few copies of the Handbook, which because of its cost was often not the latest version.
Now the Handbook is on the Internet, and students can customize their career research exploration in the school's computer labs.
The site attracted almost 300,000 users a month last year.
Says Ed: "It's been a lifesaver! The students are really motivated to learn about possible careers and I'm grateful because the online version of the Handbook has made me more effective as a counselor."
This goal measures achievement of significant milestones that reflect the Department's Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) commitment to continuous improvement of its statistical processes and products.
Results: This goal was fully achieved.
All FY 2000 milestones for improving the accuracy, efficiency, and relevancy of the economic measures were achieved.
NAICS: BLS completed its three-year effort to implement the standard industrial classification revision known as the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS).
Through coordination with the States, 94 percent of units and 97 percent of employment and wages received NAICS 1997 codes.
BLS has completed imputation for nonrespondents thus yielding a fully-coded file of all employers (ES-202 file) for the first quarter of FY 2000.
Many BLS statistical programs use the ES-202 program output as a source for drawing survey samples.
CPI Revision: As part of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) revision, the first samples from the Telephone Point-of-Purchase Survey (TPOPS) were rotated into the CPI concurrent with the release of the October 1999 index in November 1999.
TPOPS rotation will continue on a regular, biannual (every six months) cycle in 2001 and thereafter.
Continuous biannual rotation of commodity and service samples improves the accuracy and reliability of the CPI in two ways.
First, with each rotation the oldest set of retail establishments in the CPI sample is replaced with a newer set that more accurately reflects contemporaneous consumer behavior in the marketplace.
Second, with each rotation the unique set of CPI market basket items priced each period is updated in the newly selected TPOPS establishments.
The selection of the unique items is determined by recent market trends in each establishment, allowing new consumer products to enter the CPI sample, such as DVD players.
CE Expansion: BLS completed its 50 percent expansion of the urban area sample for the Consumer Expenditure (CE) Survey.
The new sample contains 7,800 households each in the diary and interview surveys, up from the 1997 baseline year of 5,400 households in each survey.
In the Consumer Expenditure Survey, data collection for the urban area sample expansion was completed in March 2000.
Processing of these data was completed in August.
The 1999 data were published in December 2000 with the 2000 data planned for publication in late 2001.
The expanded sample size of the CE survey will accomplish three objectives: * Accelerate the process of updating the Consumer Price Index (CPI) market basket.
Expand the amount of information collected on prices of certain goods and services * Produce supplementary measures of changes in consumer prices that are regarded as providing closer approximations to cost-of-living measures than the currently published CPI.
ECI Enhancement: Planning for the Employment Cost Index (ECI) expansion from 8,000 to 15,000 establishments has been completed and the sample design is now being implemented.
PPI Expansion: Work was completed on the first annual directed-substitution endeavor.
Directed substitution allows the PPI to substitute existing repriced product lines with new evolutionary versions of the product lines.
Over two dozen industries were targeted for this activity.
Cooperation from respondents was excellent.
Internet Site Improvement: In January 2000, the web-based subscription service was released for the seven Principal Federal Economic Indicators that the Department produces.
During the third quarter, four news releases were added to the subscription list so that all monthly BLS news releases are now available through this system.
Goal Assessment: Improvements to be initiated in FY 2001 include: a new time-use survey; support of the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) by strengthening a program that produces employment statistics at the State and the local level; and expansion of price, output, and productivity measures.
The performance indicators for this goal in FY 2001 are: * Conduct cognitive testing, finalize core questionnaire, and obtain OMB clearance for the American Time Use Survey.
Create a research database for modeling sub-State labor market areas in Local Area Unemployment Statistics.
For the PPI, research and select sample frames, consult with potential users on publication goals, research industry marketing and discounting practices, and begin to develop pricing methodologies for one non-residential building type.
Program Evaluations: Program evaluations pertaining to the Department's economic information are described in the narrative for goal 1.4A.
Bob is the Director of the Analysis and Evaluation Office at the Minnesota Department of Trade and Economic Development.
He recognizes that state economic development programs don't always have a major impact on the state economy, but his department's technical assistance to expanding businesses resulted in more than 9,000 new jobs last year.
An essential part of that assistance comes from data supplied by DOL's Bureau of Labor Statistics, particularly labor market information.
Bob uses data on unemployment, costs, markets, and other economic indicators to provide businesses—whether start-up dreams or Fortune 500 offshoots—the information and analysis necessary to make informed decisions.
This makes a significant difference in the lives of many individuals, in and out of Minnesota.
Promote the Economic Security of Workers and Families DOL is committed to promoting the economic security of workers and their families by protecting workers' hours, wages, and other job conditions; providing unemployment and compensation benefits when workers are unable to work; and expanding, enhancing, and protecting pension, health care, and other benefits.
Priorities are to increase compliance with minimum wage and overtime requirements; promote secure retirements for working Americans; provide more pensions for women and employees of small businesses, broaden access to health care, and shorten periods of unemployment in those areas suffering from rapid economic change.
A Maryland-based fast food franchiser has worked with DOL's Employment Standards Administration to become a model employer of teenage workers.
The Department of Labor administers and enforces more than 180 Federal laws.
These mandates and their governing regulations cover over 10 million employers and 130 million workers in various workplace activities.
DOL enters the new millennium having recently celebrated both the 62nd anniversary of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), which established minimum wage, overtime standards and child labor restrictions, and the 26th anniversary of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), which protects the integrity of private pension, health, and other employee benefit plans.
While these hallmark worker protection laws have endured, they have also grown increasingly complex to administer with the dynamic and complex changes that are occurring in America's workforce.
In furthering the economic security and welfare of workers and families, the Department utilizes a multi-pronged approach which includes enforcement, education, partnership, and recognition, and involves all segments of business and industry—contractors, manufacturers, retailers, consumers, worker advocacy groups, financial and health care communities and unions.
The DOL organizations dedicated to achieving this goal are the Employment Standards Administration and the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration.
Both agencies have developed compliance assistance programs that encourage up-front compliance through public education and outreach, as opposed to traditional enforcement techniques.
In addition, significant resources are devoted to increasing public access to vital information used to monitor and secure entitlements.
An informed public enables individuals and practitioners to better understand their rights under the law.
Each year, the Department distributes thousands of publications and pamphlets that provide basic information about voluntary compliance, and staff conduct dozens of educational meetings, conferences, and seminars, as part of the DOL outreach effort.
The primary challenge for DOL's worker protection agencies in the 21st century will be to adapt to the changes occurring in the American workforce.
Virtual workplaces, aging workers, increased numbers of women and minorities, immigration, organized labor, the growth of small businesses, and the ongoing shift from a manufacturing to a service economy will all be important factors as U.S. businesses comply with worker protection laws in the future.
The use of technology can assist the Department to more effectively protect workers' benefits and rights.
For example, electronic government initiatives provide more readily accessible technical assistance and disclosure of public records, and electronic form filing such as the newly implemented ERISA Filing Acceptance System (EFAST).
In the future, toll-free customer service "Help Desks" may provide new opportunities for interactive assistance between the Department and its customers.
Results: The goal of increasing compliance was not met.
Compliance with labor standards laws and regulations was statistically unchanged in the Los Angeles garment industry, and declined in the poultry processing industry and nursing homes.
Compliance baselines were established for forestry (30 percent) and the agricultural commodity of garlic (38 percent).
Program Description: DOL's Employment Standards Administration (ESA) is responsible for administering and enforcing laws that establish the minimally acceptable standards for wages and working conditions in this country.
These labor standards statutes – including the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), which establishes the minimum wage, overtime standards, and child labor restrictions – protect low-wage workers and the working poor.
Analysis of Results: It is ESA's experience that many of these industries' workers are among the most vulnerable – immigrants, minorities and women – who are easy targets for exploitation, and who rarely complain to Government authorities.
Labor standards compliance problems in these industries are pervasive and serious.
The factors that led ESA to target these industries – increasing reliance on immigrant and minority workforces, intense external competitive pressures, high turnover rates, and rapid changes in the industries – are not only still present, but in some instances have intensified, especially given the high employment levels in recent years.
Increasing numbers of immigrant workers in poultry processing, and more frequent bankruptcies and other financial disruptions in the nursing home industry, have made the challenge of increasing compliance more difficult.
The garment manufacturing industry, with about 700,000 domestic workers, continues to face fierce competition from off-shore manufacturing.
In light of the extrinsic factors affecting compliance in these industries, overtime violations, in particular, have persisted and in some cases increased.
An industry specific analysis of the results and strategies follow.
Analysis of Results: The 2000 Los Angeles garment survey found an overall level of compliance at 33 percent – a level statistically unchanged from the prior surveys in 1996 and 1998 – out still higher than the baseline of ??
As with earlier surveys, compliance with minimum wage requirements was higher than with overtime.
Just under half (46 percent) of the firms investigated were in compliance with minimum wage provisions, while 40 percent of firms were in compliance with the FLSA overtime provisions.
The survey reaffirms ESA's earlier findings that monitoring of contractor shops by manufacturers promotes higher levels of compliance.
About 10 percent of shops not monitored were in compliance with the minimum wage and overtime provisions, while the compliance rate for shops subject to a thorough monitoring program was 44 percent.
The survey findings also suggest that compliance is improved by a contractor's ability to bid for contract work and renegotiate prices with manufacturers when circumstances change improves compliance.
Strategies: ESA pursues a multi-pronged intervention strategy combining enforcement (including targeted investigations and assessments of penalties) with compliance assistance (i.e., seminars for employers and town hall meetings for workers), and partnerships (like compliance agreements with multi-establishment employers and relationships with other Federal, State and local government agencies).
In light of the stagnant compliance levels in the garment manufacturing industry in Los Angeles, ESA is enriching its intervention strategies and raising the stakes at all levels of the industry – contractor shops, manufacturers and retailers.
In FY 2001, ESA has strengthened initiatives to target prior violator contractors and seek remedies (fines, liquidated damages, and injunctions) against contractors that are repeat violators.
Egregious violators are being referred to U.S. Attorneys for consideration of criminal prosecution.
Manufacturers who fail to comply with DOL Compliance Monitoring Agreements are also a focus.
The “hot goods” provision of the FLSA is being invoked where appropriate to encourage additional manufacturers to implement compliance monitoring programs.
ESA plans to seek injunctions against manufacturers with repeat violations and contempt citations against manufacturers that violate injunctions.
Finally, during FY 2001, ESA will begin including limited investigations of retailers' private label production.
Analysis of Results: The 2000 compliance results for poultry processors are somewhat mixed.
The overall compliance rate is zero – in comparison to a less than 40 percent compliance level in 1997 (the baseline year for this industry).
The survey's findings can be partially attributed to changes in the survey approach reflecting ESA's increased experience with industry employment practices and in some individual employer pay practices.
Unlike the initial survey, which focused heavily on chicken-catching crews, the 2000 survey looked more closely at the pay practices of in-plant employment and temporary help agencies.
The FY 2000 survey found improvement in the overall compliance of chicken-catching (live haul) crews which increased from 40 percent in 1997 to 56 percent.
Overtime violations were found in all of the processors surveyed.
As in 1997, the most common in-plant finding involved the failure of employers to compensate workers for the time spent putting on, removing, sanitizing and cleaning gear and equipment at the beginning and end of shifts and before and after meal breaks.
Additional overtime violations resulted from the failure of employers to compensate workers appropriately for breaks.
Improper equipment deductions and the misclassification of certain workers as FLSA exempt also resulted in violations.
Family and Medical Leave Act violations (new in the 2000 survey) were found in two plants, as were child labor violations.
Strategies: Some portion of the compliance improvement for live-haul crews may be attributed to ESA’s education/outreach efforts and to Departmental (and private) litigation.
Assistance to the industry remains a crucial strategy for promoting compliance for in-plant workers.
ESA will, in addition, explore new outreach tools to educate workers – particularly the non-English speaking population – about basic labor standards rights.
The ongoing dialogue with several major poultry processors to change employment practices that commonly result in violations will continue.
As with other low-wage initiatives, ESA plans to use and evaluate its existing enforcement tools, e.g., litigation, civil money penalties and other appropriate sanctions, as necessary.
Analysis of Results: The FY 2000 nursing home survey found 40 percent of facilities investigated in compliance with the FLSA minimum wage, overtime and child labor requirements – a drop from the 70 percent compliance level found in 1997.
The parameters of the 2000 survey were somewhat different from those employed in 1997 and a precise comparison is difficult.
However, the results still suggest a decline in overall FLSA compliance.
If survey results were normalized for comparison purposes, the difference would be 67 percent compliance in 1997 versus 55 percent compliance in 2000.)
As in 1997, overtime violations were the most common with 84 percent of non-compliant nursing homes in violation of the overtime provisions.
The nature of overtime violations shifted from the improper calculation of the “regular rate” of pay (the rate on which the additional overtime premium is computed) in 1997 to misapplied professional and administrative FLSA exemptions in 2000.
However, the greatest number of employees subject to violation were those not compensated for hours worked during their meal periods.
Fifteen percent of facilities investigated had child labor violations compared to 6 percent in 1997.
Many of the overtime violations, and some of the child labor violations, may be symptomatic of the industry’s increasing staff shortages.
Minimum wage violation rates in the nursing home industry increased slightly from 4 percent in 1997 to 7 percent in 2000.
Strategies: Based on the results of the 1997 survey findings, ESA had anticipated that many of the identified issues could be addressed by increased compliance assistance augmented by selectively targeted investigations in those geographic regions that demonstrated lower compliance rates (the Northeast and Midwest).
Given the results of the 2000 survey, however, ESA has modified its strategies for affecting compliance in this industry.
Compliance assistance remains an important component.
In addition, ESA has begun in FY 2001 to focus increased attention on those nursing homes nationwide that either have a history of prior violations, are owned by a nursing home chain with a history of corporate-wide non-compliance, and/or have been identified by the Health Care Finance Administration as experiencing staffing deficiencies.
ESA also plans to increase the assessment of civil money penalties and to pursue litigation where appropriate to increase the consequences of noncompliance for recalcitrant companies.
Goal Assessment: The long-term goal of increasing compliance in the garment manufacturing, poultry processing, agricultural commodities, and health care industries remains unchanged at this time.
DOL is exploring, however, whether other measures of the effectiveness of intervention strategies may be warranted.
Results: The goal to increase compliance among prior violators in the poultry processing and nursing home industries was not met.
Compliance declined among reinvestigated employers in the poultry processing and nursing home industries from previous measurements, and goal accomplishment could not be measured for the Los Angeles garment industry.
A compliance baseline was established for forestry (15 percent), but an insufficient number of employers precluded a statistically valid baseline for the commodity of garlic.
Program Description: DOL's Employment Standards Administration (ESA) is responsible for administering and enforcing laws that establish the minimally acceptable standards for wages and working conditions in this country.
These labor standards statutes – including the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), which establishes the minimum wage, overtime standards, and child labor restrictions – serve to protect the most vulnerable workers in the workplace: low-wage workers and the working poor.
Analysis of Results: This goal is used as a measure of the effectiveness and lasting value of ESA's intervention strategies, and represents improvement from full non-compliance.
The same extrinsic factors and industry dynamics that affect overall compliance rates in the targeted industries – competitive pressures and rapid changes – impact levels of compliance among prior violators.
Increases in compliance rates for prior violators have slowed since earlier survey findings, much as overall compliance in the targeted industries has declined.
The survey measuring approach also affects the reported results.
Both the poultry and nursing home industries are characterized by large multi-establishment employers that incur violations at some establishments and not at others.
In measuring recidivism, a violation at any establishment owned by a large corporate entity with a history of non-compliance (whether at the same location or not) would be characterized as a repeat or recurring violation.
This method permits the Department to measure not just the effectiveness of ESA's intervention strategies at single establishments, but how those strategies achieve lasting corporate-wide compliance, and typically results in higher recidivism rates.
For example, if the recidivism sample for the nursing home survey had been limited to only those firms that had prior violations at the same location, then the compliance level among repeat violators would have been 51 percent as opposed to 41 percent.
An industry specific analysis of the results follows.
With regard to the Los Angeles garment industry, ESA determined that the compliance baseline established in 1998 did not include a large enough sample to be statistically reliable.
Therefore, a statistically valid compliance baseline of 37 percent was established this year using a valid sample size.
Analysis of Results: The goal of increasing compliance by five percent was not met as the compliance survey found none of the employers investigated in full compliance.
The survey found no difference in compliance levels for those poultry processing plants that had a prior violation history and those that had never been investigated in the past.
These results may be largely attributed to the shift in survey focus from live-haul crews to in-plant workers, the changes in employer pay practices, external industry pressures and the control exercised by the 23 corporations that operate the 51 plants investigated (an average of two plants per corporate entity).
Strategies: In low-wage industries, ESA pursues a multi-pronged intervention strategy of enforcement (including targeted investigations and assessment of penalties); education/outreach (including compliance seminars for employers and town hall meetings for workers); and partnerships (such as compliance agreements with multi-establishment employers and relationships with other Federal, State, and local government agencies).
Strategies for affecting overall compliance in the poultry processing industry are also relevant for increasing compliance among prior violators.
Given the lack of significant improvement in compliance rates following an intervention, ESA has modified its strategy in FY 2001 in part by increasing the consequences for noncompliance.
In particular, the use of litigation and civil money penalties against recalcitrant employers is being expanded to examine the effect on changing ongoing violative practices.
Finally, the Department’s discussions with the major poultry processors to secure changes in certain employment practices will, where successful, address non-compliant behavior on a broader corporate-wide scale.
Analysis of Results: The goal of increasing compliance by 5 percent was not met, as the compliance survey found a 41 percent level of compliance.
In comparison, 44 percent of nursing homes investigated for the first time were in compliance.
Of those nursing homes still in violation following an intervention, most (70 percent) were found with violations of a different nature.
Significantly fewer violators in the 2000 survey were found engaging in the same violations for which they were previously cited.
Strategies: As with other low-wage industries, strategies that escalate the negative consequences associated with non-compliant behavior – collecting civil money penalties, litigation, and publicizing violations – have been expanded in FY 2001.
ESA is focusing compliance assistance and enforcement attention on nursing homes nationwide in FY 2001, with a special emphasis on past violators and multi-establishment corporations with a history of violations.
Goal Assessment: The goal of increasing compliance among prior violators subject to repeat investigations remains unchanged at this time.
ESA will, however, examine existing measures and explore other methodologies to assess whether there are more effective means to assess the effectiveness of enforcement interventions on future compliance.
Results: The goals were met; compliance surveys established a baseline of 79 percent in full service restaurants, 70 percent in fast food restaurants, and 82 percent in grocery stores.
Program Description: BLS statistics show that each year more than 4 million teens under age 18 are employed in this country, and a sizable number of these teens are at risk being injured or killed on the job.
On average, 70 working teens are killed each year; 210,000 are injured, and 70,000 injured seriously enough to require hospital emergency room treatment.
DOL's Employment Standards Administration (ESA) is responsible for administering the laws that establish the minimally acceptable standards for working conditions in this country, including protections for America's working youth.
Analysis of Results: The restaurant and grocery industries are the two largest employers of young workers.
Together these industries account for nearly one-half of youth employment in the U.S. (based on Bureau of Labor Statistics data).
Almost 50 percent of on-the-job injuries to youth under 18 resulting in days away from work occur in eating and drinking establishments, while 25 percent are in food stores.
While the baseline levels of compliance found in the FY 2000 survey are higher than in other targeted low-wage industries, it is important to note that these surveys only measured compliance with the child labor requirements – not compliance with the minimum wage and overtime requirements.
Seventy-nine percent of full service restaurants were in compliance with the FLSA child labor provisions.
Although most (89 percent) of minors were employed in con pliance, only 53 percent of the 14- and 15-year-olds working in full service restaurants were employed in compliance.
Minors in this industry were found using prohibited power-driven equipment, like meat slicers and bakery machinery.
A slightly lower level of child labor compliance was found in the fast food industry (70 percent), but younger workers were DOL's Employment Standards Administration (ESA) found 127 teenagers under 16 working as cooks, cashiers, and custodial helpers working in violation of the hours and times mandated by the Fair Labor Standards Act.
The franchise owner of the 15 fast food restaurants agreed to fix the problem immediately, paid a fine, and then cooperated with ESA to implement best practices so that teenagers could continue to work safely and lawfully.
The company decided to separate 14 and 15-year olds on a new computerized timekeeping system, centralize its payroll record-keeping for easier review, color code minors' uniforms to make identification obvious to supervisors, and invite an ESA investigator to monthly staff meetings occasionally to talk about compliance issues.
In addition, to promote awareness and understanding of the child labor laws in the community, the owner printed and distributed 100,000 tray liners on child labor laws and DOL's Work Safe This Summer campaign.
Photo by Michael Carpenter also disproportionately employed in violation of the child labor requirements.
Nearly 30 percent of 14- and 15-year-olds were employed in violation of the child labor requirements, compared to 5 percent for all minors.
Among the 3 targeted industries, supermarkets had the highest level of compliance at 82 percent, but the hazardous occupations violations found in this industry, including the use of power-driven paper processing machines (paper balers) and power-driven hoisting equipment (fork lifts), are a concern.
More than half of the violations for each of the surveyed industries involved employers' failure to comply with hours and time restrictions.
Child labor regulations limit the number of hours and the times of day 14-and 15-year-olds may work while school is in session, and the type of work they may perform.
Most youths employed in violation of these standards (87 percent) worked more than an hour past the time standard, and 55 percent worked more than 2 hours past the standard.
In spite of the relatively high compliance rates in these 3 industries, the survey indicates that there are significant child labor compliance issues.
Based on the survey findings, there are at least 52,000 young workers employed in violation of the child labor requirements in these three industries at any given time.
Young workers are employed in hazardous occupations, working too late at night, and for too many hours.
Strategies: As with each of its compliance goals, ESA pursues a multi-pronged intervention strategy combining enforcement (including targeted investigations and assessment of penalties); education/outreach (such as compliance seminars for employers, public service announcements and compliance assistance materials geared toward workers and teens in particular); and partnerships (such as compliance agreements with multi-establishment employers and relationships with other Federal, State, and local government agencies).
The measure of success will depend largely on finding the appropriate balance of the varying strategies and assessing the degree to which enforcement and compliance assistance tools are available and effective.
ESA has modified its child labor strategy for FY 2001 in part by increasing the consequences for noncompliance – assessing and collecting child labor civil money penalties.
Additionally, the Department is increasing its efforts to reach out to stakeholders to communicate the nature and causes of the violations and to obtain their input for developing a plan for future action.
Given the nearly universal membership in industry associations, these stakeholders provide unique opportunities for cooperative partnerships that in turn may broaden the scope of ESA's compliance assistance program.
Partnerships with States that have similar child labor enforcement responsibilities also serve to promote compliance in these three industry sectors as data are shared and enforcement activities coordinated.
During FY 2001, ESA has begun to develop locally focused initiatives in the restaurant and grocery industries, including an enforcement component directed to past violators.
Goal Assessment: Even with child labor compliance rates ranging from 70 percent to 82 percent, attaining a higher level of compliance remains important because these industries employ so many of our Nation's youth, and the risk of injury is high.
Results: The goals were met: compliance surveys established a baseline of 53 percent in full service restaurants, 73 percent in fast food restaurants, and 72 percent in grocery stores.
Program Description: BLS Statistics show that each year more than 4 million teens under age 18 are employed in this country, and a sizable number of teens risk being injured or killed on the job.
On average 70 working teens are killed each year, 210,000 are injured, and 70,000 injured seriously enough to require hospital emergency room treatment.
DOL's Employment Standards Administration (ESA) is responsible for administering the laws that establish the minimally acceptable standards for working conditions in this country, including protections for America's working youth.
Analysis of Results: This goal is used as a measure of the effectiveness and lasting value of ESA's intervention strategies, and represents improvement from full non-compliance with child labor regulations.
For fast food restaurants and grocery stores, child labor compliance rates were relatively similar for those employers previously investigated compared to the overall rate, but for full service restaurants, the compliance rate for previously investigated employers was significantly lower.
The restaurant and grocery industries are the two largest employers of young workers.
Together, these industries account for nearly one-half of youth employment in the U.S. (based on Bureau of Labor Statistics data).
Young workers in these industries also experience a high incidence of occupational injuries.
Almost 50 percent of on-the-job injuries to youth under 18 resulting in days away from work occur in eating and drinking establishments, while 25 percent are in food stores.
While these baseline levels of compliance are higher than in other targeted low-wage industries, it is important to note that these surveys only measured compliance with the child labor requirements – not compliance with the minimum wage and overtime requirements.
Strategies: As with each of its compliance goals, ESA pursues a multi-pronged intervention strategy combining enforcement (including targeted investigations and assessment of penalties); education/outreach (such as compliance seminars for employers, public service announcements and compliance assistance materials geared toward workers and teens in particular); and partnerships (such as compliance agreements with multi-establishment employers and relationships with other Federal, State, and local government agencies).
The measure of success will depend largely on finding the appropriate balance of the varying strategies and assessing the degree to which enforcement and compliance assistance tools are available and effective.
To address the lack of significant improvement in child labor compliance rates following an intervention, ESA has modified its FY 2001 strategy in part by increasing the consequences for noncompliance -- assessing and collecting child labor civil money penalties.
As with its strategies for increasing child labor compliance overall, ESA is increasing its efforts to reach out to stakeholders to communicate the nature and causes of the violations and to obtain their input for developing a plan for future action.
Given the nearly universal membership in industry associations, these stakeholders provide unique opportunities for cooperative partnerships that in turn may broaden the scope of ESA's compliance assistance program.
Partnerships with States that have similar child labor enforcement responsibilities also serve to promote compliance in these three industry sectors as data are shared and enforcement activities coordinated.
During FY 2001, ESA has begun to develop locally focused initiatives in the restaurant and grocery industries, including an enforcement component directed to past violators.
Goal Assessment: With child labor compliance rates ranging from 53 percent to 73 percent among employers with a history of violations, improving compliance remains an important goal because these industries employ so many of our Nation's youth, and the risk of injury is high.
Goal 2.1E: Achieve timely union reporting compliance such that a minimum of 87 percent of unions with annual receipts greater than $200,000 timely file union annual financial reports for public disclosure access.
Results: This goal was fully achieved in FY 2000, as 87.2 percent of unions with receipts greater than $200,000 timely filed annual financial reports.
Program Description: Through the administration and enforcement of the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA), DOL's Employment Standards Administration (ESA) safeguards union democracy and financial integrity.
Making union financial reports available for public disclosure is central to this mission.
Analysis of Results: Although the FY 2000 timely filing rate fell below the 89.8 percent rate achieved in FY 1999, performance overall has climbed since FY 1997.
Agency compliance assistance efforts and delinquent reports programs and initiatives have contributed positively to performance improvements.
Strategies: To achieve the performance target, the Department employs various strategies which emphasize compliance assistance to union officials.
For example, special contacts are made to remind unions delinquent in the prior year to file their reports on time.
Additionally, liaisons have been established with a number of international unions to encourage their assistance in promoting timely report-filing by their affiliates.
These strategies have been successful and will be continued.
An electronic report filing and Internet public disclosure system planned for implementation in FY 2001 includes features to improve the LMRDA reporting and disclosure program.
Goal Assessment: Performance results will be monitored through FY 2001 to determine whether future targets should be increased or whether the goal should be replaced.
Results: The Department exceeded this goal.
Assets were restored in 1,187 investigations of employee pension and health benefit plans closed during FY 2000, an increase of 24 percent over FY 1999.
In addition, prohibited transactions were corrected in 538 cases closed in FY 2000, an increase of 38 percent over the prior year.
Program Description: Where plan assets have been endangered by an imprudent act on the part of the fiduciary or have been otherwise misused, the Department's Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration (PWBA) pursues remedies on behalf of plan beneficiaries to minimize potential loss or to make the plan whole through the restoration of assets.
Increasing the number of cases with fiduciary (monetary) results demonstrates the Department's success in protecting plan assets.
Analysis of Results: The Department exceeded its performance targets for FY 2000.
More importantly, during the past year the Department continued to improve the quality of cases selected for investigation as demonstrated by the continuing increases in the number of cases closed with fiduciary results, a primary strategy for achieving the goal.
In FY 2000, the Department restored approximately $426 million to benefit plans as a result of its investigative efforts – assets that, in the absence of investigative efforts, would have been lost to participants and beneficiaries.
Because of the volatile nature of recoveries, past performance is not indicative of future performance in A Benefit Services company administered health care plans for its client companies, which covered about 2,400 participants.
The company was responsible for collecting the premiums and ensuring that claims were paid and adequate insurance policies were purchased and implemented.
However, a number of covered employees began receiving telephone calls from doctors and hospitals seeking payment for services.
Despite assurances from the company that the bills were being paid, more and more employees reported harassing calls from bill collectors.
The ensuing investigation by DOL's Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, as well as the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Virginia State Police, and the U.S. Postal Inspection Service, revealed that the company's husband-and-wife owners were embezzling the funds rather than covering the costs of medical bills and insurance policies.
Both husband and wife were sentenced to jail terms of three-plus years and ordered to make restitution of more than $3.7 million.
However, over the period of several years, the trend has generally been upward.
The data used to measure the achievement of this goal are derived from PWBA's Enforcement Management System.
The data integrity is high as recently verified by a contractual review conducted by a recognized expert in government performance-based management and data analysis.
Strategies: During FY 2000, regional offices continued to employ more effective targeting techniques to increase the number of cases converted from limited review investigations to fiduciary investigations in which possible fiduciary or criminal violations have been identified.
Some offices requested special computer-generated targeting reports designed to aid their analysis of specific types of plans (e.g., Employee Stock Option Plans), or investment/ asset categories (e.g., those holding real estate/ mortgages or those where assets have been transferred to other plans).
Other offices went directly to financial institutions to assist them in identifying plans which may have a delinquent contribution problem or which may have been abandoned by responsible plan officials.
In addition, regional offices initiated localized projects to target issues that were prevalent in their jurisdictions.
Successful strategies are then shared nationally for consideration by other regions.
Goal Assessment: In FY 2001, DOL will begin reporting separate and distinct measures for pension and health plan enforcement to reflect increasing responsibilities in the health-related enforcement arena.
The Department has also set more ambitious targets given its recent experience, while continuing to protect against irregular annual fluctuations by utilizing a two-year rolling average.
Program Evaluation: The Office of Inspector General (OIG) conducted an evaluation of PWBA's enforcement and training programs and concluded that: (1) the enforcement program training is effective; and (2) the training initiatives to provide and maintain a level of proficiency for its investigators and auditors are appropriate for the enforcement of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
The OIG provided several recommendations to further improve PWBA's training programs and PWBA is initiating the recommended actions.
Please refer to Appendix 3 for more details or for information about obtaining a copy of the evaluation.
Results: This goal was exceeded.
With the assistance of Pension Benefit Advisers, the Department recovered approximately $67 million for plan participants in FY 2000.
Program Description: DOL's Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration (PWBA) directly assists plan participants and beneficiaries in understanding their rights and protecting their benefits via its participant assistance program.
The direct restoration or payment of benefits to participants without the need for protracted or costly litigation is a primary objective of the Department.
Analysis of Results: The Department exceeded the FY 2000 performance goal of $53 million by approximately 26 percent and exceeded its FY 1999 recoveries by $5 million, or 8 percent.
While a benefit recovery is an important performance indicator, it understates PWBA's total customer assistance impact because some important services, such as the restoration of health benefits, do not result in the recovery of benefit funds and cannot be readily quantified.
DOL received approximately 155,000 written or telephone inquiries for assistance this year.
DOL has attained a 98.7 percent response rate to written inquiries within 30 days of receipt and a 99.9 percent response rate to telephone inquiries by the close of the next business day.
A rapid and accurate response is critical to protecting workers' benefits.
Based on FY 1999 and FY 2000 results, the Department recovered or protected over $129 million for plan participants as a result of its customer assistance program, an indication that the Department is realizing the full benefits of increased resources, customer assistance staff and the efficiencies of improved technologies.
The data used to measure the achievement of this goal are derived from PWBA's Technical Assistance and Inquiry System.
During FY 2000, the Department implemented a new policy to further ensure consistency and accuracy of the data across regional components.
Based on the new policy and on a contractual review by an expert in performance-based management and data analysis, the Department is confident about the data reported.
Strategies: DOL combines an aggressive outreach and education program to create a knowledgeable consumer who may assist in "policing" his or her own benefit rights with a highly motivated and trained staff of customer assistance experts in the field of pension and health laws.
Moreover, the customer assistance staff have access to a wide array of technical experts throughout the Department.
Goal Assessment: The Department has maintained this goal in FY 2001 and seeks to increase recoveries.
In addition, the Department plans to participate in the American Customer Service Index initiative sponsored by the National Performance Review as a means for assessing Americans' trust and confidence in the information that the Department provides.
A gentleman had been unsuccessful for nearly two years in obtaining information about his retirement benefits from his former employer.
Frustrated about the employer's denial and refusal to respond to his further inquiries, he contacted the Department for assistance.
The Department located the pension plan administrator who confirmed the gentleman's eligibility to receive pension benefits.
A pension payment of over $85,000 was swiftly paid to the claimant.
DOL improves the lives of America’s working families through the administration of programs dealing with unemployment insurance, expansion of private pension coverage, protection of Federal workers from the effects of work-related injuries, payment of locally prevailing wages on Federal construction projects, and timely and uninterrupted payment of pension benefits.
DOL’s role in protecting worker benefits arose in response to specific concerns about the well-being of American workers and their families.
The Department’s Employment and Training Administration, Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, Employment Standards Administration, and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation are responsible for administering DOL programs that safeguard the economic security of the Nation’s workers and retirees.
The protection of employee benefits systems is vital to both America’s workers and the National economy.
Americans are living and working longer and will be dependent on pension and health care benefits for longer periods of time.
The worker who spends an entire career with one company is now the exception rather than the rule.
Given these trends, DOL anticipates an even greater emphasis in the future on pension and health care benefits that provide the flexibility and coverage that American workers deserve.
Educating workers about their benefits, as well as about targeted issues such as retirement planning, also offers significant challenges for DOL.
From an administrative perspective, the Department will face continuing challenges to more effectively use information technology to enhance the quality of services while containing the costs of benefit programs.
Results: The goal was substantially achieved.
Twenty-three States met the quality indicator against a target of 24 States.
Forty-seven States achieved the timeliness indicator against a target of 47 States.
Program Description: By temporarily replacing part of lost wage income, Unemployment Insurance (UI) is the first economic line of defense for workers who lose their jobs generally through no fault of their own.
Authorized by the Social Security Act of 1935, UI was created to alleviate personal and family hardship due to involuntary unemployment and to stabilize the economy.
Criteria have been established to provide a means of judging whether eligibility was determined fairly and whether workers received their UI benefits on schedule (the latter is a Secretary's Standard in regulation).
Analysis of Results: In FY 2000, the States showed definite progress toward improving the quality of benefit adjudication determinations.
A criterion that 75 percent of eligibility determination cases reviewed must have a passing score for a State to be minimally successful was set in July 1999, to take effect in FY 2002.
In view of changes tightening the underlying review process and States' performance under it, and States' focus on cost-saving efforts such as telephone claims-taking, the Department realized that many States would not meet the criterion until 2002 and some even later.
The goal for FY 2000 was for 24 States to achieve the standard.
See chart below.)
Twenty-three States succeeded, and 6 additional States came very close with 72 percent or higher of their reviewed cases achieving a passing score.
The number of States meeting the first payment timeliness standard for intrastate payments rose and overall performance is quite good; however, the erosion of average timeliness from 1996 to 2000 is of some concern (see chart above).
It reflects performance declines in a few larger States, due in part to the tightening of the labor market (resulting in a higher percentage of claims with eligibility issues, e.g., the reasons for separation from work, which require time-consuming adjudication), and in part to the transition to telephone claims-taking systems.
However, the Department is encouraged at the improvement from 1998 through 2000 and expects further improvement as States complete corrective action plans.
Strategies: In FY 1999, a new performance planning and budgeting system was instituted with instructions to the States including performance measures and minimum performance criteria.
The new system has States develop corrective action plans for each missed criterion, and emphasizes continuous improvement and joint DOL-State cooperation.
Thirty-four States adopted the new system in FY 2000, and all will use it in FY 2001.
In a related effort, the Department conducted four training sessions on various aspects of the adjudication process during FY 2000 to assist the States.
The training will continue in FY 2001, and the Department will also host a national conference on nonmonetary adjudications.
Goal Assessment: The performance indicators for this goal will continue to address quality and timeliness as dimensions of measurement, but with higher results targeted for FY 2001.
Results: The results exceeded the goal.
The number of private wage and salary workers in pension programs increased by 2 percent from 47.6 million in 1998 to 48.3 million in FY 1999.
With respect to those groups where pension coverage has been historically lower, the increase among women was two percent, among minorities five percent, and among workers in small businesses six percent.
Program Description: Improving the financial security of Americans during their retirement years is a Departmental priority.
Expanding pension coverage to those Americans who have historically experienced low pension coverage is of particular concern.
Analysis of Results: The data indicate that the Department was successful in achieving a primary performance goal that directly improves the lives and conditions of American families – ensuring a better security in retirement.
Strategies: Many factors contribute to the expansion of pension coverage, such as the structure and health of the economy (e.g., level of employment and economic growth, labor shortage or surplus sectoral shifts in economic activity) and demographics (aging population, increasing numbers of women and minorities).
In addition to these external factors, the Department also contributes through aggressive educational strategies, such as the Retirement Savings Education Campaign and Partnerships, targeted public service announcements, promotional cards in tax returns, 800 telephone line, interactive web sites, and videos for small businesses, to name a few.
The Department will continue to educate our customers regarding the importance of retirement planning, particularly participation in pension plans, and anticipates continued success in expanding pension coverage.
Goal Assessment: In FY 2001, DOL has maintained this goal and again seeks an increase of one percent.
The Department continues to pursue education and outreach, in general, and continues targeting those groups who have historically shown a lower rate of pension coverage – women, minorities, and workers in small businesses.
As a result, DOL anticipates continued expansion of pension coverage.
¹ Goal 2.2B was dropped from the Department’s FY 2000 Annual Performance Plan.
An explanation is provided in Appendix Z.
Goal 2.2D: Return Federal employees to work following an injury as early as appropriate as indicated by a 9 percent reduction from the baseline in the average number of production days lost due to disability.
Reduce the number of lost production days to 173 days in Quality Case Management cases only and establish baseline for all cases.
Results: This goal was exceeded.
The average number of lost production days for Quality Case Management cases declined to 164 days, a reduction of over 13 percent, and the baseline for all cases was established.
Program Description: DOL administers, through the Employment Standards Administration (ESA), three primary disability compensation programs that provide benefits to certain workers who experience work-related injury or disease, and survivors of employees who die from job-related injury or disease.
One of these programs, the Federal Employees' Compensation Act program, affords income and medical cost protection to civilian employees of the Federal Government and certain other groups.
Analysis of Results: The average lost production days (LPD) measured for Quality Case Management (QCM) cases in FY 2000 was 164 days.
Under the QCM program, new injury cases receive early intervention from nurses allowing case management to begin at a point when it can be much more effective.
The nurse visits the claimant and coordinates medical care and light duty assignment, working with the attending physician and the employing agency.
The FY 2000 results for QCM cases represent a shortening of the average time away from work of 25 days when compared to the FY 1997 baseline year.
The reduction also equates to $17.7 million in compensation cost savings in those cases measured in FY 2000.
A new LPD baseline representing all cases (not only QCM cases as before) has been established at 68.3 days.
Strategies: In FY 2000, ESA intervened in almost 13,000 QCM cases, assigning nurse case managers to coordinate medical care and return-to-work activities.
Intervention by the nurses in the early stages following a work injury plus ongoing monitoring of return-to-work status by responsible claims examiners, and extensive outreach to employing agencies to encourage bringing injured workers back, are clearly the primary contributing factors in the attainment of this goal.
Goal Assessment: The Federal Worker 2000 Presidential Initiative, announced in 1999, has established several goals for Federal agencies for FY 2001, including: reducing injuries; speeding reports of injuries; lowering injury rates in high incidence work sites, and reducing the rate of lost production days.
In conjunction with the latter goal, DOL is leading a government-wide effort to reduce LPD for Federal workers.
The new goal extends the time loss measurement to all Federal injuries (roughly 170,000 per year), including during the “continuation of pay” period immediately following an injury.
The FY 2001 goal is to reduce the national average LPD to 67 days, a 2 percent reduction from the FY 2000 baseline.
A nurse injured his lower back while lifting a patient at a Veterans Administration hospital.
He had to have leg surgery to relieve his neurological symptoms and was left with a permanent, residual foot drop.
DOL’s Employment Standards Administration assigned a rehabilitation specialist to help him become as functional as possible even though he could not return to his pre-injury job.
Working with his doctor and a therapist, the specialist was able to help the nurse restore his cardiovascular function, recondition his physical capability, and treat his foot drop with orthotics.
Four months after his surgery, he returned to work in a nursing clinic, assigned to less physical duties such as counseling, supportive instruction, testing, record keeping, and planning.
Now, he is ready to pursue his education with the goal of increasing his value to his new employer.
Results: This goal was exceeded.
Cumulative first-year savings were $72 million.
Program Description: DOL administers, through the Employment Standards Administration (ESA), three primary disability compensation programs that provide benefits to certain workers who experience work-related injury or disease, and survivors of employees who die from job-related injury or disease.
One of these programs, the Federal Employees' Compensation Act program, affords income and medical cost protection to civilian employees of the Federal Government and certain other groups.
Analysis of Results: Periodic Roll Management (PRM) teams completed over 7,700 reviews in FY 2000; one-half of the reviews resulted in either an adjustment to continuing benefit amounts or a termination of benefits.
Strategies: PRM is aimed at quality management of the long-term disability roll, improving service to disabled beneficiaries, rehabilitating and reemploying the partially disabled, and adjusting benefits to accurately reflect eligibility.
PRM has proven highly successful in identifying the potential for return to work and resolving cases.
This strategy has resulted in hundreds of millions of dollars in compensation benefit savings and a reduction in the size of the permanent disability roll of over eight percent since 1992.
Goal Assessment: The success of PRM enables DOL to increase its target by 44 percent in FY 2001 to achieve $95 million in savings.
Six Federal employees died in an August 9, 2000 plane crash, leaving six spouses and a total of six dependent children.
The next day, the Employment Standards Administration (ESA) had established claim files on each employee.
They also immediately dispatched a manager to the Naval Air Station, to which the workers were attached, to meet with base staff and explain what needed to be done in order for the claims to be processed quickly.
The manager also attended the first two meetings with families.
ESA was constantly in contact with the Air Station to quickly obtain all necessary documentation.
This allowed ESA to arrange for checks to be issued on September 15, to pay all the survivors benefits from August 10 to September 10, and to provide continuing payments every 28 days thereafter.
Goal 2.2F: In the Federal Employees’ Compensation Act (FECA) program, save an additional $5 million over FY 1999 compared to amounts charged through full-year implementation of fee schedules for inpatient hospital and pharmacy services; and save $1.5 million compared to amounts charged for physician services through the Correct Coding Initiative (CCI).
Results: Performance significantly exceeded both targets for this goal.
The FECA program saved $34.5 million using fee schedules for Inpatient and Pharmacy services, and the Correct Coding Initiative saved an additional $7.6 million.
Program Description: DOL administers, through the Employment Standards Administration (ESA), three primary disability compensation programs that provide benefits to certain workers who experience work-related injury or disease, and survivors of employees who die from job-related injury or disease.
One of these programs, the Federal Employees’ Compensation Act program, affords income and medical cost protection to civilian employees of the Federal government and certain other groups.
Analysis of Results: Savings from Inpatient Hospital and Pharmacy service fee schedules totaled $34.5 million, exceeding the goal by 61 percent.
In large part, these substantial billing adjustments were due to a 37 percent increase in charges for the services which was not foreseeable at the time the performance measures were developed.
The CCI review to identify duplicate and other improper billings saved another $7.6 million, or $6.1 million above the annual goal.
DOL uses fee schedules to set payment levels for standard categories of billed medical services.
A special automated bill review, the CCI, identifies medical providers’ duplicate and abusive billing practices before payments are authorized.
Goal Assessment: DOL has revised the long-range medical savings goal published in the Department’s Strategic Plan.
The new goal sets a target for reducing the overall average cost per case.
This measure will more accurately reflect DOL’s success in cost containment, and should target staff’s efforts more effectively.
A city letter carrier injured his knee and back.
He returned to light duty within six weeks of surgery on his knee.
The goal for this worker was to restore him to his maximum level of functioning and return him to his pre-injury job.
Due to a residual low back problem, some accommodations would have to be made by the worker and the post office.
ESA’s assigned nurse provided close coordination with him, his doctor and the post office which resulted in his returning to full duty within three months of knee surgery.
A special letter bag and harness was provided to assist him in carrying mail safely and without stress on his lower back.
His route was minimally modified to allow him to safely work full time in his letter carrier job.
Goal 2.2G: Each area of the country will be surveyed for all four types of construction at least every three years, with the resulting wage determinations validly reflecting locally prevailing wage/benefits.
In FY 2000, implement scanning technology and develop knowledge management technology; and complete analysis of BLS data and decide whether a Davis-Bacon reengineering or reinvention approach will be pursued in FY 2001.
Results: This goal was fully achieved.
The Department successfully completed all planned FY 2000 milestones, and completed its analysis of the relative merits and benefits of the “reengineering” approach versus the “reinvention” approach.
A recommendation was made in favor of the reengineering approach and the DOL appropriations committees were notified of this by the previous administration’s Assistant Secretary for Employment Standards.
Program Description: DOL’s Employment Standards Administration (ESA) administers and enforces the Davis-Bacon Act.
This Act requires the payment of locally prevailing wages so that Federal contracting practices do not undercut workers’ wages in the community and place local contractors and workers at a competitive disadvantage.
DOL determines and issues wage rates for covered Federally-funded and assisted construction projects.
Analysis of Results: As part of the Davis-Bacon “reengineering” approach, during FY 2000 development of an electronic version of the Report of Construction Contractors’ Wage Rates was completed, and an imaging/scanning program was developed to facilitate electronic data entry using the new form.
As part of the Davis-Bacon “reinvention” approach, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) completed the last of four National Compensation Survey fringe benefit pilot surveys.
In addition, BLS provided 1998 construction industry survey data for selected metropolitan areas and a report of its pilot program to test the feasibility of collecting information on the union status of employees.
Strategies: DOL has pursued two possible alternatives for improving the Davis-Bacon wage survey/wage determination program.
The first alternative, called the “reengineering” approach, applies new technologies and processes to the existing Davis-Bacon survey program to improve the accuracy, timeliness and participation in that survey effort.
The second alternative, labeled the “reinvention” approach, would use existing BLS survey data sources as the primary basis for Davis-Bacon wage determinations.
Goal Assessment: With the achievement of the above steps, both alternatives were developed to the point where an informed decision could be made.
DOL examined each alternative based upon five essential evaluation criteria — feasibility / viability, timeliness, accuracy, completeness, and cost.
The Department is currently undertaking the development of the reengineering system.
Results: This goal was fully achieved.
Program Description: The Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) is responsible for providing timely and uninterrupted payment of pension benefits to participants whose defined benefit pension plans terminated, most frequently as a result of the sponsoring employer's bankruptcy.
Benefit determinations tell participants in plans for which PBGC has become the trustee what pension benefits they will receive.
PBGC pays estimated benefits to all eligible participants retiring prior to the issuance of a benefit determination, thus ensuring that they receive their benefits when due and without interruption.
Analysis of Results: PBGC reduced the average timeframe for issuing final benefit determinations from five to six years in FY 1999 to a four to five year timeframe in FY 2000.
The length of time is largely a result of an intricate series of complex actions -- from verifying plan assets and participant data, to completing an actuarial valuation and financial and control group analysis.
Sponsor bankruptcies and legal disputes over plan assets also complicate and stretch out the trusteeship process.
Strategies: PBGC has streamlined case processing, tripling the annual production of benefit determinations over the past six years.
Focusing these efforts on the oldest cases in the backlog has led to a gradual reduction in the average time for issuing benefit determinations.
Goal Assessment: PBGC expects that a three to four year processing time can be achieved and maintained, and has set this timeframe as the goal for FY 2001.
Program Evaluation: Due to the sizeable increase in PBGC's participant workload in the early 1990's, combined with cases carried over from earlier years, in 1993, PBGC faced significant backlogs in issuing participant benefit determinations.
In response, beginning in 1994, the agency reorganized its case processing operations and modernized the data processing systems that support case processing.
PBGC's Inspector General issued reports in 1999 and 2000 focusing on the agency's progress in reducing case processing times and raising concerns about the timely issuance of benefit determinations to individual participants.
PBGC's management response agrees that continued improvement was essential, and noted that further progress was being made in accordance with the Government Performance and Results Act.
While the agency is now completing work on the last of its backlog, it is processing newly trusted plans within three years, which is as rapidly as they can be completed under the provisions of current law.
Please refer to Appendix 3 for more details or for information about obtaining a copy of the evaluation.
The National unemployment rate stood at 3.9 percent as of October 2000.
However, millions of Americans continue to be displaced from jobs in spite of the low unemployment rates.
Worker dislocations – including those stemming from plant closures, corporate restructuring and foreign trade – number 3.3 million annually.
Although many displaced workers find new jobs quickly, approximately 2 million individuals need re-employment services and 500,000 need training each year.
These dislocated workers must be retrained to secure jobs with long-term potential and to overcome barriers to employment, such as low skill levels and English language deficits, in order to re-enter the labor force.
Rapid technological and economic change, together with intense global competition, serve to make re-employment and retraining services more imperative.
The Department's Employment and Training Administration provides worker retraining through three major programs, the Workforce Investment Act (WIA), Title IB (Adult and Dislocated Worker Employment and Training Activities); the Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) program; and the North American Free Trade Agreement Transitional Adjustment Assistance (NAFTA-TAA) program.
The WIA program for dislocated workers replaces services previously available under the Job Training Partnership Act, and is offered through the One-Stop Centers.
All three of the Department's programs serving dislocated workers provide occupational and on-the-job training, job search assistance, relocation assistance, and income support for workers in training to maximize job placement and wage replacement.
The rapid change in the economy and labor market has placed a premium on technical skills, and contributed to the closing of outmoded facilities and the displacement of workers whose competencies are less in demand.
The challenge for DOL will be to improve the effectiveness of the Dislocated Worker program by identifying workers at risk of future job loss and upgrading their skills in time to prevent unemployment, integrating related program services, and leveraging available resources through the application of technology and other efficiencies.
Goal 2.3A: Under the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) Title III for dislocated workers, 74 percent of program terminees will be employed at an average wage replacement (compared to their wage at dislocation) of 93 percent at termination/ 76 percent will be employed one quarter after program exit at an average wage replacement rate of 97 percent.
Results: This goal was substantially achieved.
The average wage replacement rate for participants leaving the program with jobs was 100 percent, and the rate at follow-up rose to 103 percent.
The employment rates at program termination and follow-up, 71 percent and 75 percent respectively, fell below the target levels.
Program Description: Though the unemployment rate is currently low, worker dislocations — from plant closures, corporate restructuring and foreign trade — continue to occur, and are estimated to impact 3.3 million workers annually.
The dislocated worker program seeks to maximize employment and wage replacement, within the framework of the One-Stop centers providing retraining and other One-Stop services, such as access to the Internet, job search related databases and resume writing workshops.
Analysis of Results: The overall performance of the dislocated worker program for the past three years has been positive.
Results from the Program Year 1999 Worker Adjustment Program Annual Reports submitted by the States suggest a modest drop in performance on the two employment measures.
One possible explanation for the decline from Program Year 1998 is the fact that the States implementing the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) early, which were high performers in previous years, did not report JTPA data.
Because of the staggered nature of the transition from JTPA to WIA, six States implementing WIA early — Vermont, Kentucky, Florida, Indiana, Texas and Utah — established new WIA participant tracking procedures.
Their omission from JTPA reports may have affected the Program Year 1999 national average.
The Department is reviewing the modest nationwide performance decline for Program Year 1999 by reviewing State and local area reports that reflect large changes in performance between 1998 and 1999.
A contractor has been engaged to conduct sample site visits to both explain the factors contributing to the decline and give insight into WIA implementation.
DOL also launched a major data validation project, with contractor support, to assure greater data integrity and to develop a Technical Assistance Guide on eligibility determination.
The 1999 performance data show that participants received an average of 36 weeks of retraining, and over 94 percent of those in training received occupational training, such as computer programming and Ronald, was a longtime maintenance employee at a large oil company, and had seen one layoff after another as oil production gradually declined in Western Texas.
When Ronald lost his job after 19 years, he knew that a career change was in order.
At age 49, he was able to take advantage of DOL's dislocated worker assistance program to complete his college degree.
After receiving his BA in history from a State University, Ronald found a job as a social studies teacher at a local junior high school.
Says Ronald: "This career change came at just the right time. I've never been happier in my life."
Nearly 11 percent of those in training received basic skills training.
Supportive services, such as child care and transportation, were provided to 32 percent of all participants who exited the program.
Strategies: Under DOL leadership, a national workgroup was created to improve rapid response assistance and disseminate effective practices to cover all dislocated worker issues.
Workshops conducted by the group covered such topics as layoff aversion strategies, meeting the challenge of dislocated workers from different cultures, and working with employers and organized labor.
Another major effort involved strategies to respond promptly and effectively to employer-identified skill shortages.
Demonstration programs were funded to respond to shortages in manufacturing industries and to assist the creation of regional partnerships between employers, local boards, and other stakeholders to respond to skill training needs.
The Department is also supporting projects to upgrade skills of incumbent workers, including those employed in low-skill jobs or those with obsolete job skills.
In addition, the Department issued grants enabling 29 States to build systems for training incumbent workers.
The main goals of these projects are to raise employer awareness of the value of incumbent worker training, link the public workforce system and existing incumbent worker training activities, and promote greater involvement by the public workforce system in such activities.
Goal Assessment: Future performance goals have been revised to reflect the requirements of the Workforce Investment Act.
The new goals will focus on employment, employment retention in the third quarter after exit, and post-program earnings replacement.
Program Audit: The Department of Labor's Office of Inspector General (OIG) completed an audit of the dislocated worker program in FY 2000.
The OIG found that: (1) programs were not predominantly serving persons who were victims of plant closings or mass layoffs; (2) 35 percent of program participants were ineligible or documentation was insufficient to establish their eligibility; and (3) the standard allocation formula may not distribute dislocated worker funds where they are most needed.
The Department has responded that the OIG's report does not adequately consider the authority vested in State and local governments and the need for flexibility in addressing local labor-market conditions.
A number of actions are being taken to address the issues raised in the report (see Appendix 3).
Results: This goal was substantially achieved.
The reemployment rate for NAFTA-TAA program terminees was 64.6 percent – against a target of 72 percent.
Wage replacement at reemployment was at an average of 106.8 percent, significantly exceeding the target of 80 percent.
Program Description: DOL's TAA program provides readjustment services to dislocated workers where increased imports contributed importantly to their separations.
DOL's NAFTA-TAA program provides readjustment services to dislocated workers where increased imports from Canada or Mexico, or a shift of production to Canada or Mexico, contributed importantly to their separations.
These services and benefits include occupational, on-the-job, and remedial training, job search assistance, relocation assistance, and income support for workers in approved training.
Under the TAA program in FY 2000, an estimated 25,000 workers were enrolled in classroom and on-the-job training, 250 workers received job search assistance, and approximately 400 workers were provided relocation allowances.
Under the NAFTA-TAA program, 4,800 workers were enrolled in classroom and on-the-job training.
Analysis of Results: FY 2000 was only the second year of operation for the Trade Act Participant Report (TAPR), and several States continue to have difficulties gathering and reporting complete and accurate participant outcomes data.
Summary data available for FY 2000 show a reemployment rate at termination of 64.6 percent, as compared to the 73.4 percent achieved in FY 1999.
A review of wage record data conducted by the Department indicates a higher rate for FY 2000.¹ DOL instituted the TAPR and established performance standards during FY 1999.
The success of the TAPR system depends on the States' ability to track those exiting the program and gather accurate data on their reemployment status and post-program wages.
However, not all States have been able to fully accomplish this task.
The Department's Employment and Training Administration is currently reviewing the technical difficulties the States are experiencing in trying to correctly report this information.
For FY 2001, the TAPR system has been thoroughly revised to make it more compatible with the system to be used for the Dislocated Worker Michael thought his career had ended when he was laid off from a manufacturer in Wisconsin.
He had been at the company for 25 years, ascending the corporate ladder, but at 49, even with a college degree in business administration, he was unable to find work in Rusk County's economically depressed market.
With the help of DOL's Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) program, Michael went back to school to pursue a degree in social work.
With TAA supporting the cost of his education, he made the Dean's List every semester and graduated with a 3.96 grade point average.
He took a job with Rusk County as a social worker and is already earning as much as he had before, while also serving his community.
The revised system will rely on wage record data to show reemployment and wage replacement, which should increase the completeness and accuracy of the information.
Goal Assessment: For FY 2001, targeted performance levels for this goal have increased.
The goal provides for 73 percent of the participants to be employed as they leave the program.
Wages for the second and third quarters after completing the program are targeted to average at least 82 percent of total wages received during the second and third quarters prior to the participants' trade-impacted separations.
Program Evaluation: The General Accounting Office (GAO) conducted an audit of Trade Adjustment Assistance in FY 2000.
GAO found: (1) Differences in the TAA and NAFTA-TAA programs' statutory requirements governing certification and training enrollment complicate program administration and prevent some workers from entering suitable training; (2) The absence of a statutory time limit on training in TAA and some other benefits means that workers may collect benefits many years after being certified as trade impacted; and (3) Internal control weaknesses may result in workers getting benefits that they are not eligible to receive.
A number of actions are being taken to address the issues raised in the report.
See Appendix 3.) ■ The lower reemployment percentage for FY 2000 is believed to be the result of discrepancies in the data submitted by the States.
A review and analysis of wage record data for terminees reported as unemployed in eight States found a significantly higher number of persons reemployed in those States compared to the information provided on the States' original reports.
The increase raises the overall National reemployment rate to 74.8 percent.
Foster Quality Workplaces that are Safe, Healthy, and Fair The Department is committed to fostering workplaces that are safe, healthy, and fair.
To meet this objective, the Department is dedicated to increasing the representation, advancement, and promotion of women, people of color, veterans, and people with disabilities in the workplace; providing access to quality child care for working families; and improving worker safety and health.
As today's workplace is increasingly affected by global markets, DOL will also address core international labor standards and child labor issues.
A job site project manager demonstrates an engineered fall protection system that has anchor points strategically placed around the perimeter of the building and inserted in the concrete slab above.
Courtesy of the Centex Construction Company.
Reducing workplace injuries, illnesses, and fatalities is a core mission of the Department of Labor.
The Act that created the Department in 1913 established as a primary legislative purpose the improvement of working conditions.
In that year, the Bureau of Labor Statistics documented approximately 23,000 industrial deaths among a workforce of 38 million, equivalent to a rate of 61 deaths per 100,000 workers.
By 1999, the workforce had grown to approximately 135 million and occupational deaths had declined to 6,023 or fewer than five per 100,000 workers.
Even with this progress, significant hazards remain for America's workers.
In addition to fatal workplace injuries, an estimated 50,000 American workers die each year from illnesses caused by workplace exposures, and six million people suffer non-fatal workplace injuries.
Injuries alone cost U.S. businesses over $122 billion annually.
Through the use of modern technology, substantial progress has been made in the safety and health environment of men and women working in the mining industry.
For example, through the Department's efforts in cooperation with industry and equipment manufacturers, large surface equipment has been fitted in recent years with a number of new safety features to reduce the incidence and severity of mine related accidents.
Examples of these features include fully enclosed cabs with high-strength windows in a reinforced steel frame, video cameras to improve visibility for operators of large haulage trucks, and two-way emergency communication systems for large surface mobile equipment.
Information technology and the Internet provide up-to-date information and analysis for employers, workers, and Mine Safety and Health Administration employees, enhancing their ability to make a difference by reducing the injuries and illnesses suffered by the Nation's mine workers.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration is making similar use of modern technology by providing employers and employees technical assistance for preventing or eliminating hazards through various means of electronic communication.
In recent years, OSHA has developed interactive, online expert systems which elicit information from users and respond with advice on how the Department's regulations apply to the users' situations.
A "Technical Advisors" series has been issued addressing various topics covered by OSHA's strategic goals (for example, Silica, Logging, and Lead in Construction).
The agency's technical links page on its website also offers information, technical assistance, and other references as part of the broad outreach effort of the Department.
The challenge of making progress toward the accomplishment of the Department's mission is affected by a number of factors: the number of workers OSHA is responsible for protecting has expanded dramatically, nearly doubling between 1970, when OSHA was created, and 2000; rapid technological advances and a dynamic workplace environment have changed the nature of work, leading to new health and safety issues; and industry restructuring and global competition have put pressure on employers to reduce costs and increase productivity which may impact safety and health conditions.
Results: This goal was substantially achieved.
Non-fatal accidents and accident injury rates were below the five-year average; the number of fatalities equaled, but did not exceed the five-year average.
Program Description: The Department's Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA), through its safety and health enforcement and compliance efforts and in partnership with the American mining community, works to eliminate fatalities and reduce the frequency and severity of accidents in accordance with the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977.
Fatalities: The number of fatalities in FY 2000 was 89, the same as the FY 1995-1999 baseline average.
Based on a five-year moving average, the number of mining fatalities has continued to fall.
The average for FY1991-1995 was 98 compared to 89 in FY1996-2000 - a reduction of 9 percent.
While coal mine fatalities continued on a downward trend, the metal and nonmetal mining sector has shown increasing occurrences of fatalities which rose from 45 in FY 1999 to 55 in FY 2000.
Of particular concern are gold mines in Nevada which account for half of the increase, with the remaining half distributed throughout the metal and nonmetal mining industry.
Injuries: The Nonfatal-Days-Lost (NFDL) Injury Incidence Rate (i.e., injuries resulting in a lost work day or restricted activity per 200,000 workhours) of 3.45 is below the baseline rate of 3.82.
Based on the five-year average, the number of nonfatal injuries and the nonfatal injury rate continued a downward trend for coal and metal and nonmetal mining.
Coal mining continues to have a higher injury rate due to the greater percentage of work hours spent in the more hazardous underground environment.
Accident and injury data are accurate and reliable.
MSHA receives employment, injury and accident data from mine operators and has an audit program in place to ensure their reliability.
Strategies: Traditionally, DOL has focused efforts on reducing or eliminating the most probable and common causes of injuries and fatalities including explosions, roof falls, and powered haulage accidents.
Eighteen miners have been crushed to death in coal stockpiles over the past 20 years, but last year, two bulldozer operators at Indiana and Kentucky mines fell into these dangerous "voids" and came out alive.
The men were pushing coal into open chutes at the bottom of stockpiles that dump onto conveyor belts.
The process can create hidden cavities, or voids, at the points where the coal is drawn off.
Both bulldozers sank into such voids, and were smothered by the loose coal.
Thanks to a safety campaign by the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA), the bulldozers had fully enclosed cabs with high-strength windows, which protected the operators from harm.
In general, these categories of accidents (and resulting fatalities) have declined.
The Department is increasing its focus on analysis of the more unusual factors and events, taking advantage of technology to analyze more variables such as human and environmental causes that have contributed to recent accidents and fatalities.
Results of the analysis are being used to focus attention in geographic locations where particular health and safety issues exist, to concentrate efforts on specific safety and health concerns, and to promote awareness.
Recently implemented regulations require training for employees of almost 90 percent of the metal and non-metal mines, where approximately 70 percent of the fatal accidents occurred over the past five years.
To combat the increased fatalities in gold mines, the Department has provided technical support for operators regarding roof and ground control; established a training program for miners and operators regarding roof conditions and hazards in gold mining; and assigned full-time resident inspectors at these mines.
Goal Assessment: This performance goal remains in the Department's FY 2001 Annual Performance Plan and will continue to measure results against a five-year moving average.
A bulldozer operator was clearing trees in a limestone quarry in Festus, Missouri.
He was pushing over a tree when one of the tracks sank into a hole and the bulldozer rolled over into a valley.
The machine landed upright, but use of the seat belt kept the operator from being thrown out of the cab.
Similarly equipped with a seat belt was 42 year old Jeff, who was backing up his 100-ton haulage truck to dump rock over a high cliff wall at a large stone quarry in Havre de Grace, Maryland, when the ground fell out from under him.
Heavy rains had softened the dirt, and the weight of the truck created a sinkhole effect that caused the truck to roll over the wall and land upside down on its cab.
Jeff was wearing his seat belt, which is required by the Mine Safety and Health Administration, and was left hanging upside down, but was otherwise unscathed.