The Department of Labor fosters and promotes the welfare of the job seekers, wage earners, and retirees of the United States by improving their working conditions, advancing their opportunities for profitable employment, protecting their retirement and health care benefits, helping employers find workers, strengthening free collective bargaining, and tracking changes in employment, prices, and other national economic measurements.
In carrying out this mission, the Department administers a variety of Federal labor laws including those that guarantee workers' rights to safe and healthful working conditions, a minimum hourly wage and overtime pay, freedom from employment discrimination, unemployment insurance, and other income support.
We will promote the economic well-being of workers and their families; help them share in the American dream through rising wages, pensions, health benefits and expanded economic opportunities; and foster safe and healthful workplaces that are free from discrimination.
The Department of Labor is organized into major component agencies, each headed by an Assistant Secretary or Commissioner who administers the various statutes and programs for which the Department is responsible.
These programs are carried out through a network of regional offices and smaller field, district, and area offices, as well as, in some cases, through local-level grantees and contractors.
The largest program agencies are Employment and Training Administration (ETA), Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration (PWBA), Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC), Employment Standards Administration (ESA), Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA); and Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).
The entire DOL organization chart may be viewed at Appendix 1.
This report, prepared in accordance with the Reports Consolidation Act of 2000, presents the results of the Department of Labor’s (DOL) program and financial performance for FY 2001.
The report features how the Department of Labor — in service to the American public — is “Meeting the Challenges of the 21st Century Workforce.”
FY 2001 confronted the Nation and the Department of Labor with challenges previously unimaginable as Americans came under attack in their places of work on September 11th and then faced economic turmoil in the aftermath.
DOL honors all of our Nation’s workers — those who died at their jobs on September 11th, those who risked their own lives in the rescue efforts, those who returned to work with quiet courage and determination in the uncertain days following the attack, and those who now seek new employment to regain economic security for themselves and their families.
As we move forward into the 21st Century, we renew DOL’s commitment to delivering results that enable America’s workers to meet every challenge posed by the global economy — ensuring that all Americans will have the education, technical skills and opportunities to attain rewarding careers in a safe and healthful work environment and the economic security to enjoy their retirement years.
The FY 2001 Annual Report is divided into three major sections.
The Annual Performance Report* reflects both the progress realized and the setbacks encountered in achieving the Department’s three strategic goals — *A Prepared Workforce, A Secure Workforce, and Quality Workplaces*.
Through statistics, analysis, and the stories of individuals, the Annual Performance Report illustrates the contributions of DOL programs to In Guatemala, nine year old Wendy used to wake up early each morning to go to the river and break stones.
Her family has broken stones their whole lives to survive.
But now, her mother, Palestina, has her own business and Wendy and her three siblings attend school.
This was all made possible through support from a DOL funded International Labor Organization project targeting working children and their families in the stone quarry sector.
Wendy is very happy with the changes in her life.
She likes being in school and spending time with her friends.
Her mother is optimistic about what the future holds: “Perhaps I will never stop being poor,” she says, “but my children will have more opportunities, as will their children.”
Photo from: US DOL/ILAB archive prepare the Nation's workers and their families to achieve their aspirations in the dynamic and challenging environment of the 21st Century workforce.
A summary of each of the three sections follows.
FY 2001 marks the third year that the Department of Labor along with other Federal Agencies has reported program results against the goals in the annual performance plan.
In addition to the Department's Annual Performance Plan, each DOL agency developed an Annual Performance Plan.
Over 200 performance goals included in these plans have provided a basis for targeting and measuring the accomplishments of DOL programs.
Those goals that are key to the accomplishment of DOL's programs were selected from agency plans and included in the FY 2001 Departmental Performance Plan, providing a basis for assessing the Department's effectiveness in providing core services to our constituents, as well as the performance of individual DOL agencies.
The FY 2001 Annual Report includes descriptions of the Department's strategic goals, the ensuing outcome goals, and a presentation of program results for two measurement years, Fiscal Year 2001 and Program Year 2000.
The Department's Employment and Training Administration includes some programs which are forward-funded and follow a program year that begins nine months after the fiscal year for which program funding was received.
Of the 48 performance goals presented in the FY 2001 Annual Performance Report, the Department exceeded or fully achieved 60.4 percent of its goals, substantially achieved 6.3 percent, and did not achieve 33.3 percent.
Performance results declined from FY 2000, when the Department fully achieved 76 percent of the goals, substantially achieved an additional 15 percent and did not achieve 9 percent of the goals.
The assessment category of substantially achieved acknowledges program performance where results were close to achieving the target (attained 80 percent or more of the targeted goal).
Several factors, including the economy and the increased outcome-orientation of the Department's goals influenced program results during FY 2001.
For example, as the Department's job training programs under the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) placed a new emphasis on longer-term employment outcomes, the slowing pace of the economy prompted employers to reduce their labor forces with a disproportionate impact on the most recently hired workers including WIA participants.
The increased outcome focus of the Department's goals, as in the case of the WIA goals, introduces a much greater number of factors outside the control of program managers and raises the difficulty of achieving such goals.
Notwithstanding these challenges, the Department fully accepts our responsibility and accountability for achieving goals that target improving performance in the key results that DOL's programs are expected to deliver on behalf of America's workers.
To improve achievements in FY 2002 and bring DOL closer to the ultimate objective of a performance-based organization — one that manages programs by using performance information to achieve planned results — the Department has introduced several initiatives under the leadership of the newly established Management Review Board, chaired by the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management and comprised of the Chief of Staff, the Deputy Secretary, and the Assistant Secretaries and heads of major agencies.
The performance agreements or standards used to evaluate the performance of individual DOL executives and managers have been revised to institutionalize personal accountability for achieving the Department's performance goals.
The Management Review Board members have reinstated the practice of meeting at mid-year and year end with the Deputy Secretary to review performance progress and results, providing a capstone to a management oversight process supported by regular program reviews at lower levels of management in individual DOL agencies.
Planning efforts during FY 2001 focused on assessing the relationship between program strategies and performance goals, and the Department will intensify these initiatives during the remainder of FY 2002 as DOL strives to enhance the results of core programs.
Program evaluations, which have demonstrated their value to the Department's job training programs, will be extended to other programs to address the causes of shortfalls in performance results, identify more effective and efficient strategies, ensure the accuracy and reliability of performance data, and supplement the performance information available through existing data collection processes.
To develop more coordinated strategies for improving the results of cross-cutting programs, with a special emphasis on job training programs and related services, the Department is participating actively in an inter-agency planning workgroup with the Departments of Education, Health and Human Services and Veterans Affairs.
The Management Review Board also provides leadership to the Department's initiatives to advance the President's Management Agenda, developing goals and strategies to achieve the Agenda for the Department's FY 2002 and 2003 Annual Performance Plans.
Among the President's Management Agenda initiatives, the integration of performance and budget represents an important step on the path to a performance-based organization.
This report and the Department's FY 2002 Annual Performance Plan present DOL's initial efforts to offer a financial context to our performance objectives.
During the remainder of FY 2002, the Department will pilot the development of goals to improve the cost-effectiveness of selected programs and continue efforts to integrate the overall presentation of DOL's budget and performance plans.
The Department recognizes that transitioning to a fully performance-based organization depends upon the availability of reliable and timely information concerning the results of DOL's programs.
The challenges to performance measurement vary significantly among DOL's programs, with the data sources and the agencies' level of control over the reporting systems representing the primary factors influencing the reliability and usefulness of the Department's performance information.
During FY 2001, the Department has continued its progress working with third parties that provide critical performance information about DOL's programs.
Most noteworthy is the Employment and Training Administration's development of a verification and validation process to assist its State partners to improve the effectiveness of data-driven management decisions at the State level and to ensure the accuracy of performance data before the States report to the Department.
The Office of Inspector General has also expanded its audits of performance information, including data collected by third parties, to assist the Department in identifying data sources requiring attention.
DOL's functions are organized around three strategic goals, which have provided a focus for the Department's strategic planning and a framework for its annual performance plans.
These goals build on our successes and respond to the challenge of helping every American participate and prosper in today's economy.
Through these strategic goals and their supporting outcome goals, DOL staff and the American public can see a direct link between the Department's purpose and its activities.
The Department will revise the Strategic Plan during FY 2002 to highlight the Secretary's 21st Century Workforce initiatives and to refocus the strategic direction of the major DOL programs.
Strategic Goal 1, a Prepared Workforce, includes 15 performance goals.
Eleven of 15 or 73.3 percent of the goals were fully achieved — a decline in performance in comparison to FY 2000, when 93 percent of the goals in this area were achieved.
Of the remaining four goals, two were substantially achieved, and two were not met.
Some decline in performance was expected given the major program transition occurring in Youth and Adult training during this first full year of performance under the implementation of the Workforce Investment Act.
The new program focus on longer-term retention in employment for adults or in advanced training, education or employment for younger participants, presented the most significant challenge for the job training programs.
A downturn in the economy compounded the challenges to retaining employment for participants, since newly hired workers with limited skills and experience generally are laid off first.
Strategic Goal 2, a Secure Workforce, includes 15 performance goals, of which 7, or 46.7 percent, were achieved.
Performance in FY 2001 was less than in FY 2000, when 69 percent of the goals were achieved.
Of the eight goals remaining, one was substantially achieved, and seven were not met.
DOL continues to strive to increase compliance with labor standards governing wages and work hours in selected low-wage industries and will focus intensively on evaluating the effectiveness of its strategies.
Although the overall compliance goals were not achieved, increasing numbers of employers in the industries were paying and employing workers in compliance with the minimum wage and overtime requirements.
The economy adversely affected the achievement of other Secure Workforce goals, particularly the timely payment of benefits to unemployed workers, causing the number of States paying Unemployment Insurance claims on time to decline for the first time since FY 1998.
Economic factors leading to workforce downsizing at the U.S. Postal Service restricted employment opportunities for employees recovering from work-related injuries and illnesses, contributing to a Government-wide increase in disability periods following such incidents.
Strategic Goal 3, Quality Workplaces, includes 11 performance goals.
Six goals or 54.5 percent were achieved and 5 were not met, representing a decline in performance as compared with FY 2000, when 77 percent of the goals comprising this strategic objective were achieved.
Several of the unmet performance indicators were first introduced and measured in FY 2001, and the limited historical data available may have contributed to setting unrealistic targets.
Nearly all goals to improve workplace safety and health goals were achieved and, in some cases, significantly exceeded.
In FY 2001, the mining industry, for example, experienced the lowest number of fatalities in the history of the industry.
In addition, the five industries characterized by high-hazard workplaces - shipyards, food processing, nursing homes, logging, and construction - experienced significant reductions in the incidence rates of injuries and illnesses over the last five years.
The costs for achieving the Department's goals vary significantly as illustrated in the graph on this page and the table presented on the next page.
The graph allocates costs by the three strategic goals, depicting that 83 percent of the Department's total FY 2001 net operating costs of $42.5 billion supported the accomplishment of a Secure Workforce, and the majority of those funds provide benefits to unemployed workers or workers disabled as a result of work-related injuries or illnesses.
Fifteen percent of the Department's FY 2001 costs contributed to the goal of a Prepared Workforce, providing grants to States and other organizations to offer job training and a host of employment-related services to assist workers to improve their skills and obtain productive, long-term employment.
Only two percent of the FY 2001 expenditures contributed to the goal of Quality Workplaces, and the majority of those costs fund the salaries of Federal employees dedicated to improving safety and health in the Nation's workplaces.
The DOL goal structure hierarchy includes 10 Outcome goals which further refine the objectives of the Department's three strategic goals.
In this report, performance data and supporting information are presented by strategic goal, following the sequence in the Department's FY 2001 Annual Performance Plan.
Each DOL Strategic Goal serves as a category for presenting performance results.
Under each Strategic Goal, outcome goals that segment the larger objective of the Strategic Goal into more specific objectives are discussed.
This information provides a non-technical orientation on how DOL serves the public in each major area of the overall DOL mission and serves as an introduction to the detailed performance information that follows.
Following each outcome goal, separate reports of results for individual performance goals provide the following information: * A report and analysis of performance results against the goal.
A description of the program being evaluated.
Highlights of key strategies employed toward achieving the goal.
A capsule summary of any planned changes in the program and performance measures in the Department's FY 2002 or FY 2003 Annual Performance Plans, based on performance results.
Summary comments on any evaluations relevant to the performance goal that were conducted during the year.
The following appendices provide supporting information for the performance results presented in the body of the report.
Appendix 1* presents the organizational chart for the Department.
Appendix 2* lists each performance goal and identifies whether or not the goal has been achieved.
This section also includes performance goals that were costs to each of the 10 major performance oriented segments of the Department's mission.
An analysis of program cost trends covering the last three fiscal years (FY 1999-2001) is included as part of each Outcome Goal description within the Performance Report following the Executive Summary³.
In FY 2001, the Department of Labor maintained its outstanding record in financial management.
Under the Government Management Reform Act (GMRA) and the Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 (CFOA), all federal agencies are required to produce annual financial statements and to have those statements audited.
The Department's Inspector General issued an unqualified, or "clean," opinion on the financial statements, marking the fifth consecutive year that DOL has attained this highest level of financial performance.
The audit report also states that no material weaknesses were found in the Department's system of internal controls that would affect the financial statements' accuracy.
In addition, all financial systems at the Department were in compliance with the Federal Financial Management Improvement Act of 1996 (FFMIA).
This marked the completion of a multi-year effort to bring DOL's systems into full compliance.
The Department is shifting its managerial cost accounting efforts from agency-specific pilots to a department-wide approach.
Initially these efforts will focus on the development of a high-level departmental cost accounting model.
This model will provide improved cost information and support better accountability and resource allocation.
Subsequent efforts will target providing more detailed cost information and enhanced reporting capabilities in support of performance budgeting.
These cost accounting efforts will significantly enhance management decision-making in the Department by providing accurate, relevant and timely information on the cost of DOL programs.
The Appendix also lists the measurement period for the performance data addressed in the performance goals.
Appendix 3 includes a listing of significant evaluations of DOL programs conducted by the General Accounting Office (GAO), OIG, and other organizations during FY 2001.
Appendix 4 contains supporting information for each performance goal including the performance indicator, source of data, baseline data, and any comments pertinent to data collection.
Appendix 5 is the glossary of acronyms used in this document.
Appendix 6 includes a listing of DOL internet links.
Christian, who has a severe cognitive disability, is a Lab Aide on a quality control and materials team for a research institute in a large university.
This team is responsible for the sequencing of genes from clones.
Christian labels the plates that carry the genetic material.
He has this job thanks to his job coach at the Institute for Community Inclusion, a DOL project grantee in a major U.S. city.
This project, which is coordinated through the DOL Office of Disability Employment Policy, encourages employers to raise their expectations of persons with disabilities and to consider hiring people with significant disabilities and non-stereotypical jobs consistent with the individual's interests and abilities.
Christian's supervisor says, "Christian does a very good job here. He pays close attention to detail. If Christian did not do his job properly, for each batch of plates that were improperly labeled, we would lose somewhere around $300,000 per day. I trust him to do his job every day."
The accompanying principal financial statements summarize DOL’s financial position, net cost of operations and changes in net position, provide information on budgetary resources and financing and present the sources and disposition of custodial revenues for fiscal years 2001 and 2000.
Highlights of the financial information presented in the principal statements are shown below: * DOL conducted operations under five major programs during 2001 and 2000: Income Maintenance, Employment and Training, Labor, Employment and Pension Standards, Worker Safety and Health, and Statistics.
The total and net operating costs of DOL’s major programs are shown on the Statement of Net Costs.
Total costs are reduced by earned program revenues to calculate net program costs.
Total net program costs, plus net costs not assigned to programs, comprise DOL’s net cost of operations.
The total cost of DOL operations during 2001 and 2000 was $45.1 billion and $35.4 billion respectively.
These costs were offset by earned revenues of $2.6 billion and $2.5 billion, to arrive at net cost of operations of $42.5 billion and $32.9 billion in 2001 and 2000 respectively, a $9.6 billion increase (29 percent) between fiscal years.
This increase in the net cost of operations during 2001 was primarily attributable to cost increases within DOL’s largest program, Income Maintenance.
Income maintenance costs represented 82 percent and 78 percent of the Department’s net cost of operations in 2001 and 2000 respectively.
DOL reported net program costs for Income Maintenance of $34.8 billion and $25.6 billion in 2001 and 2000, an increase of $9.2 billion between fiscal years.
This increase was attributable to increases in unemployment benefits ($7.4 billion) and disability benefits ($1.8 billion) during 2001.
Benefit payment expenses of $32.9 billion, incurred under DOL’s unemployment ($28.5 billion) and disability ($4.4 billion) compensation programs, comprised the majority of the Department’s income maintenance costs during 2001.
Benefit payment expenses were $23.6 billion in 2000.
DOL reported net costs for Employment and Training programs of $5.9 billion and $5.6 billion in 2001 and 2000 respectively, and increase of $0.3 billion (5 percent) between fiscal years.
Net program costs reported under DOL’s remaining three major programs were $1.7 billion and $1.6 billion in 2001 and 2000 respectively.
DOL’s earned revenues for 2001 and 2000 were $2.6 billion and $2.5 billion respectively.
Earned revenues consisted primarily of payments to DOL’s Unemployment Trust Fund and Special Benefit Fund from other Federal agencies, to reimburse these funds for unemployment benefits or workers’ compensation benefits paid from the funds to the agencies’ employees.
DOL’s net cost of operations must be funded by financing sources other than earned revenues.
The principal financial statements report the financial position and results of operations of DOL, pursuant to the requirements of U.S.C. 3515(b).
The statements have been prepared from the books and records of DOL in accordance with OMB prescribed formats.
The statements are different from the financial reports used to monitor and control budgetary resources, which are prepared from the same books and records.
The Office of Inspector General (OIG) has identified the following areas to be the most serious management and performance challenges facing the Department of Labor: * Effectiveness of Employment and Training Programs * Financial Performance * Accountability: Budget and Performance Integration * Security of Pension Assets * Protection of Worker Benefit Funds * Information Technology and Electronic Government Challenges * Integrity of Foreign Labor Certification Programs * Effectiveness of Mine Safety and Health Programs * Rapid Expansion of the Bureau of International Labor Affairs Program * Human Capital Management The Department recognizes that the ten challenges posed by the Inspector General represent issues of major potential impact on the effectiveness and efficiency of the Department's programs and operations.
The Department's responses identify extensive actions, which have been completed or are currently in progress to address these challenges.
Several of the challenges reference specific concerns reported in detail in OIG audits issued over the past several years, and the majority of these findings, if not already closed, should be corrected within the next year.
Other challenges require legislative action or otherwise fall outside of the Department's jurisdiction, as explained in management's response.
The Department's responses to these challenges offer systemic performance data to provide readers comprehensive information about the overall effectiveness of a program or area of responsibility.
Where a sustained effort is required over several years to address an OIG management challenge that impacts a core program or management priority, performance goals and strategies are targeted in either the Departmental or agency annual performance plans.
For example, plans at the Departmental and agency level are in place to comprehensively address the human capital management challenges faced by the Department.
Goals to continuously improve the results of each DOL job training program identified in the challenges are included in the Department's Annual Performance Plan.
Finally, other issues raised in the management challenges, such as plans to improve data quality and achieve further integration of budget and performance, are discussed in detail in the Department's Annual Performance Plan.
DOL is committed to enhancing opportunities for America's workforce by providing the tools and assistance necessary for success in today's job market to people new to the labor force or wishing to improve their potential.
Special emphasis is placed on closing the employment gap for out-of-school youth and providing long-term jobs for individuals moving from welfare to work.
In addition, the Department publishes crucial labor market information to support key economic and policy decisions.
Job Research Centers at One Stop locations provide job seekers with web-based access to America's Job Bank as well as other job search references and assistance.
Job seeker receives job search assistance at One-Stop Career Center.
Photo by: Michael Carpenter American workers must have quick and easy access to a broad array of high quality and highly effective workforce development services to continue to enjoy increased employment and earnings in the global economy of the 21st Century.
One-Stop Career Centers provide the focal point for meeting the challenges of a global economy.
Through the One-Stop Centers, communities can build the local partnerships and organize the workforce development services that enable adults to acquire the skills needed for jobs and career changes that lead to high wages.
Technology has dramatically increased the Department's ability to offer services and products to customers in a broad range of formats and at almost any time.
National, State, and local job matching systems, labor market information, resource directories, and occupational and career information are online to enable direct customer access or to assist staff in providing services, and are available anywhere that personal computers can be found, such as customers' homes, businesses, and public libraries.
To provide for the special needs of persons with disabilities, the One-Stop Centers have improved access to their facilities and services.
The Employment and Training Administration (ETA) and the Veterans' Employment and Training Service (VETS), with support from the Women's Bureau, operate a number of programs that provide the information and skill-building opportunities that lead to increased employment and earnings.
Adult programs authorized under the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) provide the workforce preparation, training, and support services needed to increase the participants' skills, employment opportunities, and earnings.
Welfare-to-Work programs provide welfare recipients with education, training, and assistance tailored to prepare individuals with multiple barriers to employment to obtain jobs.
Wagner-Peyser Act employment services include: a range of labor exchange services, such as access to resource rooms with the latest technology that job seekers use to obtain employment; staff-assisted job search assistance and counseling; job referral and placement; recruitment and screening services for employers; and labor market and career information.
Electronic information is available to bring together job seekers and employers nationwide through America's Labor Market Information System, America's Job Bank, America's Career Information Network, America's Learning Exchange, and a wide variety of labor market and workforce development tools.
ETA's Office of Apprenticeship Training, Employer and Labor Services works to increase the number of apprenticeship occupations, providing opportunities for satisfying and rewarding careers in highly paid, skilled occupations.
VETS programs target veterans requiring special assistance, such as service-connected disabled veterans, and homeless, minority, or older veterans, as well as younger veterans recently separated from active service.
The Women's Bureau seeks to ensure that issues current to women are identified and supported in Departmental programs.
FY 2001 program costs of $3.2 billion for Outcome Goal 1.1 support ETA's adult training programs and employment services, in addition to the employment services and training provided for veterans by the Veterans' Employment and Training Service.
In FY 2000, costs for this outcome goal showed a slight increase compared to FY 1999, as DOL transitioned from the training programs of the Job Training and Partnership Act to those of the Workforce Investment Act.
Costs continued to increase in FY 2001, reflecting an increasing tempo in WIA training operations following the start-up/structuring activities of FY 2000.
FY 2001's increased costs also are a result of legislative changes in the Welfare-to-Work program that expanded participant eligibility.
A key Secretarial area of emphasis is re-orienting and improving the effectiveness of the Department's job training programs to meet the needs of the 21st Century workforce.
The Department will increase collaboration within the One-Stop framework, leveraging the full array of services available from all partners, to enable all workers to secure employment with the opportunity for increased earnings and career advancement.
The Department and its partners also will take advantage of available technology, measure performance and customer satisfaction, address infrastructure and capacity needs, and seek new ways to break down the barriers to integrated One-Stop service delivery.
The collective goal is to provide high quality services and information that best serve the nation's job seekers and employers.
The economic impact of the September 11th terrorist attacks is likely to have a disproportionate effect on low-wage workers, who tend to be early victims of rising unemployment and the last to benefit from expanding job opportunities during times of recovery.
The Department will marshal the expertise of all our service partners to ensure positive outcomes on behalf of these workers.
Of those Welfare-to-Work (WtW) participants placed in unsubsidized employment, 66 percent will remain in the workforce for six months with six percent average earnings increase by the second consecutive quarter following the placement quarter.
Results: The goal was not achieved.
Of those WtW participants placed in unsubsidized employment, 49 percent remained in the workforce for six months with 59 percent average earnings increase by the second consecutive quarter following the placement quarter.
Program Description: The WtW program seeks to place and retain in jobs individuals who face formidable barriers to employment, including long-term welfare recipients, those who have exhausted their welfare benefits, young adults transitioning from foster care and certain non-custodial parents.
The program concentrates on quickly placing participants in a work activity while offering ongoing supportive services critical to successful long-term employment, such as child care, transportation, and emergency housing.
A work activity can be an unsubsidized job or a subsidized job, such as community service, work experience, or on-the-job training.
Placements focus on jobs with progressive wage gains that lead to economic self-sufficiency.
A unique feature of WtW is the program’s primary emphasis on post-employment services, including occupational skill training, General Educational Development (GED) preparation, and further education.
By providing these services in a work-based environment, DOL helps “to assure that participants retain jobs, increase their wages, and develop a permanent attachment to the labor market.”
The program began in FY 1998 by issuing grants to States and competitive grants to local communities.
States must provide $1 in match for every $2 in Federal grant funds they receive.
The Department made a concerted effort to award WtW competitive grants to small-scale community and faith-based organizations.
Analysis of Results: Two following factors may have contributed to the shortfall in the targeted retention rate: * Employment has declined in the service and retail sectors, both significant sources of entry-level placements for WtW participants whose typically low educational and skills levels and short work histories often cause these workers to be laid off in an economic downturn.
Inspector General's (OIG) recent performance review of WtW competitive grants.
As a result, DOL has simplified reporting requirements and has been training grantees on these requirements during this past year.
A major data validation review is also underway with the objective of assisting organizations with limited Federal grant experience to understand and meet the requirements.
Strategies: Strategies for improving retention and earnings gain outcomes include the following new initiatives and technical assistance products that assist grantees in addressing the employment needs of specific WtW participants: * Make Retention More Attractive: The Department will increase grantees' use of tax credits, the Federal Bonding Program, post-employment services, individual development accounts, and especially the newly authorized post-employment support payments as ways to make retaining employment more attractive to participants and more feasible for employers.
Magnify and Extend Service Provision: DOL will continue merging the WtW program into the One-Stop Centers to increase the array and duration of support and post-employment services to place and retain these participants in long-term unsubsidized jobs with advancement potential.
DOL is implementing several technical assistance and pilot ventures related to increasing employment, retention, and earnings opportunities for noncustodial parents and ex-offenders.
The Pathways to Advancement pilot project: This project, implemented jointly with Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF), subsidizes employers to upgrade and advance current entry-level, low-wage, working TANF "alumni."
One-Stop partners will fund training for welfare recipients or other at-risk job seekers from the WtW program and other sources to fill the vacancies created by the pilot project's "alumni."
Lessons learned from the pilot project will be communicated to other grantees.
Validate Data At the Program Level: Using software and tools provided by the Department, all active WtW grantees will complete a Data Validation Self-Audit by June 2002.
By September 2002, a re-sample by OIG is expected to conclude that all grantee data is timely and reliable.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The Department will not separately report goals and performance results in future DOL Annual Performance Plans and Reports for the participants targeted by this program.
However, the results of services to WtW participants will be summarized in the Department's measures for the job training and public labor exchange goals as well as in the agency-level performance plans and reports prepared by DOL's Employment and Training Administration.
Audits and Program Evaluations: The Office of Inspector General issued a final report, "Welfare-to-Work Competitive Grant Program Performance Audit," recommending that the Department conduct data validation reviews at the grantee level.
OIG also recommends that DOL work with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to ensure that HHS' Welfare-to-Work program evaluation captures the aspects of effective program innovation.
In response to these recommendations, DOL has taken a number of actions including: * The Department's Welfare-to-Work program will focus its FY 2002 technical assistance activities specifically on retention and wage gains, to address OIG's recommendation that grantees be required to follow-up with participants in unsubsidized employment to determine if additional services are needed to assure employment retention.
The Department has posted on its website a performance and reporting software package that enables grantees to readily prepare the program reports required by DOL and includes edit features to preclude common errors (http://usworkforce.org/resources/accountability.htm).
An additional software package to assist grantees in further analyzing the quality of their data will be made available in the near future.
The Department will work with the Department of Health and Human Services to assure that their national evaluation design is tailored to assess the innovative approaches being used to move welfare recipients from welfare dependency to economic self-sufficiency.
Appendix 3 provides further information on this audit.
Of those registered under the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) adult program and employed in the first quarter after exit, 77% will be employed in the third quarter after program exit, with increased average earnings of $3,264.
Results: The goal was achieved.
The retention rate after three quarters of employment was 78 percent, one percentage point above the target.
Actual earnings increased by $3,684, exceeding the target of $3,264.
Final data will be available when States submit the annual report.
That data will contain an additional quarter of wage records, so results are expected to vary from this report.
Program Description: The Workforce Investment Act’s (WIA) Adult Program improves the quality of the workforce, reduces welfare dependence, and enhances the productivity and competitiveness of the Nation’s economy.
The Department allocates adult employment and training funds by formula to the States, which further distribute the funds to local Workforce Investment Areas.
3. Training services are available to individuals who need to acquire new skills in order to find and retain a job.
Analysis of Results: DOL based the PY 2000 goals on the outcome of negotiations between the Department and State agencies, and the results reflect the performance that 50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands reported.
States and local areas used the Unemployment Insurance (UI) wage record reporting system for the first time as their performance reporting data source.
To ensure high standards of reliability, the Department is conducting a “validation project” to examine States’ reporting and the UI wage record system to assure valid and reliable data.
Strategies: DOL developed the following major strategies to improve the WIA Adult Program after its first year of full operation: • The Department conducted “WIA Readiness Reviews,” which uncovered several areas that affect the delivery of quality services and the accurate and reliable reporting of both services and outcomes.
The Department designed guidance and technical assistance activities to address the problems that the "WIA Readiness Reviews" revealed in the first year of program implementation.
States and local service providers use the guidance and technical assistance to improve services and outcomes for individuals the WIA Adult Program serves.
DOL began deploying the guidance it developed as a result of the "WIA Readiness Reviews."
The Department is working with a network of partners from business coalitions, public interest groups, and community and faith-based organizations to implement the WIA program refinements for their respective constituents.
This will assure more consistent policy, which will improve service delivery, outcomes and reporting.
DOL will assess its success in deploying the guidance during the second half of PY 2001.
The Department began "showcasing" the best WIA programs.
The Workforce Excellence Network (which consists of the Departments of Education, Health and Human Services and Labor; the National Association of Workforce Boards, the National Leadership Institute and other organizations) conducts two major national conferences each year - the "Journey to Excellence" and "Workforce Innovation" - to display programs and innovations.
In "Journey to Excellence," State and local service provider staff members who have achieved excellent results provide workshops to other State and local program staff.
Workforce Innovation" showcases projects with technological innovations that have improved employment and training services for adults and other WIA customers.
For PY 2001, DOL will build upon these basic strategies by refining readiness reviews, providing additional training and technical assistance, and working with its partners to improve core, intensive, and training services and thus improve the employment, retention, and wages of adults.
The Department has reviewed its future year goals and strategies in light of the first year's implementation experience and will maintain its planned targets of 70 percent employment, 80 percent retention, and $3,423 average earnings gain for PY 2002.
Results: The goal was fully achieved.
23.6 percent of job seekers who received labor exchange services entered employment surpassing the goal of 22.6 percent for a total of more than 3.85 million job seekers entering employment.
Program Description: In assisting job seekers to find employment, public employment service staff provides job search, referral, and placement services, and other activities and services such as counseling, testing, assessment, and occupational and labor market information.
Additionally, the public employment service provides job seekers with access to automated job vacancies, resume posting and training services through America's Career Kit (America's Job Bank, America's Career InfoNet, and America's Learning Exchange).
During Program Year 2000, State workforce agencies continued the transition to providing labor exchange services through One-Stop delivery systems.
In the One-Stop environment, coordination of labor exchange service delivery occurs with the provision of other Federally-funded workforce development services as required under the Workforce Investment Act.
Analysis of Results: The results reported for this measure represent the proportion of job seekers registered with the employment service who entered employment during Program Year 2000.
State workforce agencies collect information on the number of applicants registered with the public employment service and the number who enter employment which they in turn report to the Department in the form of summary statistics.
The Department projects the number of job seekers entering employment to further increase when Guam and New Jersey provide final data.
The Department developed a comprehensive Labor Exchange Performance Measurement System that includes newly developed performance measures and an improved system of obtaining outcome information based on unemployment insurance wage record data.
Studies in selected States have indicated that the current reporting procedure, which requires follow-up contacts with job seekers, significantly understates the outcomes of the public labor exchange when compared to data available from the unemployment insurance records.
Full implementation of the new measures requires substantial changes, and the reporting process that supports the collection of data will be effective in Program Year 2002.
Strategies: ETA has invested in training to improve the skills of front- line One-Stop workers.
Training emphases have focused on addressing the needs of customers, accessing and using America’s Career Kit tools and O*NET (Occupational Information Network), an electronic tool that identifies, defines, describes, and classifies occupations.
O*NET can be used by employers to define and classify jobs and seek job applicants, and by workers and others in searching for jobs and making career choices.
These investments have been part of ETA’s efforts to ensure that staff-assisted services are provided to job seekers and employers in One-Stop delivery centers and have contributed to increased effectiveness in performing the labor exchange function.
Increase by 15 percent the total number of job openings listed with the public employment service, including both those listed with State Workforce Agencies and those listed directly with America's Job Bank (AJB) via the Internet.
Results: The goal was fully achieved.
The number of job openings listed with State Workforce Agencies (7.4 million) and America's Job Bank (5.4 million) increased by 26.4 percent over Program Year 1999.
Program Description: As part of providing labor exchange, recruitment, and other technical services to employers, the public employment service publishes job openings.
Employers can advertise their job openings with State Workforce Agencies (SWAs), job seekers can research these opportunities, and staff can screen and refer suitable candidates to these jobs at the request of the employer.
Employers also can publish their job openings on America's Job Bank (AJB), which is a national Internet-based job system that facilitates connections between employers and job seekers.
Most jobs listed with the SWAs are subsequently posted on AJB.
Jobs posted on AJB from SWA listings are excluded from the AJB count in the table below.)
Analysis of Results: Even though data from one key State (New Jersey) have not yet been received, the goal was achieved.
The Department projects that the report from New Jersey, which represented 2.55 percent of the total number of job openings received in Program Year 1999, will increase the overall results for this goal.
The Department's investments in AJB and in increasing awareness of AJB among State agencies and the public have contributed to the 96 percent increase in the number of AJB direct listings.
Among the key investments: * Employer focus groups and a market analysis provided information that facilitated the development of new versions of the AJB website.
Several new versions were released during the Program Year, each of which made the site easier to navigate and use for the employer customer.
Training of One-Stop office staff on the use of AJB (and the other Career Kit products) began during Program Year 2000, increasing the visibility of this tool in many of the One-Stop centers and leading staff to recommend the service to employers with whom they work.
A public information campaign, also begun during Program Year 2000, is increasing the general public's awareness of the site.
Strategies: DOL continues to assist States to identify more effective strategies for working with employer customers in One-Stop systems overall, including listing their jobs.
New tools in development will enable employers to prepare job descriptions that are more likely to attract job seekers with the appropriate skills.
The Department placed a stronger emphasis on performance overall with the development of the Labor Exchange Performance Measures.
Although the new measures are not yet in effect, the States are broadly aware of their development and understand that performance outcomes are a key focus and support for ongoing budget requests.
In addition, the new performance data will be available in both raw form (with the ability for ad hoc reporting) and also as management reports for the States and DOL to facilitate performance monitoring.
The Department recognizes that increasing the number of job opportunities listed with the public labor exchange improves the likelihood that job seekers will locate suitable employment.
In the FY 2002 Annual Performance Plan, the number of job openings listed with the public labor exchange therefore has been incorporated as one supporting measure under a performance goal to improve the outcomes for job seekers and employers who receive public labor exchange services.
Goal 1.3B — FY 2000 Annual Performance Plan)* When Heather was down-sized from her job as human resources director for a Louisville Company, she found herself at a One-Stop Center looking for her next job.
Her resume was entered into the online job bank of the One-Stop Center.
The resume attracted the attention of a technology firm, and she was soon working for the technology firm's human resources department.
One-Stop Centers are an invaluable information resource for those who have lost their jobs.
Centers include resource rooms with the latest technology job seekers use to obtain employment, such as resume preparation tools, staff-assisted job search assistance and counseling, job referral and placement, as well as information on careers and the labor market.
Results: The goal was achieved.
During Program Year 2000, 66,563 new employers registered with America's Job Bank.
Program Description: America's Job Bank (AJB), an Internet-based labor exchange system, complements the services provided by the public employment service offices in the States.
Job seekers can search for a job in AJB's online listing of openings and post a resume to an online database free of charge.
Employers who register to use the service can search the resume database for potential candidates in addition to being able to post their job openings on the site.
The site provides both employers and job seekers a "scout" feature, offering users the ability to save searches based on search criteria they choose, have the system automatically run those searches again at user-defined intervals, and then e-mail them the search results.
AJB evolved from the Interstate Job Bank that was initiated to carry out the Secretary's responsibilities in this area under the Wagner Peyser Act.
The State of New York established the Interstate Job Bank under agreement with DOL and continues to operate the AJB under a DOL grant.
Analysis of Results: The number of new employers that register with AJB has increased steadily each year, since its inception in Program Year 1996.
The increased registration during Program Year 2000 is attributed to several factors: * The web site was redesigned to make it more intuitive and user-friendly.
DOL initiated a public information campaign during Program Year 2000 that contributed to increased employer awareness of the services that are offered free to employers.
State employment office staffs in One-Stop Centers were trained on uses of AJB that increased the web site's visibility and most likely led to staff recommending the service to employers with whom they have contact.
The economy experienced a tight labor market during the July 2000-June 2001 measurement period for this goal.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: DOL has streamlined the number of goals in the FY 2002 Annual Performance Plan, and this goal has been discontinued.
The outcomes of employer registration will be measured in the future through the percentages of public labor exchange registrants and job training program participants who secure and retain employment.
Results: The goal was fully achieved.
The number of newly registered female apprentices increased by 21 percent over the FY 1999 baseline.
Program Description: Registered apprenticeship combines on-the-job training and related classroom instruction to enable workers to learn the practical and theoretical aspects of a highly skilled occupation.
Registered apprenticeships are career training programs based in an industry which determines the skills its employees will need and trains them to achieve the relevant knowledge.
Joint employer and labor groups, individual employers and/or employer associations voluntarily sponsor the programs.
Completion of a registered apprenticeship program provides a certification of skills that can be recognized throughout the country.
Registered apprenticeship programs offer an important avenue to increase women's access to career employment opportunities in highly paid, specialized occupations.
The Department manages the National Registered Apprenticeship System, approving training programs and registering apprentices in 23 States.
DOL delegates the management authority through Federal-State partnerships with State Apprenticeship Councils/Agencies (SACs) in 28 States, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands.
Analysis of Results: In FY 1999, there were 7,551 newly registered female apprentices.
In FY 2001, there were 9,162, an increase of 21 percent over the two-year period.
Females represented 7.2 percent of all newly registered apprentices in FY 2001.
Approximately 60 percent of apprentices, including minorities and females, fall within the following industries: communication/transportation, construction, health, manufacturing, and other services.
Since FY 1999, there has been a 52.5 percent increase in women registrants within the health sector.
The communication/transportation sector follows with a 15 percent increase.
Manufacturing and construction reflect a 21.5 percent and 7 percent decrease, respectively, in new women registrations.
As the apprentices gain skills, they are compensated through a progressively increasing schedule of wages.
In FY 2001, available data indicate that the average hourly wage for new apprentices was $9.37.
Upon completion of the multi-year apprenticeship training period, apprentices earned an average of $18.74 hourly.
The data for this goal are obtained from the Apprenticeship Information Management System (AIMS) and State data maintained on registered apprentices.
Providing, in collaboration with the National Association of State and Territorial Apprenticeship Directors, technical assistance to existing apprenticeship sponsors to help them meet their obligation to recruit and retain women.
Conducting promotional activities, including: - Presentations to the Workforce Investment Boards emphasizing the need to support community-based organizations and other stakeholders that transition women from welfare to work through registered apprenticeship; and - Using professional public information materials (CD-ROMs, brochures and pamphlets) that feature women in successful apprenticeship occupations.
The Department has also developed cooperative working relationships with Federal and State agencies and community-based organizations to raise awareness of apprenticeship's benefits, to enhance opportunities for women, and to improve coordination of outreach to sponsors.
The Department continued to collaborate with the Women in Apprenticeship and Nontraditional Occupations outreach grantees, which educate women about the registered apprenticeship system.
Women learn where and when to apply for apprenticeship, the commitment and dedication needed to fulfill their apprenticeship obligations, and the requirements needed to meet the minimum qualifications to enter apprenticeship.
DOL also plans a new initiative to increase the capacity of registered programs to improve recruitment, retention and placement of traditionally underrepresented groups within their respective programs.
Some of the strategies include selecting program sponsors who have demonstrated success with underrepresented groups.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The Department has revised its FY 2002 apprenticeship goal to target program expansion by offering apprenticeship as a means for meeting the training needs of business and workers in areas where the program has not been traditionally used.
Areas of emphasis are reflected in the goal’s performance indicators: Increasing the number of new apprenticeship programs; Increasing the number of new businesses involved in apprenticeship; Increasing the number of new apprentices; and Increasing the number of new programs in new and emerging industries.
In the longer term (2-4 years), the Department will add goals for the percentages of enrolled individuals who complete apprenticeship programs and for their average wage gains.
4. Ensure that current apprenticeship database information shared is detailed, accurate and complete, which will enable the Department to evaluate progress in meeting labor market needs.
As reflected in the revised performance indicators, the Department agrees with these recommendations and is developing strategies to address them.
See Appendix 3 for further information regarding this evaluation.
Increase the number of women in the labor force who have greater knowledge that can assist them in improving their pay and benefits, worklife needs, and career advancement as measured by a 5 percent increase.
Results: Performance exceeded the goal.
42,449 women received assistance, surpassing the FY 2001 target of 33,600 by 26 percent.
Program Description: The mission of DOL's Women's Bureau is to advance opportunities for women in the workforce.
As the trend of female participation in the workforce increases, the Department seeks to provide information, skills, and support networks to women attempting to enter or advance in the workforce.
The Department recognizes the need to develop strategic and performance goals that are more outcome-oriented to measure DOL's progress towards enhancing the lives of America's working women and their families.
The Department has discontinued the current goal for FY 2002, and has reflected the Women's Bureau's initiatives as strategies contributing to the achievement of other Departmental program goals for this fiscal year.
Goal 1.1 — FY 2001 Annual Performance Plan)* and women provided information and assistance to gain entry into high-wage careers.
The 42,449 women reached directly, as measured by the Women's Bureau, are a fraction of the estimated one million women reached indirectly through DOL's influence in changing policies and programs as well as other advocacy activities.
For example, with support from the Department, Mississippi established a Commission on the Status of Women with the potential to impact all working women in the State through the development of new employment policies.
Several sources of data are used for collecting performance information: an automated tracking system to collect data for technical assistance provided to women; an evaluation form used at workshops, conferences, symposiums, and forums; contractor reports of results; comment cards distributed with all Departmental publications as well as at some sponsored or co-sponsored events and exhibits; and, unsolicited information, such as letters from constituents.
Strategies: The Department leverages the resources of the Women's Bureau by joining in collaborative ventures and partnerships with public, private, and academic sectors, to reach out to the widest possible audience through activities such as pilot projects, workshops, training sessions, and public forums.
Twenty-seven percent of those veterans and other eligible persons registering for public labor exchange services will enter employment each year through assistance provided by VETS-funded staff and the Wagner-Peyser funded systems.
Results: The goal was fully achieved.
The entered employment rate for veterans assisted by the public employment service system was 33 percent.
Reports have been received from all but five States.)
Program Description: The Department's Veterans' Employment and Training Service (VETS) is responsible for maximizing employment and training services to America's veterans by ensuring priority of service to veterans throughout the public labor exchange.
The Department funds State Disabled Veterans Outreach Program (DVOP) specialists and Local Veterans Employment Representatives (LVERs).
DVOP staff provide a variety of specialized services through the public labor exchange, including career coaching, vocational guidance, assessment, job search and job development services, referral to training, and other supportive activities to those veterans requiring special assistance.
LVERs ensure that veterans receive services on a priority basis in local employment service offices, train local office staff, facilitate job search and Transition Assistance Program workshops, and conduct outreach to employers and community groups on veterans' issues.
Analysis of Results: The ratio of veterans entering employment to those registering with the public labor exchange continues to show an increase due to the renewed focus on the quality and intensity of services provided to veterans to meet their individual needs.
The program staff identify job ready veterans who do not require intensive services and "fast track" these registrants to receive the level of services that will enable them to successfully meet their employment goals.
To disabled veterans or those with significant barriers to employment who may require a broad range of support, DVOP staff offer career coaching, skills assessment, job development, referral to training, follow-up and other intensive services.
The Department is redefining the data collection and reporting process for all public labor exchange measures.
The 33 percent entered employment rate of veterans registered with the public labor exchange significantly understates the actual level of performance because of data collection procedures, which require staff follow-up to confirm employment.
The introduction during the next year of unemployment insurance wage records to track employment results will resolve the program's reporting problems.
In addition, a number of States are in the process of converting their data collection systems to facilitate the collection and reporting of information on the results of job training programs authorized by the Workforce Investment Act.
The automated system changes have delayed receipt of some States' reports (Hawaii, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York and Pennsylvania), requiring the Department to estimate the entered employment rate.
Strategies: LVERs assist transitioning service personnel to identify the credentials and training needed for jobs requiring licenses and/or certifications in a variety of industries that will be available upon their separation from the military service.
In FY 2002, the Department will implement a national marketing program to promote employment opportunities for veterans and to expand VETS' licensing and certification initiatives In a continuing effort to strengthen cooperative working relationships with the State workforce agencies, the Department hosted four regional workshops involving VETS national office staff, VETS field staff, and State agency administrators.
The workshops focused on enhancing the working relationships between the Department and the States, and developing new approaches to increase the number of job applicants who enter employment.
During this period, VETS has also worked closely with the Department's Employment and Training Administration to review and align VETS' performance measures with those of the United States Employment Service, advancing the goal of integrated employment and training services through the One-Stop service delivery system.
Program Evaluation: In FY 2001, the General Accounting Office (GAO) issued two reports on VETS: "Veterans' Employment and Training Service: Proposed Performance Measurement System Improved, but Further Changes Needed," issued in May, and "Veterans' Employment and Training Service: Flexibility and Accountability Needed to Improve Services to Veterans" issued in September.
Both reports focus on the Department's oversight of employment and training services provided to veterans.
The Department has developed new performance outcome measures and monitoring tools for the public labor exchange that replace process measures.
The revised procedures for establishing performance targets and measuring outcomes will go a long way toward resolving issues raised by GAO in their recent audits by significantly improving the programs' emphasis on outcomes.
Appendix 3 provides further information on both reports.
Goals Assessment and Future Plans: The Department has delayed by one year the implementation of new public labor exchange veterans' performance goals, originally planned for FY 2002, to provide the States additional time to develop their data collection systems.
The new goals will closely mirror those prepared by the United States Employment Service, and more complete data available from State Unemployment Insurance wage records will permit the Department to set significantly higher and more realistic performance targets beginning in FY 2003.
Goal 1.1) — FY 2001 Annual Performance Plan "We try to have useful information for everyone," said W Clyde Fazenbaker, a veterans employment representative with the Illinois Department of Employment Security who also serves as a facilitator for the Transition Assistance Program (TAP) workshops at the Great Lakes Naval Training Center north of Chicago.
It's always a challenge because we have people leaving the military at all stages of their lives and they have different needs and expectations about civilian employment."
During the last 10 years, more than 12,000 military personnel have made a successful transition into civilian life after participating in TAP workshops held at Great Lakes.
At least 50 percent of those veterans eligible and other eligible persons enrolled in Homeless Veteran Reintegration Project (HVRP) grants enter employment.
Result: This goal was exceeded.
The entered employment rate in the Homeless Veteran Reintegration Project grants totaled 54 percent.
Program Description: The Homeless Veteran Reintegration Project funds employment, training, and other support services (e.g., medical treatment, counseling, transportation) to enable homeless veterans to reintegrate successfully into the workforce.
Organizations receiving grants under this program typically provide job search, counseling, placement assistance, remedial education, classroom and on-the-job training, and supportive services such as transportation and transitional housing — often in concert with HUD, VA and other service providers.
Grantees are also strongly encouraged to establish linkages with rehabilitation agencies for such services as drug and alcohol counseling.
Analysis of Results: During the past year, the Department has improved the entered employment rate for homeless veterans participating in the Homeless Veteran Reintegration Project by reinforcing this outcome as the primary focus for service providers, while continuing to assist participants to overcome the multiple problems that prevent many homeless veterans from securing and retaining employment.
The program's services now emphasize longer-term job retention and targeted training to match available jobs.
In addition, the Department has developed closer linkages with associated Federal, State, and local community based organizations in order to leverage resources to increase service capacity.
Once on the job, homeless veterans are contacted periodically to ensure their successful transition from homelessness to gainful employment.
These follow- Mark, a four year Army veteran and Baltimore native, bounced around the country for 20 years looking for work, doing odd jobs on fishing boats, oil rigs, and other manual jobs, abusing drugs and alcohol.
After roaming around the country, his mother recommended the Maryland Center for Veterans Education and Training (MCVET).
I came in scared," Mark said.
Now I want to recover."
Mark has earned his GED and moved into a Single Room Occupancy apartment at MCVET.
He currently performs building security for MCVET and has just completed technical school for heating and air conditioning repair and maintenance.
Since 1993, MCVET has been providing a comprehensive series of programs to homeless veterans in Maryland including a day drop-in facility, emergency and transitional housing, health care assessments, job training and placement.
This continuum of care, plus a philosophy that insists that every resident has skills and abilities to achieve independent living, has earned MCVET recognition from the Departments of Labor and Housing and Urban Development as a "National Model" for seamless services to homeless veterans.
The Department will expand its technical assistance efforts to current service providers particularly first-time grantees by: (1) helping them develop linkages with Federal, State, and local community resources; (2) improving reporting systems at the local level; (3) convening an advisory committee composed of experienced grantees; and (4) emphasizing longer term follow up services, job retention, wage enhancement, and improved quality and applicability of training.
In addition, the Department will identify potential new service providers including faith-based and community organizations as potential grantees.
During FY 2002, DOL also plans to assist grantees by orienting them to the problems of homeless veterans including substance abuse, mental and physical disabilities.
In FY 2002, this goal targets an increase to at least 54 percent of veterans enrolled in the Homeless Veteran Reintegration Project entering employment and the establishment of a baseline rate for job retention six months after the homeless veterans enter employment.
Goal 1.1K — FY 2001 Annual Performance Plan)* Staff of the Veterans' Employment and Training Service inform reservists and National Guard members before activation about their civilian reemployment rights and responsibilities.
A federal law guarantees that they can return to their civilian jobs when their military duty is done.
Students at Job Corps Center learn methods to cut and install siding.
Photo by: Michael Carpenter Studies reveal strong correlations among poverty, lack of a high school diploma, joblessness, youth violence, and crime.
DOL administers youth programs under the Workforce Investment Act, including the Job Corps program, the youth formula grant program, the Youth Opportunity Grant program, as well as the recently sunset School-to-Work initiative, and research and demonstration projects that address the persistent unemployment challenges of at-risk youth both in and out-of-school.
DOL's youth programs primarily serve those youth who are out-of-school, and those who are in school but at risk of dropping out of school.
They are intended to provide the necessary support for in-school youth to complete secondary school, move into post-secondary education, and transition into successful careers.
In addition, these programs provide education, training, and support services, to the hardest to serve out-of-school youth providing them with the skills necessary to enter and succeed in today's workforce.
Statistics support the notion that education and training programs are more effective when they are delivered with extensive support services.
DOL has found that the following 10 elements are key ingredients of effective youth programs: (1) tutoring and study skills training; (2) alternative secondary school services; (3) summer employment opportunities linked to academic and occupational learning; (4) paid and unpaid work experiences; (5) occupational skills training; (6) leadership development; (7) supportive services; (8) adult mentoring; (9) comprehensive guidance and counseling; and (10) long-term follow-up.
The Workforce Investment Act substantially reformed the formula-funded youth program to require this comprehensive range of services to meet the employment, career, and educational goals of youth.
In addition to the formula-funded program, the Job Corps administers services in a concentrated manner.
Job Corps provides intensive, long-term training in a residential setting and offers a wide range of supportive services, including a secure, drug-free learning environment, medical care, and career and personal counseling.
The Job Corps has also placed increased emphasis on education—especially the attainment of a high school diploma which has been shown in many studies to increase an individual's employment and earnings potential.
During DOL's recent Summit on the 21st Century Workforce, the Departments of Education and Labor announced a new joint proposal to include establishing a Job Corps distance-learning program through a National High School and forming partnerships between Job Corps centers and public schools.
The decrease in net costs in FY 2000 may be substantially attributed to the transition from the Job Training Partnership Act program to that under the Workforce Investment Act.
The subsequent increase in costs in FY 2001 reflects: (1) the increased spending by the States on program operations as the training tempo increased following the start-up activities in FY 2000, and (2) the start-up of a new youth opportunity grant program funded at $300 million.
According to 2000 Census data, 16.2 percent of children under 18 years old (over five million children) are living in poverty.
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the unemployment rate of 16-24 year olds has increased from 9.1 percent in June 2000 to 10.4 percent through June 2001.
Over the next four years the Census Bureau estimates that the number of 15-24 year olds will increase by over two million.
In order to meet the challenge of serving these young people most in need, DOL will focus its efforts to improve the delivery of youth services under its Workforce Investment Act, Job Corps, and Youth Opportunity Grants programs.
The Department of Labor enters the 21st Century facing many new and continuing challenges.
Preparing all youth for future careers in a rapidly changing, technologically driven economy presents special challenges.
By focusing on a holistic youth development approach to serving young people, DOL youth programs will equip youth with the skills necessary to succeed in the 21st Century workforce.
Of the 14-18 year old youth registered under the WIA youth program, 50 percent will be either employed, in advanced training, post-secondary education, military service or apprenticeships in the third quarter after program exit.
Results: This goal was substantially achieved, with 47.4 percent of youth either employed, in advanced training, post-secondary education, military service or apprenticeships in the third quarter after program exit.
Program Description: Title I of the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) serves eligible low-income youth between the ages of 14–21 who have barriers to employment, including those who have deficiencies in basic skills or meet one or more of these criteria: homeless, a runaway, pregnant, parenting, an offender, school dropout, or a foster child.
The program also serves youth with disabilities and others who may require additional assistance to complete an educational program or to secure and hold employment.
Programs and services are offered to both in and out-of-school youth, with at least 30 percent of the funds being spent on out-of-school youth.
Service strategies prepare youth for post-secondary education by stressing strong linkages between academic and occupational learning, and preparing youth for employment.
Local communities create opportunities for youth by providing required program elements, including: tutoring, alternative schools, summer employment, occupational training, work experience, supportive services, leadership development, mentoring, counseling, and follow-up services.
Analysis of Results: Two factors have had an impact on the Department’s fully achieving this goal: * Results for this goal were computed using preliminary data.
Only 42 of the 53 States and jurisdictions have reported final data, and 7 of the States submitted data that are questionable.
For the most part, reporting problems can be attributed to introducing a new performance data reporting system with the implementation of the Workforce Investment Act this year.
The Department is now working with States experiencing problems to obtain accurate data.
When the States report final data in January 2002, results should better reflect actual performance.
Results include three quarters of participant data from the prior Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) Title II-C youth program.
Data used to compute this measure are based on youth who terminated during the final three quarters of the JTPA program, with only one quarter of data from the WIA program.
Since the JTPA program placed much less emphasis on follow-up and measuring longer-term outcomes, lower retention levels in this first year of the program most likely stem from the JTPA data.
Strategies: The Workforce Investment Act, fully effective in Program Year 2000, introduced substantial reforms for youth programs, placing a stronger emphasis on more comprehensive, long-term activities coupled with at least twelve months of follow-up after program completion.
During this initial period of program implementation, DOL mounted efforts to establish Youth Councils as a new governance body and advocate for youth in the local communities.
DOL also provided technical assistance and training to help the States and local communities implement the newly required WIA youth services as well as the performance management and reporting systems that support the program.
To increase the program’s focus on educational attainment for this age group, the Department has revised the Program Year 2002 performance measures for the 14 to 18 year-old youth served by the Workforce Investment Act.
The new measure targets attainment of a secondary school diploma or equivalent by the first quarter after exit for 51 percent of the 14-18 year-old youth who enter the program without these credentials.
Program Evaluation: The Office of Inspector General issued the final audit report on *Job Training Partnership Act, Title II-C Out-of-School Program Performance* on March 19, 2001.
The OIG reported that: * Positive outcomes for the Title II-C Out-of-School Youth Program were significantly lower than those reported; * Documentation supporting youth employability enhancements was seriously deficient; and * Participants’ post-program earnings were affected by program interventions and level of their participation.
Recommendations included: * Conduct data validation effort as a part of program monitoring; and * Notify all States and the substate grantees of: * Audit results with emphasis on the necessity for States and their grantees to validate outcome data as part of their monitoring program and training provider eligibility determinations; * The importance of documenting not only reported outcomes but also specific services provided, dates services were provided, and actual program exit date; and * The importance of not only enrolling youth in occupational skills training activities, but also finding ways to keep them actively participating in the program to completion, to maximize their post-program earnings.
In response, to OIG’s findings and recommendations, the Department issued comprehensive guidance on youth services and a notice about this audit to the States and substate grantees.
Finally, DOL is undertaking a data validation initiative which is attempting to create both more precise programming specifications and more precise standards for validating data quality.
For further information about this audit, please refer to Appendix 3.
Of the 19-21 year old youth served under the WIA youth program, 70 percent will be employed in the third quarter after program exit.
Results: This goal was achieved.
74.4 percent of 19-21 year-old youth were employed in the third quarter after program exit.
Program Description: Title I of the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) serves eligible low-income youth, between the ages of 14–21, who have barriers to employment, including those who have deficiencies in basic skills or meet one or more of these criteria: homeless, a runaway, pregnant, parenting, an offender, school dropout, or a foster child.
The program also serves youth with disabilities and others who may require additional assistance to complete an educational program or to secure and hold employment.
Programs and services are offered to both in and out-of-school youth, with at least 30 percent of the funds being spent on out-of-school youth.
Service strategies prepare youth for post-secondary education by stressing strong linkages between academic and occupational learning, and preparing youth for employment.
Local communities create opportunities for youth by providing required program elements, including: tutoring, alternative schools, summer employment, occupational training, work experience, supportive services, leadership development, mentoring, counseling, and follow-up services.
Analysis of Results: Results were based on fourth quarter reports as of June 30, 2001.
Final data will be available when States submit the annual report.
That data will contain an additional quarter of wage records so results are expected to vary from this report.
The Department will analyze performance for the first year under the WIA in greater detail when all data are available.
However, the higher rate of success for the 19-21 year old youth may relate to the similarity of WIA performance objectives for the older participants to the measures under its predecessor program, the Job Training Partnership Act.
The newer legislation continues the emphasis on employment for 19-21 year old participants, requiring less programmatic redesign than WIA's focus on education related accomplishments for 14-18 year old participants.
Strategies: The Workforce Investment Act, fully effective in Program Year 2000, introduced substantial reforms for youth programs, placing a stronger emphasis on more comprehensive, long-term activities for youth coupled with at least twelve months of follow-up after program completion.
During this initial period of program implementation, DOL mounted efforts to establish Youth Councils as a new local governance body and advocate for youth in the local communities.
DOL also provided technical assistance and training to help the States and local communities implement the newly required WIA youth services as well as the performance management and reporting systems that support the program.
The Department has revised the performance measures for 19-21 year old youth in the FY 2002 Annual Performance Plan, adding an entered employment target of 63 percent and increasing the target for retention in employment in the third quarter after program exit to 77 percent.
Program Evaluation: The Office of Inspector General issued the final audit report on *Job Training Partnership Act, Title II-C Out-of-School Program Performance* on March 19, 2001.
OIG reported that: * Positive outcomes for the Title II-C Out-of-School Youth Program were significantly lower than those reported; * Documentation supporting youth employability enhancements was seriously deficient; and * Participants' post-program earnings were affected favorably by program interventions and the level of their participation.
Recommendations included: * Conduct data validation effort as a part of program monitoring; and * Notify all States and substate grantees of: * Audit results with emphasis on the necessity for States and their grantees to validate outcome data as part of their monitoring program and training provider eligibility determinations; * The importance of documenting not only reported outcomes but also specific services provided, dates services were provided, and actual program exit date; and * The importance of not only enrolling youth in occupational skills training activities, but also encouraging participation in the program to completion, to maximize their post-program earnings.
In response to OIG's findings and recommendations, the Department issued comprehensive guidance on youth services and a notice about this audit to the States and substate grantees.
Finally, DOL is undertaking a data validation initiative to create both more precise programming specifications and more precise standards for validating data quality.
For further information about this audit, please refer to Appendix 3.
Results: The goal was substantially met.
Ninety-one percent of Job Corps graduates entered employment at an average hourly wage of $7.97 or pursued further education upon completion of the program.
The 90-day job retention rate after initial placement was 67 percent.
Analysis of Results: In Program Year 2000, the Department achieved significant success in placing Job Corps graduates into employment or advanced education.
In addition, the starting average hourly wage for graduates rose to $7.97, exceeding the targeted wage of $7.49 by 48 cents.
The 67 percent of Job Corps graduates who remained in jobs or educational programs after 90 days fell short of the 70 percent target for this new measure.
Several factors contributed to this result: a target that proved overly ambitious in light of economic conditions that could have influenced employers' retention of newly hired workers; the need to enhance services to meet the broader career transition needs of Job Corps graduates; and delays in revising contracts to introduce the new services.
The Office of Job Corps' Management Information System serves as the source for this data.
The reliability of the data compiled through this rigorously designed and comprehensive data collection system is routinely monitored and reviewed at several levels by management and a contractor retained by Job Corps to provide data verification services.
Program Description: The DOL Job Corps program is a highly intensive, primarily residential training program for severely disadvantaged youth ages 16 to 24.
The program provides occupational skills and academic training, social education, and other support to over 70,000 participants at 118 centers.
To realize the objectives of the Workforce Investment Act, the Department has expanded the scope of the Job Corps' program operations to provide support services for up to 12 months after students graduate from the program.
Strategies: To maximize the benefits of the Job Corps program for disadvantaged youth, the Department emphasizes a number of strategies including improving the quality of the education and training programs and tailoring services to the individual needs of each student.
Services that address individual needs may include occupational exploration programs, a comprehensive academic program, competency-based vocation education programs, work-based learning at employer work sites, social and employability skills development, counseling and related support services, driver's education program, health care, child care support at some centers, and post-program placement and support.
Other strategies focus on management and outreach, for example: integrating performance measurement into the competitive procurement process; and maintaining partnerships with communities, employers, and educational institutions; to further enhance the career and educational opportunities for graduates.
In the future, increased emphasis will be placed on providing career development services that meet the broader career transition needs of Job Corps graduates, to ensure their success over the longer term.
During enrollment, expanded services will address areas such as career and personal counseling, increased career exploration options, and integrated academic and vocational training.
After students leave Job Corps, career development services may include placement assistance, transitional support services (housing, transportation, and child care), and linkages with communities, employers, and other partners to assist in graduates' successful transition to the work force.
In the FY 2002 Annual Performance Plan, DOL has increased the target rates for Job Corps graduates who enter employment or education and the average hourly wages, and has added an indicator for attainment of high school diplomas to measure the expected outcomes of an interagency agreement with the Department of Education.
Audits and Evaluations: Mathematica Policy Research, Inc. completed a comprehensive, four year evaluation of the Job Corps program, entitled, *National Job Corps Study: The Impacts of* John is one of more than 700 Job Corps students who participated in one of the more unusual vocational training experiences offered by the Job Corps — fighting fires in America's National forests.
In August, John and his fellow students gathered from 11 Job Corps Centers to assist professional firefighters in fighting the numerous forest fires that threatened our National Forests in the western United States — where summer daytime temperatures of 90-plus degrees were further heated to 110 degrees on the fire lines.
During this month of intense training, John learned the meaning of teamwork, response to supervision, and how to use fire-fighting equipment.
With completion of the program, he is qualified for fire fighting and camp support assignments with the National Forest service.
Job Corps on Participants' Employment and Related Outcomes.
The national longitudinal study concluded that the Job Corps program offers a favorable return on the taxpayers' investment; for example, for every dollar spent for Job Corps, the benefit to society is $2.02.
The study also reported that, by comparison to a sample of disadvantaged youth who did not enroll in the Job Corps program, participants realized significant increases in education and training, including much greater attainment of General Educational Development (GED) and vocational certificates; positive employment and earnings gains; higher paying jobs with more benefits; significant reductions in arrests, convictions and incarcerations; and reduction in the receipt of public assistance.
In Program Year 2000, Job Corps, along with over 100 other Federal Government entities, was selected to participate in the American Customer Satisfaction Index (ACSI), a national measure of citizen satisfaction with Federal services.
The survey questioned a national sample of parents and guardians of Job Corps graduates about their level of satisfaction with the services their children received while enrolled in Job Corps.
Job Corps received a customer satisfaction rating of 80 on the ACSI index, higher than both the Federal Government-wide score (68.6 on the index) and the private sector comparable score (71.2 on the index).
Additionally, parents and guardians demonstrated confidence that Job Corps will continue to be effective in the future with a rating of 86 on the index, and that they would be likely to recommend Job Corps to other parents and guardians.
For more information about this program evaluation, please refer to Appendix 3.
Goal 1.2B — FY 2000 Annual Performance Plan) A Job Corps electrical systems technical instructor trains students on proper methods and tools for preparing coated cable for installation.
Results: This goal was achieved, as 2.9 million secondary students participated in School-to-Work activities.
Program Description: The School-to-Work (STW) Opportunities Act of 1994 established a national framework within which States and local grantees could build on education and workforce development reforms to facilitate the education and career preparation of young people.
The Act's goals are to increase academic achievement, improve technical skills, broaden career opportunities, and prepare all students for high-skill, high-wage occupations.
Students participating in STW classes receive career-related instruction as a complement to their traditional academic classes.
The initiative provides venture capital to support grantees in building their STW systems.
Analysis of Results: Student participation in STW experiences has grown considerably.
During Program Year 2000, the number of students engaged in these activities increased from 1.6 million to 2.9 million.
This increase is most likely due to the establishment of the STW infrastructure.
With program components in place – schools, teachers, counselors, and employers are able to promote the availability of services and activities, thereby increasing student demand.
During the lifetime of the School-to-Work Opportunities, other results reveal that: Goal Assessment: Due to the sunset of the School-to-Work legislation on October 1, 2001, the Department has discontinued this goal.
BLS data are published in a variety of printed and electronic formats.
The BLS Customer Service Guide provides information on how to obtain data and who to ask for more information.
Photo by: Shawn Moore The Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) is responsible for producing some of the Nation's most sensitive and important economic indicators.
These indicators are key sources of data used for economic planning and analysis by the President, Congress, and other Federal policy-makers, as well as public and private institutions.
Seven BLS data series have been designated as Principal Federal Economic Indicators by the Office of Management and Budget: the Employment Situation, Consumer Price Index (CPI), Producer Price Index (PPI), U.S. Import and Export Price Indexes, Employment Cost Index, Real Earnings, and Productivity and Costs.
BLS data are also used by individuals seeking to improve their chances to succeed in the 21st Century workforce.
Rapid technological changes, the globalization of world markets, and profound demographic shifts are reshaping the American workplace and changing the composition of America's workforce.
BLS has been and will continue to be responsive to users' needs to understand these changes by providing timely and accurate economic information in several different formats.
Users can obtain BLS data through the Bureau's web site, a recorded message phone system, or hard copy press releases.
The effectiveness of BLS data is determined through a number of criteria pertaining to timeliness, quality, and access.
BLS also continuously improves its statistical processes and products to ensure that its data and dissemination methods are useful and relevant to its customers.
The CPI program continued updating samples of retail stores and other business establishments (outlets) in the 87 geographic areas for which the CPI is calculated.
This process, known as outlet rotation, introduces new outlets and items into the samples that are used to calculate the CPI, making the CPI more reflective of the current marketplace.
Prices of items from these newly initiated outlets were used in the November 2001 CPI released in December.
BLS began work on a new survey measuring how Americans spend their time.
The American Time Use Survey (ATUS) will measure the amount of time people spend doing various activities, such as paid work, childcare, volunteering, commuting, and socializing.
This information, which currently is lacking for the United States, will be collected starting in 2003, with the first annual estimates being published in 2004.
BLS substantially improved its website.
The primary goal was to make the site faster and easier for users to find needed information.
Feedback from users as well as extensive cognitive testing with librarians, journalists, researchers, and other users led to the launch of the revised site on October 16, 2001.
Some of the new features include more topics on the BLS home page, more maps, and enhanced navigational aids.
In FY 2001, net costs for Outcome Goal 1.3 were $463 million.
BLS' budget and costs grew incrementally from 1999 to 2001.
This trend is attributed primarily to mandatory cost increases; the creation of new programs, such as the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey and the ATUS; and important improvements to the CPI and the PPI.
Substantial challenges face BLS, including the changing economy, maintaining sufficient response levels, and evolving technology.
To respond to the challenge of changing technology, BLS must remain on the cutting edge and adapt emerging technology to BLS processes, such as an Internet data collection facility, while maintaining a steady flow of economic information.
Keeping abreast of improvements and using these improvements to deliver data in a more timely and useful manner are essential ingredients to providing the quality of service our customers expect.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics reports performance for this goal using such measures as timeliness, output, quality, relevancy, accuracy, and access.
Extracted from those measures and presented here are the following measures: timeliness, quality, and access.
The first, timeliness, addresses how often the Department's Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) meets the release dates in the published schedule of its Principal Federal Economic Indicators.
The second measure is reliability.
Decision-makers need to know how well BLS statistics reflect the economic activity described.
The third, access, is measured by customer usage of the BLS Internet site.
FY 2001 Results: The goal was achieved.
Performance measures were fully met for all three of the goal's dimensions.
Analysis of Results: The Department met the timeliness measures for all programs.
An evaluation of the Office of Publications and Special Studies report of release dates against the release schedule of BLS Principal Federal Economic Indicators provides the data for measuring the results of the timeliness indicator.
The report includes the results of four of the seven Principal Indicators — the Employment Situation, Consumer Price Index (CPI), Producer Price Index (PPI), and Employment Cost Index (ECI).
The Department scheduled 40 releases in 2001, comprised of quarterly releases of the ECI and separate monthly releases of the Employment Situation, CPI, and PPI.
The Department made no changes to its strategies for achieving this performance measure.
Analysis of Results: The four economic indicators met the established quality targets.
In order to increase the relevance of BLS information, BLS consults with advisory councils and other researchers.
In FY 2001, BLS continued the second year of the Federal Economics Statistics Advisory Committee (FESAC), composed of Dave Adams, the webmaster for the Youth Motivation Task Force (YMTF) in Orange County, California, regularly downloads data from DOU's Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) website to support the YMTF's goal of reducing the high school dropout rate.
One strategy the YMTF uses is to send volunteers, like Andrew Gallagher, pictured here, into high school classrooms to discuss the value of education using information on how the unemployment rate and earnings differ by educational attainment.
These volunteers also use household expenditure data to discuss the cost of living.
Mr. Adams says, "One of our major problems has been the gathering of reliable/accurate ... statistics. With the advent of the Internet, we discovered last year that the Bureau of Labor Statistics and the Monthly Labor Review: The Editor's Desk is a daily "e-newsletter" that highlights interesting BLS data and can be found on the BLS website at: http://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/tedhome.htm.
Analysis of Results.
The average number of Internet site user sessions each month serves as a proxy measure of the number of customers accessing BLS information.
In FY 2000 and 2001, the number of user sessions increased 33 and 30 percent, respectively.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The performance goals for the timeliness and quality dimensions remain the same in FY 2002 except for the addition of another Principal Federal Economic Indicator, the U.S. Import and Export Price Indexes.
The access measure will change to reflect the continued improvements to the BLS Internet site.
A new performance indicator for FY 2002 is: Improve the BLS Internet site, including output functionality for users retrieving data.
For example, users will have the ability to obtain data from the website and view it in a graphical format, which will provide a more intuitive visual mechanism for recognizing long-term trends and anomalies in large data sets.
Audits and Evaluations: OIG completed an evaluation of the International Price System mandated under the Government Information Security Reform Act.
The findings and recommendations demonstrate that the appropriate management controls are in place to ensure the timely and accurate processing of data.
A General Accounting Office (GAO) review completed of the Consumer Price Index raised concerns about oversight of commodity analysts' substitution determinations, but did not identify errors or inconsistencies that materially affected the calculation of the Index.
BLS continues implementing a periodic review process to improve the consistency and accuracy of analysts' decisions in response to the GAO review.
Appendix 3 provides further details on the evaluations.
Douglas West, Certified Purchasing Manager (C.P.M.), the Operations Purchasing Manager for Opryland Hotel in Nashville, Tennessee, has saved his employer hundreds of thousands of dollars by using Producer Price Index (PPI) statistics from the DOL's Bureau of Labor Statistics to negotiate contracts.
After establishing the initial terms of a contract, Mr. West periodically reviews these terms against the changes to the market prices of raw materials and final products, as shown by the PPI, to determine if he needs to re-negotiate cost adjustments under contract provisions.
For example, he may re-negotiate a contract for both tissue based on cost changes to the final product or to the raw materials (such as recycled waste paper or virgin fiber).
He sees the PPI data as a useful tool in ensuring fairness for both parties of a contract.
PPI information can be found on the BLS website at: http://www.bls.gov/ppi.
This goal measures achievement of significant milestones that reflect the Department’s Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) commitment to continuous improvement of its statistical processes and products.
Results: This goal was not achieved.
The Department achieved four of the six milestones for improving the accuracy, efficiency, and relevancy of the economic measures, but did not meet all FY 2001 milestones established for the American Time Use Survey and the Producer Price Index.
ATUS:* Development of the new American Time Use Survey (ATUS) began with the Department completing cognitive testing on the survey elements; collecting and analyzing field test data; and finalizing the survey’s core questionnaire.
The Department expects to receive the Office of Management and Budget’s clearance of the survey in FY 2002 rather than FY 2001 as originally planned, but this delay should not postpone the start of full survey production in 2003.
LAUS:* To fulfill requirements of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 that calls for continuous improvement of the employment statistics system, the Department is enhancing the Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS) program with several activities including the creation of a research database for modeling sub-State labor market areas.
DOL has signed agreements with the States to obtain county unemployment insurance claims data to include in the research database.
PPI:* The Producer Price Index (PPI) program began work to establish output price indexes for selected nonresidential buildings and construction trades.
Currently no reliable aggregate output price data exist for the nonresidential construction sector of the U.S. economy to permit accurate measurement of real output and productivity.
DOL researched sample frames; consulted with potential users and project partners, including the Bureau of Economic Analysis and the Census Bureau, on publication goals and data needs; and researched industry marketing and discounting practices.
The Department encountered unanticipated delays in purchasing the data needed for the research phase of the project, and will reschedule future activities in parallel rather than consecutively in order to keep the project on schedule to publish the first of the nonresidential construction indexes in 2005, as originally planned.
The last of the construction indexes remains scheduled for 2008 publication.
CPI:* As part of a multiyear effort to improve the timeliness and accuracy of the Consumer Price Index (CPI), in FY 2001, the CPI program had underway updating of retail store and other establishment samples in which prices are collected in all 87 CPI pricing areas.
The new rotation design allows some new outlets in every geographic area to be included in the CPI every year in order to reflect changes in stores and items in the marketplace.
Employment, Hours, and Earnings:* To improve the accuracy of survey estimates of the Current Employment Statistics program, DOL is moving from a quota-based to a probability-based sample.
In contrast to quota sampling, probability sampling uses randomized selection to ensure a representative cross section of the population is sampled.
Probability sampling will significantly reduce the risk of non-sampling error or bias in the estimates.
The three-year phased implementation began in June 2000 with the publication of wholesale trade estimates computed under the new design.
In FY 2001, DOL converted all Current Employment Statistics series for industries that produce goods to the new design, providing for 23 percent of all payroll employees to be covered by the published national estimates based on the probability-based sample and estimator.
Consumer Prices and Price Indexes:* DOL continued work on improving CPI quality adjustment measures to account for changes in the quality of consumer goods and services and for the emergence of new goods and services in the marketplace.
Although work was slowed in early 2001 due to staff turnover, work resumed by the end of the year on reviewing and evaluating data collected in 2000.
Goal Assessment: The performance indicators for this goal in FY 2002 are: * Publish the first superlative Consumer Price Index (C-CPI-U).
Beginning with January 2002 data, update expenditure weights in the Consumer Price Index every two years.
Complete a full field test of the operational computer-assisted data collection (CADC) system for Consumer Price Index items other than rent.
Reweight Producer Price Indexes using 1997 shipment values and updated input/output ratios.
Reweight Import and Export Price Indexes using 2000 trade values.
Begin releasing monthly data as a developmental series for the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey.
Publish the first Covered Employment and Wages data (ES-202) under the North American Industry Classification System.
Produce measures of labor productivity and unit labor costs for 15 additional service-producing industries.
Program Evaluations: Program evaluations pertaining to the Department's economic information are described in the narrative for goal 1.3A.
Goal 1.3B — FY 2001 Annual Performance Plan)* The National Longitudinal Surveys (NLS) data, produced by DOL's Bureau of Labor Statistics, are a rich source of information about the American labor market.
Researchers like James J. Heckman, Henry Schultz Distinguished Service Professor of Economics at the University of Chicago, use these data to study the kinds of decisions that private citizens make over the course of their lives and the long-term consequences of those decisions.
Using the NLS data, Professor Heckman determined that a General Education Development (GED) certificate does not provide the same opportunities as a high school diploma.
Further, he found GED recipients are only marginally more successful than high school dropouts, a finding that has prompted policymakers to debate the merits of obtaining GEDs and to investigate ways to make high school education more accessible to at-risk young people.
Professor Heckman also used NLS data to demonstrate sophisticated statistical methods he developed that are now widely used by social science researchers.
For these contributions to the theory and methods of studying pressing social issues, Professor Heckman received the Nobel Prize in Economics in 2000.
NLS information can be found on the BLS website at: http://www.bls.gov/nls.
Promote the Economic Security of Workers and Families DOL is committed to promoting the economic security of workers and their families by protecting workers' hours, wages, and other job conditions; providing unemployment compensation and other benefits when workers are unable to work; and expanding, enhancing, and protecting pension, health care, and other benefits.
Priorities are to increase compliance with minimum wage and overtime requirements; promote secure retirements for working Americans; provide more pensions for women and employees of small businesses; broaden access to health care; and shorten periods of unemployment in those areas suffering from rapid economic change.
Virginia Employment Commission and DOL personnel staff a temporary site at Reagan National Airport to accept unemployment applications for airport workers unemployed as the result of the September 11 attacks.
PWBA pamphlets provide information to the public on retirement and health benefits planning.
The Department of Labor administers and enforces more than 180 Federal laws.
These mandates and their governing regulations cover over 10 million employers and 130 million workers in various workplace activities.
DOL enters the 21st Century having recently celebrated both the 63rd anniversary of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), which established minimum wage, overtime standards and child labor restrictions, and the 27th anniversary of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), which protects the integrity of private pension, health, and other employee benefit plans.
While these hallmark worker protection laws have endured, many new and difficult issues have arisen as dynamic and complex changes transform America's workforce.
In furthering the economic security and welfare of workers and families, the Department utilizes a multi-pronged approach, which includes compliance assistance, education, private/public partnerships and, when that fails, a balanced consistent enforcement program involving all segments of business and industry—contractors, manufacturers, retailers, consumers, worker advocacy groups, financial and health care communities and unions.
The DOL organizations dedicated to achieving this goal are the Employment Standards Administration and the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration.
Both agencies have developed compliance assistance programs that encourage up-front compliance through public education and outreach, as opposed to traditional after-the-fact enforcement techniques.
In addition, significant resources are devoted to increasing public access to vital information used to monitor and secure entitlements.
An informed public enables individuals and practitioners to better understand their rights under the law.
Each year, the Department distributes thousands of publications and pamphlets that provide basic information about voluntary compliance, and staff conduct dozens of educational meetings, conferences, and seminars, as part of the DOL outreach effort.
More recently, the Department has experimented with voluntary correction programs that have been well received by the regulated community, such as the Voluntary Fiduciary Correction Program and the Delinquent Filer Voluntary Compliance program.
In support of the enforcement of laws designed to guarantee an honest day’s pay for an honest day’s work, DOL engages in partnerships with employer associations, multi-establishment employers, commercial consumers, the States, and intermediaries – non-governmental agencies and organizations such as faith-based groups, unions, “English as a Second Language” groups, and other social service organizations with direct contact with workers, especially low-wage workers.
DOL has an ongoing relationship with the National Interfaith Committee for Worker Justice, and projects—such as including labor and safety issues in church bulletin inserts—are underway.
The FY 2001 net costs for Outcome Goal 2.1, at $299 million, represent the compliance assistance and enforcement efforts of both the Employment Standards Administration, which is responsible for upholding minimum wage, overtime and other workplace standards and the safeguarding of union democracy; and the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, which is responsible for oversight of pension and health benefit plans.
The increase in costs addressed, in part: expanding responsibilities in the health care arena resulting from laws passed between 1996 and 1998; enhanced electronic filing and compliance assistance for the ERISA Filing Acceptance System; continuing implementation of a nationwide toll-free help line to provide employers and employees with information about Federal minimum wage, overtime, child labor, and record keeping requirements; and continuing e-government improvements, including electronic filing of union annual financial reports and an internet-based public disclosure system for union reports.
The primary challenge for DOL’s worker protection agencies in the 21st Century will be to ensure that the protections are appropriate for and keep pace with the changes occurring in the American workforce.
Virtual workplaces, aging workers, increased numbers of women and minorities in the workforce, immigration, organized labor, the growth of small businesses, and the ongoing shift from a manufacturing to a service economy will all be important factors as U.S. businesses strive to comply with worker protection laws in the future.
The use of technology assists the Department to more effectively inform employers of their obligations and to protect workers’ benefits and rights.
For example, e-government initiatives provide more readily accessible disclosure of public records; technical assistance on workplace-related issues such as family and medical leave, minimum wage, and overtime; and electronic form filing such as the ERISA Filing Acceptance System.
In addition, toll-free customer service “Help Desks” provide new opportunities for interactive assistance between the Department and its customers.
Results: This performance goal was not achieved.
Compliance with labor laws and standards met the performance targets in the New York City garment industry and in the agricultural commodity of lettuce.
Compliance improved in the residential health care (assisted living facilities) industry and in the agricultural commodity of onions, but fell two and four percentage points short of the goals, respectively.
Compliance remained relatively steady in the San Francisco garment industry and declined in the agricultural commodity of tomatoes.
Program Description: DOL’s Employment Standards Administration (ESA) is responsible for administering and enforcing laws that establish the minimally acceptable standards for wages and working conditions in this country.
These labor standards statutes, including the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), and the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (MSPA), provide critical protections for low-wage workers and the working poor, and the goal measures progress toward improving conditions in industries with significant historical levels of non-compliance with the standards.
Analysis of Results – Background: The labor standards compliance problems in the targeted industries are among the most pervasive and serious in the U.S.
The factors that led the Department to target these industries – increasing reliance on immigrant and minority workforces, intense external competitive pressures and high turnover rates – remain prevalent today, and the current compliance levels reflect their impact.
The major garment centers in the U.S. are in New York City, southern California and the San Francisco Bay area.
According to BLS data, in October 2001, the garment industry employed approximately 542,000 workers in the U.S.—down from just over one million in January 1990.
These garment workers are mostly immigrant (both legal and illegal), vulnerable to exploitation and unlikely to complain about unsafe working conditions and failure to receive wages.
The 542,000 figure does not, however, include what is believed to be a relatively large number of workers in the underground economy – especially in New York City and southern California where the garment industry is most unstable.
Former garment workers own many of the contractor shops in these areas, and due to their lack of management knowledge, rarely remain in business for a sustained period of time.
The manufacturers that contract with them are now being adversely impacted by fierce competition, demands for quick turnaround for goods and the pressures of the global economy.
Instability also increasingly characterizes the agricultural labor market.
The U.S. is harvesting more labor-intensive crops, such as vegetables, fruits, nuts, and berries, than ever before.
In many other industries, wages increase with sales and productivity gains, but agricultural worker earnings have decreased in real terms (in 1998 dollars) over the last ten years.
By most measures, farm workers were worse off in the late 1990s than they were ten years earlier.
Farm workers found fewer weeks of employment, earned less per hour in real terms, continued to have poverty level earnings, and less frequently used public assistance programs designed to ease the effects of poverty on the working poor.
The industry also has experienced increased competition from newcomers willing to work for much less and under much harsher conditions than those they replaced.
Community-based, residential home-like facilities that provide "custodial" as opposed to "medical" care typically comprise the residential care segment of the long-term care industry.
The industry employs some 500,000 workers, and unlike the more institutional-based nursing home segment, the residential care industry tends to employ fewer workers per facility.
Over 70 percent of employees are women and more than one-fourth are minorities.
Pay arrangements are often informal and may include only the provision of room and board for individuals who stay overnight to provide on-site assistance as needed.
Payroll records are often non-existent.
Many smaller operations are unfamiliar with the Federal minimum wage and overtime requirements.
An industry-specific analysis of the results follows.
Analysis of Results: The 2001 San Francisco garment investigation-based survey found 75 percent of employers in compliance with both the minimum wage and overtime requirements – not a statistically significant change since the prior survey in 1999 when the level of compliance was determined at 74 percent, but a nearly 20 percentage point increase since 1995.
As with earlier surveys, compliance with minimum wage requirements was higher than with overtime.
Ninety-four percent of the firms investigated complied with the minimum wage provision while 75 percent of firms complied with the FLSA overtime provision.
Although the level of compliance remained virtually the same as in 1999, albeit at a high rate as compared to New York City and southern California, the survey in 2001 found indications of improvement, especially for the low-wage production workers (those who sew, press and trim apparel goods).
In 2001, 88 percent of the shops with low-wage production workers were in compliance as compared to 81 percent in 1999.
In addition, the data show that 96 percent of employees were paid correctly as compared to 87 percent in 1997.
Over time, the severity of the violations has significantly decreased.
For example, over a six-year period of time, the average amount of back wages per case has dropped from more than $1,200 to about $190.
Since 1995, the level of compliance with both minimum wage and overtime requirements has increased by more than 30 percent.
In 2001, the average back wages due per employee was $212, down from $274 in 1999.
These improvements evidence the effectiveness of the Department’s multi-prong strategy of compliance assistance, partnerships, collaborative efforts, and enforcement.
Strategies: Given the improvement in the level of compliance among San Francisco garment shops since 1995 and the reduced severity of the violations, the Department’s performance goals in FY 2002 and beyond will not focus on the San Francisco garment industry.
DOL has developed a program in FY 2002 to maintain or improve the current level of compliance, continue aggressive compliance assistance for the industry, and focus enforcement on repeat and willful violators.
The Department will also continue to work with the State of California under the Targeted Industries Partnership Program (TIPP) to explore opportunities for joint compliance assistance and outreach initiatives.
Analysis of Results: The 2001 New York City garment survey found 52 percent of employers in compliance with both minimum wage and overtime requirements – an increase from 37 percent in 1997 and 35 percent in 1999.
As with earlier surveys, compliance with minimum wage requirements was higher than with overtime.
Eighty-seven percent of the firms investigated were in compliance with minimum wage provisions while 52 percent of firms were in compliance with the FLSA overtime provisions.
The 2001 survey found a significant improvement in compliance.
The level of compliance with both the minimum wage and overtime requirements is 17 percentage points or 50 percent higher in 2001 than in 1999.
Compliance with the minimum wage requirement increased 25 percent from 69 percent in 1999 to 87 percent in 2001.
The average back wages due per shop with minimum wage or overtime violations dropped 50 percent to $6,042 in 2001 from $12,099 in 1999.
Similarly, the average back wages due per employee dropped 50 percent to $251 in 2001 from $516 in 1999.
The survey also found that more garment workers are being paid correctly.
The percent of employees overall paid correctly has increased by nearly two-thirds between 1997 (38 percent) and 2001 (62 percent).
The percent of employees paid minimum wage correctly increased to 93 percent in 2001 from 83 percent in 1999.
Also, the percent of employees paid overtime correctly increased from 42 percent in 1999 to 62 percent in 2001.
Strategies: The Department will continue with its multi-prong strategy in the New York City garment industry.
Specifically, in FY 2002, the Department is planning to continue its program of visiting newly registered contractor shops to offer compliance assistance.
DOL will also continue to work with the New York City Apparel Industry Compliance Partnership, a group of manufacturers and others attempting initiatives such as training of contractor shops.
In addition, to promote compliance monitoring, a strategy that has proven to raise compliance rates by as much as 28 percentage points, the Department will conduct directed investigations of manufacturers which were previously investigated for violations of the “hot goods” provision of the FLSA or which have a history of contracting with chronic violators.
Shops that are prior violators will be a focus of the Department’s attention.
Where appropriate, serious and repeat violations will be considered for litigation.
Finally, the Department will continue its coordination with the New York State Department of Labor and the New York State Attorney General’s office, and explore opportunities for referring egregious violations for prosecution under State law.
Analysis of Results: ESA found compliance in the agricultural commodity of lettuce to be 76 percent, exceeding the performance goal of 70 percent.
Unlike other hand harvested crops, a few large shippers/packers or brokers control the agricultural commodity of lettuce beginning with the initial planting and continuing through final harvest.
The concentration of the shippers/packers – primarily in California – aided in the dissemination of compliance assistance and permitted DOL to focus its compliance intervention strategies in a more direct fashion.
The control exerted by the shippers/packers, in turn, may have contributed largely to the increase in compliance rates found this fiscal year in the lettuce crop.
Analysis of Results: Compliance with both the minimum wage and overtime requirements increased to 43 percent; however the goal of increasing compliance to 47 percent was not achieved.
In the agricultural industry, the Department also oversees provisions of the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act, such as housing and When investigations of 10 nursing homes in Indiana revealed that for a variety of reasons, all were failing to pay overtime, ESA’s Wage and Hour Division took action.
Working in collaboration with the Continuing Education Division of Indiana University, Wage and Hour personnel prepared a compliance assistance workshop for nursing home administrators covering such topics as minimum wage, overtime pay, and the child labor requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA).
Flyers advertising the workshop were sent to area nursing homes, and a news release reporting the results of the investigations and of Wage and Hour’s intent to investigate violators in the future was sent to county officials and the local nursing home association.
Promoting the workshop produced a high level of interest.
The workshop was attended by more than 20 nursing home administrators, and compliance rates improved significantly.
A recent reinspection of nursing homes in the same geographical area found 100 percent compliance with the FLSA.
In the 1999 survey, the clear majority of violators – 25 out of the 26 establishments found in violation (96 percent) – had violated at least one of the critical MSPA provisions, and this rate decreased to 76 percent (28 out of 37 establishments found in noncompliance) in 2001, an improvement of 20 percentage points.
Compliance with the wage provisions also increased (93 percent of establishments paid workers in compliance in 2001 compared to 86 percent in 1999), and with the FLSA child labor provisions – 98 percent compliance in 2001 compared to 96 percent in 1999.
Analysis of Results: Although the compliance survey in the tomato sector found a 45 percent level of compliance, significantly below the 80 percent target, some progress had occurred.
An analysis of the findings reveals that of the 33 establishments found in violation, only seven of those (21 percent) had multiple MSPA violations.
Ninety-three percent of the establishments paid employees in compliance and, of those employers who provided transportation, 95 percent provided safe vehicles that were driven by properly licensed drivers.
Further analysis of the compliance baseline of 75 percent for the tomato sector, first established in 1996, has raised questions about the validity of this measure, which served as the basis for the FY 2001 target.
The 1996 data were developed prior to measurement standards and criteria implemented in 1997.
The Department therefore will use the compliance rate found in the 2001 tomato survey as the current baseline level of compliance for future measurement.
Strategies: In each commodity, the Department will provide enhanced compliance assistance, and continue to collaborate with employer organizations, employee groups and other interested or affected groups to identify and communicate issues, including best practices.
To further impact compliance, DOL will better focus its efforts and use innovative methods of influencing the behavior of “bad actors,” especially those employers who egregiously violate the law or have a history of violations.
A progressive enforcement strategy – which includes increased focus on report violators, stepped-up civil monetary penalties commensurate with the seriousness of the violation(s), revocation of Farm Labor Contractor licenses, use of the joint employment principles and use of the FLSA’s “hot goods” provisions to influence those who do business with the “bad actors” – will be employed to provide a deterrent to violation of the laws affecting farm workers.
The Department will continue its partnering with State government agencies—including State departments of labor—to more effectively provide compliance assistance to employers and employees.
In addition, DOL will explore expansion of existing partnerships and creation of new partnerships to facilitate cooperation between the agencies and better leverage limited resources in order to positively impact compliance levels.
Finally, specific compliance problems in the agriculture sector will be analyzed in detail by commodity and by geographic area to better target compliance assistance efforts on the issues most affecting employers and employees.
Analysis of Results: The 2001 residential living survey found 60 percent of employers in compliance – an increase of 3 percentage points over the baseline level of 57 percent set in 1998.
Although the goal of increasing compliance by five percentage points was not met, the results show positive movement and – with continuing emphasis on compliance in the industry – hold the promise for long-term improvements.
As with the FY 1998 baseline survey, the employers most frequently violated the overtime provisions.
In FY 2001, 63 percent of the facilities complied with the FLSA overtime provisions – a slight increase over the baseline level of 61 percent overtime compliance.
Ninety-three (93) percent of facilities complied with the minimum wage standards – an eight percent increase over the 85 percent level of minimum wage compliance in FY 1998.
Strategies: Given the increasing trends in compliance demonstrated by the FY 2001 results, the Department will continue its balanced approach of compliance assistance, enforcement and partnership/collaborative efforts in the residential living segment of the health care industry.
Particular emphasis will be directed to increasing compliance with FLSA record keeping requirements, which contribute in large part to the types of overtime violations found.
The Department will also focus additional compliance assistance efforts on facilities in those geographic areas that demonstrated higher levels of non-compliance.
Working with State licensing agencies, DOL will also disseminate compliance assistance materials to residential facilities.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The Department is in the process of identifying performance goals and indicators that more comprehensively measure the impact of the employment standards programs, including interventions resulting from the complaints of workers in all industries as well as special initiatives aimed at improving conditions for low-wage workers.
With these objectives in mind, ESA developed new performance goals for FY 2002: Covered American workplaces legally, fairly, and safely employ and compensate their workers as indicated by: * Reducing employer violation recidivism; and * Increasing compliance in industries with chronic violations.
Program Description: DOL's Employment Standards Administration (ESA) administers and enforces laws that establish the minimally acceptable standards for wages and working conditions in this country.
These labor standards statutes – including the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), which establishes the minimum wage, overtime standards, and child labor restrictions – serve to protect the most vulnerable workers in the workplace: low-wage workers and the working poor.
Analysis of Results: This goal measures the effectiveness and lasting value of the Department's intervention strategies and represents the level of improvement from non-compliance.
The same extrinsic factors and industry dynamics that impact overall compliance also contribute to the level of compliance among prior violators.
Moreover, the subset of the industry measured for recidivism may display characteristics unlike the general industry universe.
For example, in the New York City garment industry, prior violators tend to operate so close “to the margin” that they either violate the law or go out of business – an economic condition that does not necessarily characterize the New York City garment-manufacturing universe as a whole.
Nevertheless, DOL has shown measurable increases in compliance among those previously investigated and found in violation in each of the targeted industries where a statistically valid sample was available.
In New York City garment, for example, 36 percent of the contractor shops did change their employment behavior and began paying their workers in compliance with the law.
In the residential living industry, where many prior violators had been unaware of the FLSA and Results: This performance goal was not achieved.
Compliance improved among reinvestigated employers in the residential health care (assisted living facilities) industry and declined among reinvestigated employers in the New York garment industry.
No determination was made regarding the level of compliance for previous violators in the agricultural commodities of tomato, onion, and lettuce because of difficulties in obtaining a statistically valid sample.
The previously determined baseline level of compliance for reinvestigated employers in the San Francisco garment industry was found to be invalid.
An industry specific analysis of the results follows.
Analysis of Results: Overall the compliance level for employers previously found in violation was 76 percent.
This is the first year that a statistically valid baseline of compliance was determined.
Strategies: Given the improvement in the level of compliance among San Francisco garment shops since 1995 and the less serious nature of the violations, the Department's performance goals in FY 2002 and beyond will not focus on the San Francisco garment industry.
DOL has developed a program in FY 2002 to maintain or improve the current level of compliance, continue aggressive compliance education for the industry, and focus enforcement on repeat and willful violators.
Analysis of Results: The overall compliance level for employers previously found in violation was 36 percent, down from 52 percent in 1999.
Although disappointing, this drop in compliance is not surprising.
Directed investigations since the 1999 survey, although not statistically valid, have shown similar low rates of compliance among recidivists.
These investigations, as well as the survey, demonstrated that a number of the contractor shops previously found in violation by the Department were not in business six to twelve months later.
Contractor shops in New York City operate "on the margin" in an industry already characterized as unstable.
Many of these shops cannot afford to pay the required wages, particularly overtime, and still remain competitive and in business.
As a result, they typically go out of business.
Those that stay in operation generally continue with their non-compliant behavior to remain competitive.
Strategies: DOL will continue with its multi-prong strategy in the New York City garment industry.
Specifically, in FY 2002, the Department is continuing its program of visiting newly registered contractor shops to offer compliance assistance.
DOL will also continue its collaborative efforts with the New York City Apparel Industry Compliance Partnership, a group of manufacturers and others, engaged in initiatives such as training of contractor shops.
In addition, to promote compliance monitoring, DOL will conduct directed investigations of manufacturers which were previously investigated for violations of the "hot goods" provision of the FLSA or which have a history of contracting with contractor shops that are chronic violators.
In addition, the Department will work with contractor shops to increase the number that maintain the required payroll records.
Failure to maintain proper records often contributes to violations – particularly overtime.
Finally, DOL will continue its coordination with the New York State Department of Labor and the New York State Attorney General's office and explore opportunities for referring egregious violations for prosecution under State law.
Where appropriate, serious and repeat violations will be considered for litigation by the Department.
Analysis of Results: No determination could be made regarding the level of compliance for previous violators because the number of employers investigated was insufficient to yield a statistically valid result.
Strategies: The Department has prepared new performance goals to comprehensively assess improved compliance among all employers that previously violated labor standards, and factored the measurement problems reflected in this section into the development of the new indicators.
Analysis of Results: Of prior violators investigated in the FY 2001 survey, 69 percent were in compliance with the minimum wage, overtime and child labor provisions.
This represents an increase of 14 percentage points over the 55 percent baseline level of compliance among prior violators found in FY 1998.
Strategies: Given the increasing trends in compliance demonstrated by the FY 2001 results, DOL will continue its balanced approach of compliance assistance, enforcement and partnership/collaborative efforts in the residential living segment of the health care industry.
Particular emphasis will be directed to increasing compliance with FLSA record keeping requirements, which contribute, in large part, to the types of overtime violations found, and compliance assistance will be directed to those geographic areas that demonstrated higher levels of non-compliance.
The Department will also work with State licensing agencies to disseminate compliance assistance materials to residential facilities.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The Department is in the process of identifying performance goals and indicators that more comprehensively measure the impact of the employment standards programs, including reducing employer recidivism in all industries as well as special initiatives aimed at improving conditions for low-wage workers.
The Department will discontinue reporting on employer recidivism by specific low-wage industries, but will gather and analyze this data to assist in the development of more effective compliance assistance program and to pursue aggressive enforcement action against serious and repeat violators, as appropriate.
Goal 2.1D — FY 2001 Annual Performance Plan) Photo from: DOL's Eyewire Images photography library.
Results: This performance goal was not achieved.
For FY 2001, 83.1 percent of unions with annual receipts greater than $200,000 timely filed union annual financial reports for public disclosure access.
Program Description: Through the administration and enforcement of the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act, DOL's Employment Standards Administration (ESA) safeguards union democracy and financial integrity.
Making union financial reports available for public disclosure is central to this mission.
Analysis of Results: During FY 2001 DOL introduced a new format for the filing of union financial reports to facilitate the implementation of an Internet public disclosure system scheduled for early in calendar year 2002.
The new system will offer ready Internet access to unions' financial statements for their members and others with an interest in the financial activities of labor unions, and will enable the unions to file the required reports electronically, reducing administrative burdens and expediting filing procedures.
However, the new reporting forms caused a set-back, expected to be temporary, in previous gains in timely report filing by labor organizations as union filers experienced some problems adjusting to the revised formats.
The new electronic reporting format to be initiated in calendar year 2002 should eliminate the problems encountered in FY 2001 and facilitate reporting for unions.
DOL will continue efforts with liaison and compliance assistance to further the objectives of timely and accurate union financial reporting.
Strategies: The Department routinely employs a variety of liaison and compliance assistance strategies to achieve timely reporting by unions.
For example, the Department contacts unions delinquent in filing the prior year's reports to remind them of their obligations for timely financial reporting, and establishes liaison with a number of international unions to encourage their assistance in promoting timely report-filing by their affiliates.
In FY 2001, special contacts were made to inform union filers about use of the new union annual report forms, including special liaison and compliance assistance contacts with officials of approximately 20 major international unions.
The Department will emphasize compliance assistance in FY 2002 to further improve the timeliness of union financial reporting.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: Timely reporting by unions for public disclosure availability remains an important DOL objective.
The Department will continually review strategies to improve the timely filing rate, and plans to implement a goal to improve the completeness and accuracy of filed reports.
In addition, DOL plans to expand the goal to address in a more comprehensive manner the program's missions to ensure union democracy and financial integrity.
Increase by 2.5% per year (to 1,725) the number of closed fiduciary investigations of employee pension plans where assets are restored, prohibited transactions are corrected, participant benefits are restored, or plan assets are protected from mismanagement and risk of future loss is reduced.
Results: The Department exceeded this goal, increasing by 15 percent (to 1,942) the number of pension cases where assets were restored, prohibited actions corrected, participant benefits were restored, or plan assets were protected from mismanagement and the risk of future loss was reduced.
Program Description: When a fiduciary's mismanagement of assets or imprudent administration places pension benefits at risk, the Department's Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration (PWBA) acts on behalf of plan beneficiaries to minimize potential loss or to make the plan whole through the restoration of assets.
Increasing the number of cases with fiduciary results demonstrates the Department's success in protecting plan assets.
Analysis of Results: During the past year, the Department continued to improve the quality of cases selected for investigation as demonstrated by the continuing increases in the number of cases closed with fiduciary results, a primary strategy for achieving the goal.
In FY 2001, the Department restored approximately $517 million to pension plans as a result of its investigative efforts — assets that, in the absence of investigative efforts, would have been lost to participants and beneficiaries.
Monetary recoveries may fluctuate significantly and past performance cannot predict future performance in any given year, but recoveries have followed a generally upward trend over the past several years.
PWBA's Enforcement Management System (EMS) provides the data used to measure the achievement of this goal, and the Department has confidence in the accuracy and reliability of the data.
OIG conducts regular reviews of the EMS system and PWBA has continually received high marks for its system checks and balances to ensure high quality data.
In addition, individuals not involved directly with the inputting of data or the investigation must approve case openings.
Cases with monetary results ultimately receive scrutiny throughout the management hierarchy up to and including national office oversight and review.
Strategies: During FY 2001, regional offices continued to employ more effective targeting techniques to increase the number of cases converted from limited reviews to investigations in which possible fiduciary or criminal violations have been identified.
Some offices requested special computer-generated targeting reports designed to aid their analysis of specific types of plans or investment/asset categories.
Other offices went directly to financial institutions to assist them in identifying plans which may have a delinquent contribution problem or which may have been abandoned by responsible plan officials.
In addition, regional offices initiated localized projects to target issues that were prevalent in their jurisdictions, and shared successful strategies nationally for consideration by other regions.
Lastly, in an effort to better leverage its limited investigative resources, the Department will continue its Case Opening and Results Analysis initiative to refine our efforts at identifying quality cases and their sources.
In FY 2001, DOL established separate goals for pension and health plan enforcement to reflect increasing responsibilities in the health-related enforcement arena.
The Department also set more ambitious targets given its recent experience, while continuing to protect against irregular annual fluctuations by using a two-year rolling average.
For FY 2002, the Department has raised the targeted performance level to a 5 percent increase over the average number of fiduciary investigations closed during the previous two years with positive, corrective results.
Increase by 2.5% (to 340) per year the number of closed fiduciary investigations of employee health and welfare plans where assets are restored, prohibited transactions are corrected, participant benefits are restored, plan assets are protected from mismanagement and risk of future loss is reduced.
Results: The Department exceeded this goal, increasing by 130 percent (to 782) the number of health and welfare cases where assets were restored, prohibited actions corrected, participant benefits were restored, or plan assets were protected from mismanagement and risk of future loss was reduced.
Program Description: The Department's role in the health care arena has expanded as a result of the enactment of new legislation that includes regulatory and enforcement requirements to be implemented by the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration (PWBA).
The Department exercises leadership and oversight to protect the interests of participants by ensuring the financial solvency and prudent operations of health plans.
When a fiduciary's mismanagement of assets or imprudent administration places health and welfare benefits at risk, the Department acts on behalf of the plan's beneficiaries to minimize potential loss of benefits or to make the plan whole through the restoration of assets.
Analysis of Results: The Department's Health Disclosure and Claims initiative introduced during FY 2001 played a major role in the dramatic increase in health plan investigations closed with positive, corrective results.
In recent years, DOL has dedicated substantial enforcement resources to the targeting and investigation of both civil and criminal violations relating to health benefit plans, and the Health Disclosure and Claims initiative has expanded the Department's sources of information about plans that merit attention.
The Department anticipates that the continuation of the Health Disclosure and Claims initiative into FY 2002 will again facilitate the effective targeting of health plans at risk, and produce positive investigative results similar to those achieved in FY 2001.
In FY 2001, the Department restored approximately $68 million to benefit plans or directly to participants as a result of its investigative efforts — assets that, in the absence of investigative efforts, may have been lost.
Monetary recoveries may fluctuate significantly and past performance cannot predict future performance in any given year, but recoveries have followed a generally upward trend over the past several years.
PWBA's Enforcement Management System (EMS) provides the data used to measure the achievement of this goal, and the Department has confidence in the accuracy and reliability of the data.
The system checks described in Goal 2.1F also apply to the data used to measure this goal.
In FY 2001, DOL established separate goals for pension and health plan enforcement to reflect increasing responsibilities in the health-related enforcement arena.
The Department also set more ambitious targets given its recent experience, while continuing to protect against irregular annual fluctuations by using a two-year rolling average.
For FY 2002, the Department has raised the targeted performance level to a 5 percent increase over the average number of investigations closed during the previous two years with positive results.
The continuation of the Health Disclosure and Claims initiative will permit the Department to revise this goal to better measure the effectiveness of our programs in improving the security of health plans in the 21st century.
One Stop Center staff member assists customer in processing claim for unemployment benefits.
Photo by: Michael Carpenter DOL improves the economic security of America's working families through the administration of benefit programs dealing with unemployment insurance, expansion of private pension coverage, protection of Federal workers from the effects of work-related injuries, payment of locally prevailing wages on Federal construction projects, and timely and uninterrupted payment of pension benefits.
DOL's longstanding role in protecting worker benefits arose in response to specific concerns about the well-being of American workers and their families.
The Department's Employment and Training Administration, Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, Employment Standards Administration, and Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation administer DOL programs that safeguard the economic security of the Nation's workers and retirees.
The Social Security Act of 1935 authorized the creation of the Unemployment Insurance program to alleviate personal hardship due to involuntary unemployment and to stabilize the economy.
In 1963, over 4,000 workers with vested pension rights lost some or all of their pensions when Studebaker stopped producing automobiles and closed its plants.
This experience and similar stories of losses in the private pension system became the impetus for pension reform through the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
Under this legislation, the retirement incomes of about 43 million American workers — one of every three working persons — is currently insured.
The Federal Employees' Compensation program has been protecting Federal workers from the effects of work-related injuries since President Wilson signed the first comprehensive law in 1916 to minimize the human, social and financial costs of job-related injuries.
The Davis-Bacon Act ensures that Federal contracting practices do not undercut workers' wages in local communities and do not place local contractors and workers in an unfair competitive situation.
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 made health care coverage more portable and secure for employees and gave the Department broad additional responsibilities with respect to private health plans.
The Newborns' and Mothers' Health Protection Act of 1996 established minimum requirements for hospital stays relating to childbirth.
The Mental Health Parity Act of 1996 established certain minimum requirements relating to mental health coverage.
The Women's Health and Cancer Rights Act provided new protections for patients who elect breast reconstruction in connection with a mastectomy.
Outcome Goal 2.2, with net costs of $33.8 billion in FY 2001, represents 95 percent of the costs dedicated to achieving A Secure Workforce and 80 percent of all DOL net costs.
Unemployment insurance accounts for the bulk of expenses, with $27.9 billion paid in unemployment claims in FY 2001, and the sharp increase in costs from FY 2000 is largely attributable to the rise in the number of unemployed workers during the past year.
The protection of employee benefits is vital to the future of both America's workers and the National economy.
Most recently, the combination of a cyclical downturn in the economy and the ripple effect of the terrorist acts of September 11 has left over two million more workers unemployed in October 2001 than a year earlier.
These recent events serve to underscore the need for strong systems to provide timely temporary income support to sustain eligible workers and their families, and to help connect job seekers with job openings.
Longer-term challenges to be addressed in this new century can be seen in the demographics of the workforce.
Americans will live and work longer and require pension and health care benefits for longer periods of time.
The worker who spends an entire career with one company is now the exception rather than the rule.
DOL anticipates an even greater emphasis in the future on pension and health care benefits that provide the flexibility, portability, and coverage that American workers deserve.
Increase to 26 the number of States meeting or exceeding the minimum performance criterion for benefit adjudication quality.
Increase to 48 the number of States meeting or exceeding the Secretary’s Standard (minimum performance criterion) for intrastate payment timeliness.
Results: The goal was not achieved.
Twenty-five States met the quality performance criterion that 75 percent of claims resolved through formal adjudication have high quality scores against a target of 26 States.
This indicator was substantially achieved.
Forty-two States achieved the timeliness standard by issuing 87 percent of first payments within three weeks, against a target of 48 States.
Since 47 States achieved the timeliness standard in FY 2000 and the goal was to increase the number of States meeting the Secretary’s Standard in FY 2001, this indicator was not achieved.
Program Description: By temporarily replacing part of lost wage income, the Federal-State Unemployment Insurance (UI) program alleviates personal and family hardship due to unemployment and stabilizes the economy during economic downturns.
DOL and its State partners established criteria as a means of judging whether eligibility for benefits was determined fairly and whether workers received their UI benefits as soon as possible.
1. Economic activity turned down sharply, especially at the end of the year.
2. State law, policy and management priorities affected goals’ performance in various ways.
3. Less than full administrative funding may have affected both quality and timeliness.
In FY 2001, the States continued to show progress toward improving the quality of adjudicated benefit determinations.
In July 1999, DOL and its State partners set a criterion, to take effect in FY 2002, that 75 percent of eligibility determination cases reviewed must have a passing score for a State to be minimally successful.
In view of implementation of a more rigorous review process and States’ performance under it, as well as States’ focus on customer-service improvements such as telephone claims-taking, DOL realized that many States would not meet the criterion until 2002 or later.
The goal for FY 2001 was for 26 States to achieve the standard, and 25 succeeded.
See chart below.)
Three others were very close, with between 74.1 percent and 74.9 percent of cases having a quality score.
The number of States meeting the first payment timeliness standard for intrastate payments declined from last year (see chart below).
Of the 11 States missing the criterion in 2001, eight had met the criterion in 2000.
A combination of factors seems to have affected their performance: faster than average growth in claims (their claims were 31 percent higher than last year's, versus the national average of 26 percent); three transitioned to taking initial claims by telephone, which in some states temporarily reduced first-payment timeliness; one state was completely reorganizing its Labor Department; and three very small States had fewer resources to deploy to handle rapidly rising claim loads.
DOL expects that corrective action planning—required when standards are missed—will lead to the attainment of next year's performance goal.
Seven States failed to attain the time-lapse criterion for the September 1999–August 2000 period.
Six improved their performance in the same period of 2001; four improved enough to exceed the standard in 2001.
Strategies: DOL will emphasize assisting States in meeting their rising workload demands while maintaining all possible emphasis on continuous improvement, and work to develop and gain acceptance of long-term improvements in efficiency and solvency through UI/Employment Service Reform.
DOL will continue to: * develop the Resource Justification Model to improve administrative funding; * provide technical assistance/training and project development conferences to promote continuous improvement in performance; and * raise performance by monitoring and through Corrective Action Plans and Continuous Improvement Plans which States incorporate into their Quality Service Plans.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: For FY 2002, DOL proposes several changes to its goals and indicators to more fully reflect the UI mission and Administration priorities focusing on three goals: (1) *Make Timely and Accurate Benefit Payments to Unemployed Workers.
DOL will consult with State partners and stakeholders to define the measure and set a baseline and target in FY 2002.
2) *Facilitate the Reemployment of UI Claimants.
DOL and the States will develop and test a measure and DOL will obtain authority for data collection.
3) *Set Up UI Tax Accounts Promptly for New Employers.
ETA will use as an indicator the percentage of new employers that receive a determination about their UI tax liability within 90 days of the end of the first quarter they become liable for the tax, and has set a target of 80 percent for FY 2002.
Results: This goal was not met.
With the assistance of Benefit Advisers, the Department recovered approximately $65 million for plan participants in FY 2001 — below the target of $66 million.
Program Description: The Department directly assists plan participants and beneficiaries in understanding their rights and protecting their benefits via the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration's (PWBA) participant assistance program.
The direct restoration or payment of benefits to participants without the need for protracted or costly litigation is a primary objective of the Department.
Analysis of Results: Three external factors beyond the Department's control contributed to failing to achieve the goal.
First, benefit recoveries, by their very nature, are volatile from year-to-year.
In FY 2000, the Department experienced several large recoveries (in excess of $500,000) that cannot be expected from year-to-year.
Finally, the Government-wide hiring freeze resulted in numerous Benefit Adviser positions remaining unfilled for part of the year and this had a direct and adverse impact on recoveries.
Notwithstanding these external factors, $65 million is a worthy achievement.
More importantly, while monetary benefit recoveries are an important performance indicator, they understate PWBA's total customer assistance impact because important outcomes, such as the restoration of health benefits or enhancing an individual's understanding of the law, do not result in a monetary benefit recovery and therefore cannot be readily quantified.
The Department has experienced an increasing call volume related to health benefits and, while much of the assistance does not result in a monetary benefit recovery, DOL nevertheless provides the same high level of service to resolving these matters.
DOL received approximately 173,000 written or telephone inquiries for assistance this year.
Protecting workers' benefits requires a rapid and accurate response to customer inquiries, and this criteria is therefore a meaningful measure of the Department's A rapidly growing information technology company was experiencing problems meeting its payroll and failed to transmit employee contributions to its 401(k) plan on a timely basis.
Recognizing their error, the company applied to the Department's Voluntary Fiduciary Correction Program (VFCP) to correct the problem.
The VFCP allows plan sponsors to identify, on their own initiative, certain technical violations of the law and to correct those violations by applying through the Department's VFCP.
Provided certain prescribed criteria are met and correction is documented, the company avoids the risk of investigation and liability for a civil penalty and the Department better leverages its limited enforcement resources.
As for the employees, they are able to recoup all delinquent contributions with interest.
As a result of the program, the company restored in excess of $23,000 in delinquent contributions and approximately $12,000 in lost earnings.
DOL responded to 99.3 percent of the written inquiries within 30 days of receipt and responded to 99.9 percent of telephone inquiries by the close of the next business day.
Between FY 1999 and FY 2001, the Department recovered over $194 million for plan participants as a result of its customer assistance program, an indication that the Department is realizing the full benefits of increased resources, customer assistance staff and the efficiencies of improved technologies.
Referrals from the customer service staff also prompt the opening of a significant number of investigations.
The data used to measure the achievement of this goal are derived from the Technical Assistance and Inquiry System.
During FY 2000, the Department implemented a new policy to further ensure consistency and accuracy of the data across regional components.
The new policy and a review by an expert in performance-based management and data analysis provide confidence in the reliability of these data.
PWBA continued to closely monitor the data in FY 2001 and plans to do so in FY 2002.
Strategies: DOL combines an aggressive outreach and education program to create a knowledgeable consumer who may assist in “policing” his or her own benefit rights with a highly motivated and trained staff of customer assistance experts in the field of pension and health laws.
Moreover, the customer assistance staff has access to a wide array of technical experts throughout the Department.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The Department has maintained this goal in FY 2002 as a partial indicator of its success but will consider revisions in the future because the goal fails to adequately measure the total impact of the customer assistance program.
The level of benefit recoveries is only a partial indicator of program success and does not measure the impact of answering inquiries, educating the consumer, or responding to the increase in health related questions.
Goal 2.2B — FY 2001 Annual Performance Plan)* A glass company in New York City went out of business in the 1980s.
PWBA was contacted by a participant of the defunct company’s pension plan who failed to receive his distribution of funds from the plan.
None of the owners of the company or pension plan sponsors could be located to direct a distribution to the participant.
A third party administrator held the funds but could not, without direction, distribute the funds to the participant.
The Department intervened and discovered that the inquiring participant was the only one who had not received his disbursement.
With the assistance of the Department, the third party administrator distributed approximately $11,000 to the participant.
Results: The results exceeded the goal.
The number of private wage and salary workers in pension programs increased 3 percent from 48.3 million in CY 1999 to 49.7 million in CY 2000.
With respect to those groups where pension coverage has been historically lower, the increase among women was four percent, among minorities six percent, and among workers in small businesses four percent.
Program Description: The Department seeks to improve the financial security of Americans during their retirement years, particularly by expanding coverage to those workers who have experienced historically low pension coverage.
Analysis of Results: Many factors contribute to the expansion of pension coverage, such as the structure and health of the economy (e.g., level of employment and economic growth, labor shortage or surplus, sectoral shifts in economic activity) and demographics (aging population, increasing numbers of women and minorities).
The significant impact of the economy on this goal makes it difficult to demonstrate the Department's direct impact.
Strategies: The Department contributes to retirement financial security through aggressive educational strategies, such as the Retirement Savings Education Campaign and Partnerships, targeted public service announcements, promotional cards in tax returns, 800 telephone line, interactive web sites, and videos for small businesses, to name a few.
The Department will continue to educate our customers regarding the importance of retirement planning, particularly participation in pension plans.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The Department has terminated this goal for FY 2002 because of the difficulty in evaluating the extent of program influences on the result.
Goal 2.2C — FY 2001 Annual Performance Plan)* An employee, who worked for a New York company, contacted the Department after she experienced great difficulties in getting her medical claims paid.
She found out that not only was she owed approximately $3,000, but her medical providers were owed an additional $28,000.
After intervening, the Department discovered that the sponsor only budgeted a finite amount a month for claims.
When total claims processed for a month were greater than the amount budgeted, the claims would be rolled over until the following month.
This practice resulted in excess of $4.5 million in unpaid claims impacting approximately 837 participants.
As a result of the Department's efforts, claims totaling approximately $1 million were paid immediately and a payment schedule of $30,000 per week was implemented to reduce the backlog of unpaid claims.
The Department continues to monitor the situation to ensure the weekly payments continue.
Return Federal employees to work following an injury as early as appropriate indicated by a 2% reduction from the FY 2000 baseline in the average number of production days lost due to disability.