This report, prepared in accordance with the Reports Consolidation Act of 2000, presents the results of the Department of Labor’s (DOL) program and financial performance for FY 2002.
The report features the benefits accruing from the Department’s “New Partnerships for a New Century,” as DOL enlists the support of an ever widening network of partners who share our commitment to bettering the lives of America’s workers.
From labor and business partners who have cut job related deaths, injuries, and illnesses to half the industry rates at more than 800 Voluntary Protection Program worksites — to States, local government agencies, and faith-based and community organizations that have assisted job seekers to secure new employment and increase their earnings in a tight economy — the Department’s partners have multiplied the positive impact of DOL’s efforts many times over.
Most recently and dramatically, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania’s Bureau of Deep Mine Safety, the U.S. Navy, mining industry officials and workers, and the Department formed a partnership for life — and worked together seamlessly to rescue nine miners trapped deep in a Pennsylvania coal mine.
These examples illustrate a small sample of the variety and range of the Department’s partnerships — from formal grants to government agencies and newer, not-for-profit organizations, to regulatory compliance assistance agreements with the private sector, to ad hoc rescue collaborations — and underscore the results DOL and our partners achieve together on behalf of the Nation’s workers.
The FY 2002 Annual Report is divided into four major sections.
The Annual Performance Report reflects both the progress realized and the setbacks encountered in achieving the Department’s three strategic goals – A Prepared Workforce, A Secure Workforce, and Quality Workplaces.
Through statistics, analysis, and the stories of individuals, the Annual Performance Report illustrates the contributions of DOL programs, in collaboration with our many partners, assisting the Nation’s workers and their families to achieve their aspirations in the challenging environment of the 21st Century workforce.
DOL has funded an ILO/IPEC project in the Philippines aimed at combating and preventing child labor in the home-based, informal footwear industry.
The project’s implementing agency, Oplan Ibarat, contributes half of the salary costs of teachers for the Early Childhood Development Program, with the goal of preventing children from entering exploitative work.
It also provides school supplies, transportation, and uniforms for students.
In the Philippines, an estimated 40,000 children work full or part-time in the footwear sector out of a total workforce of 450,000.
The ILO/IPEC project had originally targeted 1,500 children for withdrawal or prevention from work in the footwear industry.
By September 2002, however, the project had withdrawn or prevented a total of 3,510 children from exploitative work, and provided them with educational opportunities and other services.
The Financial Performance Report demonstrates our commitment to effective stewardship over the funds DOL receives to carry out the mission of the Department, including compliance with relevant financial management legislation.
The Auditor's Report and Principal Financial Statements and Notes are provided in their entirety.
The Auditor's Report is an independent opinion on the Financial Statements prepared by the Office of Inspector General.
The Management and Performance Challenges section of this report summarizes the top 10 management issues identified by the Department's Inspector General and the Department's progress and plans to meet these challenges.
Both the Annual Performance Report and the Financial Performance Report discuss in detail the challenges the Department is encountering as it seeks further improvement in the delivery of key services to the Department's customers.
A summary of each of the four sections follows: 1.
The Annual Performance Report FY 2002 marks the fourth year that the Department of Labor has reported program results against the goals in its Annual Performance Plan.
In addition to the Department's Annual Performance Plan, each DOL agency developed its own Annual Performance Plan.
Over 200 performance goals included in these plans have provided a basis for targeting and measuring the accomplishments of DOL programs.
Those goals that are key to the accomplishment of DOL's objectives were selected from these agency plans and included in the FY 2002 Departmental Performance Plan, providing a basis for assessing the Department's effectiveness in providing core services to our constituents.
The FY 2002 Annual Report includes descriptions of the Department's strategic goals, the ensuing outcome goals, and a presentation of program results for two measurement years, Fiscal Year 2002 and Program Year 2001.
The Department's Employment and Training Administration includes some programs that are forward-funded and follow a program year that begins nine months after the fiscal year for which program funding was received.
These goals were included in the FY 2001 Annual Performance Plan and addressed programs funded in the FY 2001, budget for a program year beginning July 1, 2001 and ending June 30, 2002.
The Appendices provide additional details and explanatory materials supporting the program results.
Of particular note is Appendix 2, which lists the performance goals included in this report and identifies the time period of measurement and a summary assessment of the results reported for each goal.
Of the 42 performance goals presented in the FY 2002 Annual Performance Report, the Department exceeded or fully achieved 55 percent of its goals, substantially achieved 19 percent, and did not achieve 26 percent.
Performance improved somewhat over FY 2001, when the Department fully or substantially achieved a combined total of 67 percent of its goals, as compared to 74 percent for FY 2002.
The assessment category of substantially achieved recognizes results that were close to achieving the target (i.e., attained 80 percent or more of the target).
The weak economy again influenced the results reported for some programs.
For example, the number of initial claims for Unemployment Insurance benefits increased by 14 percent in FY 2002, extending the time required for States to issue first payments to the claimants, a key performance indicator for the program.
New measures, targeting different dimensions of a program's outcomes or significant increases in targeted performance levels, proved overly challenging for the first year in several instances, most notably in the workers' compensation and mine safety and health programs.
Delays in the implementation of new systems to improve the quality of key performance data also affected the reporting of the Department's results for FY 2002.
In particular, due to delays in completing the Labor Exchange Performance Measurement System, data assessing the tenure of job applicants placed by the Employment Service will not be reported for FY 2002, as planned, and the results available for veterans seeking jobs will only be available for the first three quarters of FY 2002.
Some of the improvements in the Department's performance for FY 2002 can be attributed to several initiatives introduced under the leadership of DOL's Management Review Board, chaired by the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management.
These initiatives continue to advance progress toward the Department's ultimate objective of achieving a performance-based organization — one that manages its programs by effectively using performance information to achieve planned results.
The Management Review Board oversees the Department's efforts to advance the President's Management Agenda and guides DOL's performance initiatives.
Among the President's Management Agenda initiatives, the integration of performance and budget is a critical step on the path to a performance-based organization.
In FY 2004, DOL will present its requests for resources for each program in a performance budget format that, for the first time, links funding to results.
With this bottom-line focus, the Department's budget is now presented in a performance context where key goals that measure program outcomes are the basic building blocks for defining strategies and requesting the resources needed to achieve these outcomes.
In addition to integrating performance and budget, the Department's Management Review Board is also committed to ensuring the full implementation at DOL of all areas of government-wide reforms targeted by the President's Management Agenda.
In its latest scorecard assessing the progress of DOL in implementing the President's Management Agenda, OMB scored DOL highest among all Cabinet agencies.
Additional information on the President's Management Agenda and DOL's progress follows the Executive Summary.
A new organization, the Center for Program Planning and Results in the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management, has been assigned a leadership role in shaping DOL's performance-based management initiatives.
The new Center provides direction and assistance to DOL agencies in casting program strategies, developing metrics for measuring results, formulating data collection strategies and systems, and analyzing and reporting program results.
Recognizing the fundamental role of program evaluation in examining performance shortfalls, determining the impact of key strategies, and enhancing results, DOL established a centralized fund during FY 2002 for performing evaluations under the oversight of the Center for Program Planning and Results.
The 12 evaluations initiated from the first year's resources target major programs with a limited history of evaluations and a need to address key issues.
The Department will complete these evaluations during FY 2003 and include the results in next year's Annual Report.
In addition to providing an institutional focus for performance accountability at the Departmental level, DOL began in FY 2002 to hold all executives and managers personally accountable for the results of their programs through the performance agreements used to evaluate their individual performance.
Andy, who has significant cerebral palsy, works as part of the Price Task Force (PTF) team at Powell's Bookstore in Portland, Oregon.
The PTF team enters hundreds of books into the store's inventory system on a daily basis.
Andy is only able to move his eyes and his head from side to side, and uses an augmentative communication device to speak.
The Center on Self-Determination at Oregon Health & Science University, a DOL project grantee, provided training to SE Works, a One-Stop agency, about how to assist Andy and other youth with disabilities to obtain high quality career-path jobs.
A number of devices were designed and built to enable Andy to do his job independently, including a head-switch operated conveyor belt, which moves the books under a scanner.
Several different agencies leveraged their resources to enable Andy's job to become a reality.
Andy's supervisor says, 'Andy is just as productive as any other employee here.
In addition, by having Andy work here and figuring out how he could do the job with this technology, we have learned how to make the system better for everyone.
The Department recognizes that transitioning to a fully performance-based organization depends on the availability of reliable and timely information concerning the results of DOL's programs.
The challenges to performance measurement vary significantly among DOL's programs, with the data sources and the agencies' level of control over the reporting systems representing the primary factors influencing the reliability and usefulness of the Department's performance information.
During FY 2002, the Department achieved further progress in working with third parties that provide critical performance information about DOL's programs.
In particular, the Employment and Training Administration pilot tested a verification and validation system to assist its State partners and other grantees to improve the effectiveness of data-driven management decisions and to ensure the accuracy of performance data the States report to the Department.
The Department expects to implement the system during FY 2003, enhancing the reliability of the employment and training related information included in next year's report.
Other DOL agencies, such as the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, are focusing on identifying new data sources or collection methods to obtain performance data in a more timely manner to improve their managers' ability to effect changes when needed.
DOL's functions are organized around three strategic goals that have provided the focus for the Department's strategic planning and a framework for the annual performance plans.
These goals build on our successes and respond to the challenge of helping every American participate and prosper in today's economy.
Through these strategic goals and their supporting outcome goals, DOL staff and the American public can see a direct link between the Department's purpose and its activities.
The three DOL strategic goals are depicted in the table to the right: A new strategic plan covering FYs 2003-2008 is currently under development.
The plan retains the three current strategic goals and will add a fourth strategic goal, *A Competitive Workforce*.
The fourth goal expresses the Secretary's vision that America's workers and employers, with leadership and support from the Department, be positioned to maximize the opportunities afforded by the dynamic changes forecast as the 21st century unfolds.
Strategic Goal 1, *A Prepared Workforce*, includes 13 performance goals.
The Department fully achieved ten (77 percent of the 13 goals, substantially achieved one (8 percent), and did not meet the remaining two (15 percent) goals.
The 85 percent of goals fully and substantially achieved places performance for FY 2002 at approximately the same level as FY 2001, when 86.6 percent of the goals in this area were fully or substantially achieved.
Given the state of the economy during FY 2002, the results for this strategic goal were expected to parallel closely last year's performance.
Of particular note, the Department achieved seven of the eight performance indicators under this strategic goal that directly measure improvement in employment, retention, and earnings.
These data reflect positively on both the Department's overall effectiveness in assisting workers during an economic downturn and on its performance in the second year of the Workforce Investment Act.
¹ The 34 performance goals under the three strategic goals do not include the departmental management goals.
DOL fully achieved three, substantially achieved four, and did not meet one of its eight management goals.
Strategic Goal 2, A Secure Workforce, includes eleven performance goals.
DOL fully achieved four (36 percent), substantially achieved two (18 percent), and did not meet five (46 percent) of these goals.
With 54 percent of the goals fully and substantially achieved, FY 2002 performance ranks at about the same level as last year, when 53.4 percent of the goals in this area were fully or substantially achieved.
Historically, performance under this strategic goal has presented the most significant challenge for the Department, and DOL continues to focus on strengthening our results in this area.
Progress was achieved in gaining compliance with labor standards governing wages and work hours in selected low-wage industries, as results for this goal improved for the first time from unmet to substantially achieved.
The economy adversely affected the accomplishment of the Department's goals that promote the security of the Nation's workers through benefit payments and worker protection statutes.
For example, an influx of new claims delayed the timely payment of Unemployment Insurance claims and the processing of pension benefit determinations.
Initiatives currently in process to improve the quality of the goals and measures for a Secure Workforce should yield further improvements during FY 2003.
Strategic Goal 3, Quality Workplaces, includes ten performance goals.
The Department fully achieved six (60 percent), substantially achieved one (10 percent), and did not meet the remaining three (30 percent) goals.
The 70 percent of goals fully and substantially achieved represents an improvement in performance as compared with FY 2001, when 54.3 percent of the goals comprising this strategic objective were fully achieved and no additional goals were substantially achieved.
Performance varied significantly between FY 2002 and the prior year in the achievement of outcomes that lead to the strategic goal of Quality Workplaces.
The Department realized noteworthy improvements in its programs to foster equal opportunity workplaces and reduce the exploitation of child labor and address core international labor standards issues, but declined in the accomplishment of goals to reduce workplace injuries, illnesses, and fatalities.
The Department fully or substantially achieved only 50 percent of the performance goals targeting occupational safety and health in FY 2002, as compared to an 83 percent rate of achievement in FY 2001.
The Department has challenged its employees and stakeholders to achieve dramatic improvements in workplace safety and health conditions, especially in the Nation's mines.
While DOL did not achieve some of the ambitious new FY 2002 goals, such as reducing fatalities in the mining industry by 15 percent annually below the baseline, the challenges are nonetheless raising performance.
For example, the mining industry recorded the lowest number of fatalities in its history in FY 2001 and equaled that performance in FY 2002.
The costs for achieving the Department's goals vary significantly as illustrated in the graph and table presented on this page.
The graph allocates costs by the three strategic goals, depicting that 87.7 percent of the Department's total FY 2002 net operating costs of $65 billion supported the accomplishment of a Secure Workforce.
The majority of those funds provide benefits to unemployed workers or workers disabled as a result of work-related injuries or illnesses.
Of the Department's FY 2002 costs, 10.7 percent contributed to the goal of a Prepared Workforce, providing grants to States and other organizations to offer job training and a host of employment-related services to assist workers to improve their skills and obtain productive, long-term employment.
Only 1.6 percent of the FY 2002 expenditures contributed to the goal of Quality Workplaces, and the majority of those costs fund the salaries of Federal employees dedicated to improving safety and health in the Nation's workplaces.
The DOL goal structure hierarchy includes 9 outcome goals that further refine the objectives of the Department's three strategic goals.
The following chart relates DOL FY 2002 program costs to each of the 9 major performance oriented segments of the Department's mission.
An analysis of program cost trends covering the last three fiscal years (FY 1999-2002) is included as part of each Outcome Goal description within the Performance Report following the Executive Summary.
In this report, performance data and supporting information are presented by strategic goal, following the sequence in the Department's FY 2002 Annual Performance Plan.
Each DOL Strategic Goal serves as a category for presenting performance results.
Under each Strategic Goal, outcome goals that segment the larger objective of the Strategic Goal into more specific objectives are discussed.
This information provides a non-technical orientation on how DOL serves the public in each major area of the overall DOL mission, and serves as an introduction to the detailed performance information that follows.
Following each outcome goal, separate reports of results for individual performance goals provide the following information: * A report and analysis of performance results against the goal.
A description of the program being evaluated.
Highlights of key strategies employed toward achieving the goal.
A capsule summary of any planned changes in the program and performance measures in the Department's FY 2003 or 2004 Annual Performance Plans, based on performance results.
Summary comments on any evaluations relevant to the performance goal that were conducted during the year.
The following appendices provide supporting information for the performance results presented in the body of the report.
Appendix 1* presents the organizational chart for the Department.
Appendix 2* lists each performance goal and identifies whether or not the goal has been achieved.
This section includes performance goals that were eliminated or revised subsequent to the release of the FY 2002 Annual Performance Plan.
The Appendix also lists the measurement period for the performance data addressed in the performance goals.
Appendix 3* includes a listing of significant evaluations of DOL programs conducted by the General Accounting Office (GAO), OIG, and other organizations during FY 2002.
Appendix 4* contains supporting information for each performance goal including the performance indicator, source of data, baseline data, and any comments pertinent to data collection.
Appendix 5* is the glossary of acronyms used in this document.
Appendix 6* is a list of Department Internet links.
Sound financial management provides the foundation of the President's Management Agenda to attain fundamental changes in the effectiveness and efficiency of government.
In keeping with the President's goals, the Department of Labor continued its outstanding performance in financial management during FY 2002.
All financial systems at the Department maintained substantial compliance with the Federal Financial Management Improvement Act of 1996 (FFMIA), assuring that the systems support full disclosure of the costs of the Department's programs and activities.
In addition, the Department continued to comply with the Federal Managers' Financial Integrity Act (FMFIA), indicating that the Department's accounting systems and internal controls were sufficient to safeguard the resources entrusted to the Department.
No material weaknesses were found in the audit of the Department's financial statements.
However, in their report on compliance with FFMIA, the Office of Inspector General concluded that DOL substantially complied with the requirements of the Act except for compliance with the Managerial Cost Accounting Standard.
For the sixth consecutive year, the Department's Office of Inspector General issued an unqualified, or "clean," audit opinion on DOL's annual financial statements.
This independent assessment provides assurance that the money managed by the Department is accounted for properly.
The principal financial statements in this report summarize DOL's financial position, net cost of operations and changes in net position; provide information on budgetary resources and financing; and present the sources and disposition of custodial revenues for fiscal years 2002 and 2001.
Highlights of the financial information presented in the principal statements are shown below: The total net cost of DOL operations in FY 2002 was $65.0 billion, a 53 percent increase over the prior year.
The economic downturn during FY 2002 caused a $22.4 billion increase in unemployment claims, significantly increasing DOL operating costs during the year.
As seen in the chart below, income maintenance – unemployment checks – paid to individuals who are laid off or out of work and seeking employment comprise the major portion of DOL costs.
Income maintenance also includes payments to individuals who qualify for disability payments due to injury or illness suffered on the job.
Employment and Training programs comprise the second largest cost.
These programs are designed to help individuals deal with the loss of a job, research new opportunities, find training to acquire different skills, start a new job or make long-term career plans.
DOL's operations are funded primarily by Unemployment Program employer taxes, appropriations received, and investment interest earned from various trust funds.
Over 99 percent of DOL's total investments are Unemployment Trust Fund investments.
DOL total assets decreased from $106.7 billion at the end of FY 2001 to $85.6 billion in FY 2002 – primarily due to the use of Trust Fund assets for unemployment claims.
Eighty percent of DOL assets are invested in U. S. Government securities, compared to 84 percent in FY 2001.
Liabilities totaled $14.3 billion and $13.4 billion at the end of FY 2002 and FY 2001, respectively, leaving a difference, or net position, of $71.3 billion and $93.4 billion at the end of each year.
As required by the Government Management Reform Act of 1994 (31 U.S.C. 3515(b), the principal financial statements report the financial position and results of operations of DOL.
While the statements have been prepared from the books and records of DOL in accordance with formats prescribed by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), the statements differ from the financial reports used to monitor and control budgetary resources, which are prepared from the same books and records.
The statements should be read with the realization that they are for a component of the U.S. Government, a sovereign entity, and that liabilities reported in the financial statements cannot be liquidated without legislation providing resources to do so.
The Office of Inspector General (OIG) has identified the following areas to present the most serious management and performance challenges facing the Department of Labor: The University United Methodist Church Family Resource Center (FRC) in Las Vegas, Nevada didn't believe it could be eligible to receive Federal funding even though it had been providing quality job training to unemployed and dislocated workers for several years.
FRC had looked into Federal funding before, but the process was too overwhelming.
However, through an innovative and simplified micro-grant designed by the Department's Employment and Training Administration and Center for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives, FRC's Back to Work Program is working with the local One-Stop Career Center.
Since FRC has spent several years developing relationships in Las Vegas' poorest communities, the partnership will enhance DOL's ability to reach the hardest-to-serve populations.
The Department has achieved significant progress during the past year in overcoming the top management challenges identified by the Inspector General in January 2002, and the President's Management Agenda Scorecard and the Inspector General's January 2003 statement on the top management issues offer clear recognition of DOL's accomplishments.
By the end of FY 2002, the Department's status ratings had improved to Yellow for four of the five items on the President's Management Agenda Scorecard, and progress for the same items was rated as Green, placing the Department as the highest-rated Cabinet department.
The Inspector General's January 2003 statement removed one of the prior year's challenges and indicated substantial progress for others.
The Department anticipates that the results of initiatives to address several management issues during FY 2003 and a reassessment of other issues should enable the Inspector General to report even further progress in January 2004.
In this regard, as referenced by the Inspector General's statement, many concerns first raised last year about the effectiveness of mine safety and health programs have been fully addressed during FY 2002, and efforts are underway to revise regulations as necessary to resolve all of the remaining mine safety concerns.
The expected completion during FY 2003 of a program that will enable States to validate the quality of their performance data before reporting the results of their job training programs to DOL should resolve the Department's data quality issues.
The Inspector General's statement also repeats some challenges, particularly in the information technology arena, that DOL has comprehensively addressed in prior years; a reassessment of the responses should allow the Inspector General to close these issues or provide specific guidance to the Department about the additional measures required.
Where a sustained effort is required by DOL over several years to address a management issue that impacts a core program or management priority, performance goals and strategies are targeted in the Department's Annual Performance Plan.
For example, the Department's Plan incorporates goals to address the human capital management issues faced by DOL as well as to improve the results of the job training programs identified in the Inspector General's statement.
Several issues require legislative action or otherwise fall outside of the Department's jurisdiction, as explained in management's response.
To improve the clarity of presentation, the Department requests that the Inspector General segregate such items in future years' statements of management issues, directing the recommendations to officials in a position to complete the required actions.
The Department continues to heed the call of President George W. Bush that “Government should be results-oriented — guided not by process but guided by performance.”
OMB issued its FY 2001 baseline scores measuring the implementation of the President’s Management Agenda with the release of the President’s FY 2003 budget.
DOL received Yellow baseline ratings on Strategic Management of Human Capital and E-Government — and Red baseline scores for Competitive Sourcing, Financial Management, and Budget/Performance Integration.
Even with three Red scores, DOL’s scores led all Cabinet agencies.
On a quarterly basis, OMB has continued to rate the government’s progress in implementing the President’s Management Agenda – and DOL continues to lead the way.
As of the fiscal year-end on September 30, 2002, DOL received a Yellow baseline rating for Human Capital with a Green progress score.
For Competitive Sourcing, DOL received a Red baseline score with a Yellow progress rating.
For Financial Management, DOL received a Yellow status score with a Green rating for progress – the exact same scores for both E-Government and Budget and Performance Integration.
The Department’s ongoing implementation of the President’s Management Agenda is being accomplished through several DOL-wide initiatives.
Some recent highlights include: * Improved 2002 Fair Act Inventory: DOL exceeded its FY 2002 competitive sourcing goal; * Establishment of Program Planning and Results Center: DOL established this new Center to better focus its agencies on program performance and strategic planning; * DOL President’s Management Agenda (PMA) Scorecard: Consistent with OMB’s quarterly scorecard, DOL established agency-level scorecards to track implementation of the five government-wide PMA components; * FY 2004 Integrated Performance Budget: On September 9, 2002, DOL submitted its first-ever integrated budget highlighting required resources and performance goals that our agencies intend to meet; * 2002 President’s Quality Award: DOL was recognized for Strategic Management of Human Capital — one of only seven organizations recognized for the Award; * MBA Outreach Program: Secretary Chao launched this initiative to recruit employees with the key management skills needed in the increasingly challenging world of public administration; * Performance Institute and Government Executive Magazine Awards: DOL received these awards in recognition of its Electronic Government efforts; * Certificate of Excellence in Accountability Reporting (CEAR): The Association of Government Accountants recognized DOL for superior financial and accountability reporting for last year’s Annual Report.
A Prepared Workforce *Enhance Opportunities for America's Workforce* DOL is committed to enhancing opportunities for America's workforce by providing the tools and assistance necessary for success in today's job market to people new to the labor force or wishing to improve their potential.
Special emphasis is placed on closing the employment gap for out-of-school youth and providing long-term jobs for individuals so they may reach their full economic potential.
In addition, the Department publishes crucial labor market information to support key economic and policy decisions.
American workers must have quick and easy access to a broad array of high quality and highly effective workforce development services to continue to enjoy increased employment and earnings in the global economy of the 21st Century.
One-Stop Career Centers provide the local point for meeting the challenges of a global economy.
Through the One-Stop Centers, communities can build the local partnerships and organize the workforce development services that enable adults to acquire the skills needed for jobs and career changes that lead to high wages and for businesses to meet their ongoing recruitment and human services needs.
Technology has dramatically increased the Department's ability to offer services and products to customers in a broad range of formats and at almost any time.
National, State, and local automated workforce delivery systems that support job matching, labor market information, resource directories, and occupational and career information are online to enable direct customer access or to assist staff in providing services, and are available anywhere that personal computers can be found, such as customers homes, businesses, and public libraries.
To provide for the special needs of persons with disabilities, the One-Stop Centers have improved access to their facilities and services.
The Employment and Training Administration (ETA) and the Veterans' Employment and Training Service (VETS), with support from the Women's Bureau, the Center for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives and the Office of Disability Employment Policy, operate a number of programs that provide the information and skill-building opportunities that lead to increased employment and earnings.
Adult and Dislocated Worker programs authorized under the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) provide the workforce preparation, training, and support services needed to increase the participants' skills, employment opportunities, and earnings.
Wagner-Peyser Act employment services include a range of labor exchange services, such as access to resource rooms with the latest technology that job seekers use to obtain employment; staff-assisted job search assistance and counseling; job referral and placement; recruitment and screening services for employers; and labor market and career information.
Electronic information is available to bring together job seekers and employers nationwide through the CareerOneStop portal, which integrates America's Job Bank, America's Career Information Network, America's Service Locator, and a wide variety of labor market and workforce development tools.
ETA's Office of Apprenticeship Training, Employer and Labor Services works to increase the number of apprenticeship occupations, providing opportunities for satisfying and rewarding careers in highly paid, skilled occupations.
VETS programs target veterans requiring special assistance, such as service-connected disabled veterans, and homeless, minority, or older veterans, as well as younger veterans recently separated from active service.
The Women's Bureau seeks to ensure that issues current to women are identified and supported in Departmental programs.
The Center for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives is designed to help assure that the Workforce Investment Act system builds new partnerships with small community and faith-based organizations.
These institutions are known and trusted entities in poor and disadvantaged communities and are critical to achieving the WIA system goal of universal access to employment services.
The Office of Disability Employment Policy works to ensure that individuals with disabilities have full and complete access to all of the services delivered through the One-Stop system.
FY 2002 program costs of $3.6 billion for Outcome Goal 1.1 support ETA's adult training programs and employment services, in addition to the employment services and training provided for veterans by the Veterans' Employment and Training Service.
These costs are up from $3.2 billion in FY 2001, primarily due to increased services prompted by the declining economy.
A key Secretarial area of emphasis is re-orienting and improving the effectiveness of the Department's job training programs to meet the needs of the 21st Century workforce.
The Department will increase collaboration within the One-Stop framework, leveraging the full array of services available from all partners, to enable all workers to secure employment with the opportunity for increased earnings and career advancement.
To more effectively meet the needs of workers, the Department is focusing increasingly on engaging the business community as both customer and partner to ensure strong economic growth and good jobs with good wages for our citizens.
The Department will seek to ensure that the workforce investment system is demand-driven to meet business needs for the right workers with the right skills at the right time.
The Department and its partners also will take advantage of available technology and address infrastructure and capacity needs, and seek new ways to break down the barriers to integrated One-Stop service delivery.
The Department has increased its emphasis on performance accountability for all programs and services.
The collective goal is to provide high quality services and information that best serve the nation's job seekers and employers.
The economic impact of the September 11th terrorist attacks and the continued fluctuations of the economy have had significant impacts on our workers and businesses, and the Department continues to support strategies designed to effectively meet the needs of both customer groups to promote strong economic growth for businesses, individuals, and families for the coming decade and beyond.
Results: The Department achieved its goal.
The program achieved a six-month retention rate of 78.9 percent and an earnings increase of $3,555.
Program Description: The Workforce Investment Act's Adult Program improves the quality of the workforce, reduces welfare dependence, and enhances the productivity and competitiveness of the Nation's economy.
The Department allocates adult employment and training funds by formula to the States, which further distribute the funds to local Workforce Investment Areas.
3. Training services for individuals who need to acquire new skills in order to find and retain a job.
During Program Year 2001, the One-Stop Centers provided Workforce Investment Act services to approximately 388,775 adults, an increase of 56 percent from the number served in Program Year 2000.
Analysis of Results: The Department exceeded the Program Year 2001 performance targets, which DOL developed through negotiations with the State agencies.
The results reflect performance reported by 53 States and jurisdictions for the fourth quarter of Program Year 2001, ending June 30, 2002.
The results for Program Year 2001 represent a slight improvement in retention from Program Year 2000 when 78 percent of workers reported employment in the third quarter following participation.
However, average wage gains decreased by $129 from the previous year.
In its preliminary analysis of Program Year 2001 performance, the Department has not determined any major trends among State performance that would account for this decline in earnings from Program Year 2000.
A factor that may have contributed to the decline is the mix of WIA registrants in Program Year 2000 with many participants from its predecessor program who had little or no wages before entering the program.
With all adults eligible for services under the Workforce Investment Act, the Program Year 2001 registrants presumably included more participants with higher earnings before their entry into the program, and increasing average earnings gains therefore presented a greater challenge.
Early in 2003, the Department will have more extensive information on WIA registrants that will permit further analysis.
Another factor that may have contributed to this decline is the softening of the labor market with increases in unemployment and pressure on wages.
States and local areas use the Unemployment Insurance wage record reporting system as the performance reporting data source for employment, retention, and earnings measures.
The Department considers this source reliable, and has undertaken a data validation of WIA performance measures in order to further assure that the data effectively support the problem analysis, management decision-making, and continuous improvement elements of State and Federal oversight.
Strategies: In addition to the issuance of guidance addressing issues uncovered in "Readiness Reviews" conducted in Program Year 2001, such as eligibility determination policies, low participation of eligible providers, and inconsistencies with registration for adults, the Department works in partnership with States and localities to assure that they have specific help in areas where it is needed and continuous, up-to-date information on what works, as follows: * Beginning late in 2002, the Department has undertaken special technical assistance focused upon States and localities experiencing difficulties in achieving their negotiated performance standards.
The Department is in the process of identifying State and local needs for assistance based upon Program Year 2001 performance.
The Department will begin to develop approaches intended to address the workforce needs of persons of limited English speaking ability that will focus on first assessing and identifying their needs for workforce preparation, and then developing techniques to meet these needs through training and other interventions attuned to their language needs.
This will result in broader program participation and should contribute to increased outcomes.
The Department will continue showcasing the best programs.
A principal vehicle for doing so will be a national “Workforce Innovation” conference which showcases projects with technological innovations that have improved employment and training services for adults and other customers of the Workforce Investment System.
The Department will focus its efforts more on the needs of business for skilled workers and create a “demand-based” workforce investment system.
The Department has a job training initiative aimed toward high-growth industries, and a project to develop partnerships that will meet business needs and provide good job opportunities for workforce system registrants.
Audits and Program Evaluations: In a September 2002 report, *Workforce Investment Act Performance Outcomes Reporting Oversight*, the Office of Inspector General raised concerns about whether the third party data reported by States for WIA performance were accurate and supportable.
The Department generally agreed with the concerns raised by the Office of Inspector General and indicated that it believed that the concerns would be addressed with the deployment of a data validity and verification policy and tools that have been under development and are scheduled to be deployed in 2003.
See Appendix 3 for more information.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The Department continues to focus on the core performance measures for workforce programs and to emphasize high levels of achievement for programs under the Workforce Investment Act through negotiations with the States.
Strengthen the registered apprenticeship system to meet the training needs of business and workers in the 21st Century.
In Fiscal Year 2002: Results: The goal was achieved.
The indicators reflect the following increases over the baseline: a 75 percent increase in new apprenticeship programs; a 99 percent increase in new businesses involved in apprenticeship; a 64 percent increase in new apprentices; and a 23 percent increase in programs in new and emerging industries.
Program Description: Registered apprenticeship combines on-the-job training and related classroom instruction to enable workers to learn the practical and theoretical aspects of a highly skilled occupation.
Registered apprenticeships are career-training programs based in an industry that determines the skills its employees will need and trains them to achieve the relevant knowledge.
Joint employer and labor groups, individual employers, and/or employer associations voluntarily sponsor the programs.
Completion of a registered apprenticeship program provides a certification of skills that are recognized throughout the country.
Registered apprenticeship programs offer access to career opportunities in highly paid, relevant, specialized occupations; alleviate skilled worker shortages in businesses; and ensure the competitiveness of the Nation's workplaces.
The Department manages the National Registered Apprenticeship System, approving training programs and registering apprentices in 23 States.
DOL delegates the management authority through Federal-State partnerships with State Apprenticeship Councils/Agencies in 28 States, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands.
Analysis of Results: While the goal targets percentages of increase, the numerical increase in the indicators offers a better perspective on the significant growth experienced in the Apprenticeship program during the fiscal year.
End of Fiscal Year data reflects the following increases: 2,952 new programs or a 75 percent increase over the 1,685 baseline; 5,683 new businesses or a 99 percent increase over the 2,953 baseline; 129,180 new apprentices or a 64 percent increase over the 78,770 baseline; and 326 new programs in new and emerging industries or a 23 percent increase over the baseline of 266.
Strategies: Throughout FY 2002, the Department featured the apprenticeship model as a viable option to meet employers' needs for an increasingly skilled and technically competent workforce, while continuing to promote enrollment in apprenticeship training to a variety of workers interested in acquiring or upgrading their skills.
DOL provided technical assistance on initiating apprenticeship programs to businesses, industry, and labor organizations in collaboration with the National Association of State and Territorial Apprenticeship Directors and State Apprenticeship Councils (NASTAD).
Information distributed at the Department's 21st Century Workforce Summit also spurred activities, including new apprenticeship programs, to solve looming challenges, such as structural changes affecting the workforce and the economy, labor and skill shortages, demographic changes in the workforce, and technological innovations in the workplace.
DOL sponsored nationwide forums and conferences, such as the Advancing Apprenticeship into the 21st Century Forums in partnership with NASTAD, the Apprenticeship Marketing Outreach Project, and the Department of Transportation/Federal Highway Administration Forums.
These sessions offered insights into the current needs of businesses and workers.
Equally important, employers participating across industries proved receptive to exploring non-traditional ways of meeting their needs for skilled workers.
The Department will apply the insights to developing new models and strategies during FY 2003 that will strengthen and expand registered apprenticeship in key businesses and industries.
DOL also targeted over $12 million in Workforce Development Investment Project funds to introduce apprenticeships into industries such as health care, quality childcare, information technology, transportation, energy, research and evaluation services, and aerospace.
For example, CompTIA, the Computing Technology Industry Association, is utilizing a grant from DOL to design, develop and test apprenticeship in 11 occupations involving 19 companies in the information technology field.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: During FY 2003, DOL will introduce two new indicators that will measure the number of apprentices who graduate and the wage gain projections of entry and graduating apprentices, to ensure a balanced focus on enhancing the program's benefits to both the business community and the apprentices.
Results: The goal was not measured.
The Employment Service will not begin collecting employment retention outcome data until Program Year 2002, due to delays in implementing the new Labor Exchange Performance Measurement System.
Program Description: Wagner-Peyser funded labor exchange services assist job seekers in finding employment and employers in finding qualified workers.
Delivered through the One-Stop systems of the States, the public labor exchange provides universal access to core employment services (e.g., career guidance, job search assistance, job referrals, workforce information, re-employment services, etc.) in three distinct modalities: self-service, facilitated self-help, and staff-assisted services.
The goal of the public labor exchange is to assist job seekers with immediate transition to a new, better, or the next job.
Local Workforce Investment Board policies allow for flexibility in delivery structures, permitting job seekers to obtain services onsite at a comprehensive career center or affiliated site, or electronically.
In addition, employer-focused strategies to increase employment outcomes for business are an integral focus of States' public employment services.
Analysis of Results: During Program Year 2001, State Workforce Agencies worked towards full implementation of a comprehensive performance accountability system implemented for the Employment Service that included new performance measures, revised reporting procedures, and the establishment of levels of performance.
Implementation of the new performance measure of employment retention at six months—one of the four new labor exchange measures—will provide consistency with the Workforce Investment Act performance measurement system.
In Program Year 2001, the Department also implemented a pilot with eight States to evaluate prospectively the impact of the new labor exchange outcome measures.
Using wage record data matched with registrant information from Program Years 1999 and 2000, pilot data point to Statewide retention rates ranging between 65 and 75 percent for job seekers.
Strategies: Retention at six months is a completely new performance measure for the Labor Exchange and will provide useful management data on the efficacy of One-Stop employment services in meeting the needs of customers seeking long-term employment.
The primary methodology to promote retention as an outcome for the public labor exchange is to ensure that individuals with the right skills and qualifications are referred to employers who list jobs.
Therefore, strategies for this goal are focused on helping business clearly articulate the skills, competencies, and hiring criteria for their jobs and helping job seekers to identify their skills and competencies and to help them take advantage of the broader services in the One-Stop setting.
In PY 2001, ETA sponsored training for a variety of groups in the use and application of the Occupational Information Network (O*NET) tools, including a new version of O*NET Online designed to help users provide career counseling and assist and fill job orders by better describing the tasks, skills and education.
As a result of the training and outreach activities, public and private organizations have integrated O*NET into their career counseling and labor market Internet pages.
As part of ETA's strategy to improve the quality and use of workforce information, the Agency's investment in labor market information research and development focuses on four interrelated areas: use of standards and data collection; a set of State-delivered core products and services for customers; pursuit of ongoing research and development of new products; and building the capacity of the workforce system to deliver workforce information through One-Stop systems.
In addition, States in PY 2001 received investments totaling $38 million for workforce information core products and services as part of the Department's strategy to increase positive employment outcomes for both employers and job seekers.
To facilitate the sharing of States' workforce information practices and the latest workforce information products, DOL, in consultation with partners, began development of a web-based strategy for publishing and maintaining core products information for use by State Workforce Agencies nationwide.
These efforts support a more effective labor exchange process.
ETA created the Business Relations Group in PY 2001 to coordinate a broad-based outreach strategy to educate businesses about the value of the public workforce system in meeting their human resource needs.
A key activity has been "Partnerships for Jobs", the intent of which is to broker a more effective connection between business and the workforce development system leading to strategies to help business meet their short- and long-term workforce needs.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The Department, in collaboration with the Office of Management and Budget, is developing common performance measures for all employment and training programs.
The purpose of this initiative is to develop common performance measures that address the goal of getting a job, job retention, and improved earnings for participants, and the costs of all affected programs.
In FY 2003, the Department will begin the process of revising definitions of existing measures and reporting requirements consistent with existing laws so that the common measures may be implemented in Program Year 2004.
In Program Year 2001, increase by 10 percent the total number of job openings listed with the public employment service, including both those listed with State Workforce Agencies (SWAs) and those listed directly with America's Job Bank (AJB) via the Internet.
Results: The goal was not achieved.
The combined number of job openings listed with State Workforce Agencies (7.2 million) and America's Job Bank (4.6 million) decreased by 5.0 percent from Program Year 2000.
Program Description: As part of providing labor exchange, recruitment, and other technical services to employers, the public employment service publishes job openings.
Employers can advertise their job openings with State Workforce Agencies (SWAs); job seekers can research these opportunities, and staff can screen and refer suitable candidates to these jobs at the request of the employer.
America's Job Bank (AJB), an Internet-based labor exchange system, complements services provided by the public employment services offices in the States.
Job seekers can search for a job in AJB's online listing of openings and post a resume to an online database free of charge.
Employers who register to use the service can search the resume database for potential candidates in addition to being able to post their job openings on the site.
The site provides both employers and job seekers a "scout" feature, offering users the ability to save searches based on search criteria they choose, have the system automatically run those searches again at user-defined intervals, and then e-mail them the search results.
Most jobs listed with the SWAs are subsequently posted on America's Job Bank.
Jobs posted on AJB from SWA listings are excluded from the AJB count in the table below.)
Analysis of Results: Results reported for this measure reflect the downturn in the economy throughout Program Year 2001 and the economic impact of the terrorist attacks on America.
The unemployment rate of 4.5 percent at the start of Program Year 2001 climbed to 5.8 percent by December 2001, inching up to 5.9 percent by the close of Program Year 2001.
Strategies: ETA created the Business Relations Group in Program Year 2001 to coordinate an agency wide effort to better serve America's workers by meeting the needs of business.
The Department initiated a broad based outreach strategy to educate businesses about the value of the public workforce system in meeting their human resource needs, including services available through One-Stop systems locally and AJB.
For example, the Business Relations Group brokers more effective connections between large, nation-wide businesses and the decentralized public workforce system; develops strategies to connect businesses of all sizes with the system through work with industry and human resource associations; develops strategies to meet the workforce needs of high-growth industries; and generally builds the capacity of the workforce system to meet the needs of business.
The redesign of AIB and its integration into the new CareerOneStop portal will make the site more intuitive and user-friendly.
Business focus groups identified many of the new features and changes to the system.
It will incorporate features that have now become industry standards to aid in the business customer's ability to easily navigate the site.
The site will also feature a new interface to allow businesses to more easily post large numbers of jobs into AIB via a file transfer process and a new job order writing tool to assist employers in preparing better job descriptions to attract more and better qualified applicants.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: ETA will revise this goal for Program Year 2003 using a methodology that can measure continuous improvement relative to increased listings of job openings and that is adjusted to reflect changes in the economy.
This CVS/pharmacy Regional Learning Center was the first public-private partnership that combines the One-Stop Career Center goal of placing people in rewarding jobs with the CVS corporation's commitment to training its employees.
The Center is co-located with the District of Columbia's Employment Services One-Stop Career Center.
Results: The goal was achieved.
During the first three quarters of FY 2002, 42.84 percent of veterans assisted by the public labor exchange entered employment.
Fourth quarter data are not available.
Program Description: The Department's Veterans' Employment and Training Service (VETS) is responsible for maximizing employment and training services to America's veterans by ensuring priority of service to veterans in Wagner-Peyser funded programs throughout the public labor exchange.
The Department funds State Disabled Veterans' Outreach Program (DVOP) specialists and Local Veterans' Employment Representatives (LVERs).
DVOP staff provide a variety of specialized services through the public labor exchange, including career coaching, vocational guidance, assessment, job search and job development services, referral to training, and other supportive activities for these veterans requiring special assistance.
LVERs ensure that veterans receive services on a priority basis in local employment service offices, train local office staff, facilitate job search and Transition Assistance Program workshops, and conduct outreach to employers and community groups on veterans' issues.
Analysis of Results: Fourth quarter FY 2002 data were not captured due to a transition in the fourth quarter to a new performance reporting system.
Data for the first three quarters of FY 2002 were collected under previous reporting procedures that required follow-up contacts with veterans registered with the public labor exchange.
Based on these three quarters of data, 835,670 veterans were registered with the public labor exchange nationally and 358,119 veterans or 42.84 percent of those registered entered employment.
The recently implemented Labor Exchange Performance Measurement System includes new performance measures and an improved system of obtaining outcome information based on unemployment insurance wage record data.
Studies in selected States have indicated that the previous reporting procedures—based on follow up contacts with job seekers—significantly understated the outcomes of the public labor exchange compared to data available from the unemployment insurance records.
Strategies: Our top human capital management priority is working with our State partners to achieve full staffing in DVOP and LVER positions to ensure the adequacy of veterans' job placement capabilities.
VETS is also implementing a self-assessment process for staff at the State and Regional levels that should yield efficiencies and increase workforce productivity.
In another initiative consistent with the President's Management Agenda, the Department will assess managing future State grants for veterans' employment services as a performance-based system.
This approach is similar to the one adopted recently by the Department's Employment and Training Administration in addressing employment efforts on behalf of older workers.
As contrasted with the current system of fixed grants, funds will be provided to the States on a more flexible basis, considering such factors as job outlook and individual States' performance in placing veterans in employment.
DOL implemented a national outreach program that promotes employment, licensing, and certification opportunities for veterans.
Through a series of pilot programs, VETS is assessing civilian job opportunities where military training can be transferred to jobs in the civilian economy requiring a credential.
Where pilot projects are successful and the employer or organization hosting the project realizes a benefit, continuation of the project will depend upon funding from another source.
A VETS project currently underway at the Florida Community College in Jacksonville trains systems administrators separating from the Navy in computer network security.
LVER staff are assisting transitioning service personnel to identify the credentials and training needed for jobs requiring licenses and or certifications in a variety of industries that will be available upon their separation from the military service.
Goals Assessment and Future Plans: Under the new Labor Exchange Performance Measurement System, each State will negotiate performance goals for FY 2003.
FY 2003 will be a transition year, as States gain experience under the new measurement system by establishing and refining the new data collection system and building core performance information regarding services to veterans.
The new measures closely mirror those prepared by the U.S. Employment Service, and more complete data available from State Unemployment Insurance wage records have permitted the Department to set significantly higher and more realistic performance targets beginning in FY 2003.
Analysis of Results: During the past year, the Department improved the entered employment rate from 53 percent to 54 percent for participants in the Homeless Veterans' Reintegration Project by reinforcing the rate of entered employment as the primary focus for service providers, while continuing to assist participants to overcome the multiple problems that prevent them from securing and retaining employment.
The program's services now target training to match available jobs.
In addition, the Department has developed closer relationships with associated Federal, State, and local community based organizations to leverage resources to provide expanded and "seamless" services to homeless veterans.
Once on the job, homeless veterans are contacted periodically to ensure their successful transition from homelessness to gainful employment, in line with a continuum of care philosophy.
Such follow-up visits support self-esteem — a significant factor in the reintegration of a homeless veteran into the workforce — and improve job retention.
The Department has not received participant retention reports from all grantees for FY 2001.
When these reports are submitted, a baseline for retention will be established.
Strategies: The Department expanded its technical assistance efforts to current service providers, with emphasis on first-time grantees to: (1) assist them in accessing Federal, State, and local community resources; (2) improve reporting systems at the local level; (3) establish a task force composed of experienced grantees; and (4) emphasize longer term follow up services, job retention, wage enhancement, and improved quality and applicability of training.
In addition, the Department identified potential service providers/grantees, including faith-based and community organizations.
DOL also assisted grantees by orienting them to the problems of homeless veterans, including substance abuse, mental and physical disabilities.
Living in a homeless shelter, Gordon, an Army veteran, was a drug user still battling his addiction when he saw an advertisement by the Philadelphia Veterans Multi-Service and Education Center for free computer training.
Gordon applied and was accepted.
At the Center, he was fortunate to find advocates in its directors and computer training coordinator who encouraged him to pursue his interest in further education at the Community College of Philadelphia.
After graduating and gaining valuable job experience in some of the shelters he had previously lived in as a resident, he found a job as a Placement Specialist/Job Developer in the Philadelphia Veterans Center from which he had graduated.
Gordon says he is proof of how things change if you apply yourself, but most of all just don't quit!
Goals Assessment and Future Plans: In FY 2003, the goal targets an increase to 56 percent of veterans enrolled in the Homeless Veteran Reintegration Project entering employment.
The retention baseline will be established when all FY 2001 retention reports are received from our grantees.
Planning for the immediate future targets two key areas of emphasis: Capacity Building.
VETS, in a capacity building effort to improve a grantee's ability to serve the employment and training needs of Homeless Veterans, is initiating changes in the Grant solicitation process.
A greater emphasis will be placed on grants from applicants that view homelessness as a community-based effort and on work with other federal, State and local community resources in serving this population.
Stricter grant funding.
VETS has placed tighter constraints on the use of HVRP funds to ensure that grantees use these funds for employment and training services and solicit other funding sources (e.g., HUD to provide for housing, HHS to meet emergency medical needs, and DVA to serve counseling and treatment medical care) to meet other program delivery requirements.
Goals Assessment and Future Plans: In FY 2003, the goal targets an increase to 56 percent of veterans enrolled in the Homeless Veteran Reintegration Project entering employment.
The retention baseline will be established when all FY 2001 retention reports are received from our grantees.
Results: The Department exceeded the goal.
Sixteen demonstration programs for One-Stop Centers and WIA Youth programs were implemented.
Additionally, 22 demonstration programs in other areas related to employment of adults and youth with disabilities were implemented.
Program Description: DOL established the Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP) to provide leadership to increase employment opportunities for adults and youth with disabilities.
The new organization supports the President's New Freedom Initiative, with the objective of positively impacting employment opportunities for the millions of adults and youth with disabilities.
The employment rate for persons with a severe disability in 1997 was 31.4 percent, and 82 percent for persons with a non-severe disability, according to the U.S. Census Bureau.
This low employment rate for people with disabilities clearly presents the magnitude of the challenges the new organization faces.
ODEP undertakes pilot projects to assess promising practices and effective workforce development strategies for people with disabilities.
The goal is to obtain meaningful employment, training, and employment supports.
ODEP's current efforts focus primarily on selecting, initiating, and evaluating pilot projects.
Each pilot project should lead to immediate service impacts at participating sites.
The results should generate data useful to make fact-based decisions in the workforce development system.
Once a practice is employed, it should have the capability of success if it is generalized for replication in the broader workforce development system.
Analysis of Results: The 38 pilot projects initiated in September 2002 vary from two to five years in length.
Baseline results for people with disabilities receiving services at pilot project sites will be available for reporting in the FY 2003 Annual Report.
Outcome results, in terms of people with disabilities receiving services at pilot project sites as they move into the mainstream workforce development system, will be available for reporting in the FY 2005 Annual Report.
At locations where individual pilot projects are initiated, baseline data for placement and retention rates will be established as a basis for measuring the impact at the pilot location on increased rates of employment and retention for people with disabilities.
Strategies: Pilot projects undertaken in FY 2002-2005 target the development of models to enhance the capacity of the workforce development system to provide services to people with disabilities.
Partnerships with government agencies engaged in employment, training, and employment support programs provide the vehicle for implementation of the promising practices and policies proven effective on a pilot basis.
Tim is a 29 year-old man with developmental disabilities whose previous work experience had been limited to part-time jobs in fast food restaurants.
Tim sought out the help of the Career Place, the one-stop career center near Boston that is a national demonstration site for DOL's Customized Employment Grant Program.
Barbara, the Career Place's disability specialist first connected with Carol, a job developer from East Middlesex Industries (EMI), a non-profit community-based organization that works with the developmentally disabled.
Barbara and Carol saw an opportunity to build on Tim's work experience.
Together, they helped Tim develop a career action plan, craft a new resume, and hone his interview skills.
Thanks to the partnership between the Career Place and EMI, Valley Services, a major food service company, hired Tim.
He has embarked on a rewarding career, one that provides a competitive salary, full benefits and the independence Tim was seeking.
Goals Assessment and Future Plans: In FY 2003 the Department will initiate 42 new pilot projects targeted at providing employment, training, and employment support services to adults and youth with disabilities, and will establish baselines to measure the results of the pilots in improving entry and retention in employment for the pilot participants.
During development of the Department's 2003-2008 Strategic Plan, DOL will establish targets for the employment and wage gains anticipated nationwide as the result of the adoption of the successful practices identified through the pilot projects.
Results: This goal was achieved.
The participant satisfaction score was 76.3 at the end of the fourth quarter of Program Year 2001.
Program Description: The Workforce Investment Act (WIA) envisions a workforce system that is customer-focused, business-led, and community-centered.
The Adult, Dislocated Worker, and youth programs delivered through One-Stop Career Centers provide individuals with access to career support and assist them in finding jobs.
Establishing customer satisfaction benchmarks for job seekers who receive services from these programs assists States to develop continuous improvement strategies.
Analysis of Results: In order to gauge the participants' satisfaction with the services they receive, the Department requires States to use the American Customer Satisfaction Index.
Because the Index is used widely across the private and public sectors, it allows not only assessments of internal performance, but also comparisons with other organizations outside of the workforce system.
The Program Year 2001 participant customer satisfaction score was 76.3, which is slightly less than the score of 76.9 achieved in 2000.
This compares favorably to recent customer satisfaction scores for major U.S. companies such as Target, 77; Wal-Mart Stores, 75; Bank of America, 68; or the Allstate Corporation, 76.
The Department has begun examining the customer satisfaction scores for Program Year 2001 in relation to the prior year to assist States to develop improvement plans and to adopt other possible corrective actions.
Strategies: Throughout 2000 and 2001, DOL and nine States collaborated on a project to improve the measurement of customer satisfaction, particularly at the local level, to support enhancements in customer services and program planning.
The nine participating States received direct technical assistance regarding the measurement of customer satisfaction and the use of this information for program improvement and, following the training, assisted DOL to develop a Customer Satisfaction Handbook.
This Handbook, now available to all States and the One-Stop system, provides survey examples, report formats, and technical guidance on the development and use of such materials.
In addition to assisting States to measure customers' satisfaction with the services of One-Stop Centers, the Handbook is general enough for use across all DOL employment and training programs.
Through conferences, teleconferences, and face-to-face discussions, DOL works with the States to enhance the collection and use of WIA customer satisfaction data to improve performance and delivery of services to customers, to develop measures beyond those required by the Workforce Investment Act, and to help front-line staff become customer-focused.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The Department encourages States and localities to continue to measure customer satisfaction, consistent with WIA provisions, as an important strategy for improving program operations, but has not included this goal in the Annual Performance Plans beyond Program Year 2001, as DOL focuses more directly on the core program outcomes — placement, retention, and earnings.
The use of customer satisfaction measures will be re-examined in the process of reauthorizing the Workforce Investment Act and implementing the Office of Management and Budget's common performance measures for Federal job training and employment programs.
Results: This goal was achieved.
The employer satisfaction rating was 74.2 at the end of the fourth quarter of Program Year 2001.
Program Description: The Workforce Investment Act envisions a workforce system that is business-led, customer-focused, and community-centered.
Employers' satisfaction with services received from and offered by One-Stop Career Centers is integral to providing individuals with access to career support and assistance in finding jobs.
One Stop Career Centers offer career support and job search assistance to individuals, and recruitment and job preparation services to help employers meet their human resource needs.
Establishing customer satisfaction benchmarks for employers that receive services from these programs assists States to develop continuous improvement strategies.
Analysis of Results: To gauge the satisfaction of participants with the services they receive, the Department requires States to use the American Customer Satisfaction Index.
Because the Index is widely used across the private and public sectors, it allows not only assessments of internal performance, but also comparisons with other organizations outside of the workforce system.
At 74.2, the Program Year 2001 rating for employers' satisfaction reflected improvement over the 71.3 rating achieved in Program Year 2000.
The score of 74.2 compares favorably to recent customer satisfaction scores for major U.S. companies such as the Wachovia Corporation, 72; Lowe's Companies, Inc., 75; or Southwest Airlines Corporation, 74.
More than forty States had customer satisfaction scores that exceeded 70.
The Department has begun examining the customer satisfaction scores for Program Year 2001 in relation to the prior year to assist States to develop improvement plans and to adopt other possible corrective actions.
Strategies: Serving the business customer has become an important focus across DOL programs.
Accurate measurement of employers' satisfaction with the services received through One-Stops enables DOL to assess the progress of the Department's programs in meeting the expectations of our business customers.
Throughout 2000 and 2001, DOL provided direct technical assistance regarding customer satisfaction to nine States that used the training to assist DOL to develop the Customer Satisfaction Handbook.
This handbook, now available to all States and the One-Stop system, provides survey examples, report formats, and technical guidance on the development and use of such materials.
In addition to assisting States to measure customer satisfaction, the Handbook is general enough for use across all DOL employment and training programs.
The Department created a Business Relations Group to improve employer satisfaction with program services by forming business partnerships to identify the needs of high growth businesses, develop strategies to meet these needs, and strengthen outreach and connection to the business community.
Through conferences, teleconferences, and face-to-face discussions, the Department works with the States to enhance the collection and use of customer satisfaction data to improve performance and delivery of services to customers, to develop measures beyond those required by the Workforce Investment Act, and to help front-line staff become customer-focused.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The Department encourages States and localities to continue to measure customer satisfaction, consistent with WIA provisions, as an important strategy for improving program operations, but has not included this goal in the Annual Performance Plans beyond Program Year 2001, as DOL focuses more directly on the core program outcomes – placement, retention, and earnings.
The use of customer satisfaction measures will be re-examined in the process of reauthorizing the Workforce Investment Act and implementing the Office of Management and Budget's common performance measures for federal job training and employment programs.
Studies reveal strong correlations among education levels, unemployment, and life-long earnings.
DOL administers youth programs under the Workforce Investment Act (WIA), including the Job Corps program, the youth formula grant program, and the Youth Opportunity Grant Program, as well as research and demonstration projects that address the needs of at-risk youth, both in and out-of-school, for career preparation, education, and employment.
DOL's youth programs primarily serve those eligible low-income youth between the ages of 14 and 24 who are out-of-school, and those in-school youth who are at risk of dropping out, including youth with disabilities and others who may require additional assistance to complete an educational program or to secure and hold employment.
The purpose of youth activities under the Workforce Investment Act is to assist youth in achieving academic and employment success and acquiring the skills they need to succeed in the workforce and become productive adults.
DOL's youth programs provide an array of comprehensive workforce preparation services and support.
Services to in-school youth help them remain in school, move into post-secondary education or advanced training, and ultimately transition into successful careers.
For out-of-school youth, programs offer educational and employment training, support services and follow-up activities, providing them with the necessary skills to attain educational credentials (i.e., high school diploma or General Educational Development), participate in post-secondary training opportunities, and enter into gainful employment or a career, prepared to succeed in the workplace and transition successfully into adulthood.
WIA promotes strong public and private partnerships among diverse programs and community representatives, including employers, labor organizations and community-based youth service agencies through their participation on State and local workforce investment boards and youth councils.
The Youth Council, as a subgroup of the local board, is responsible for planning and coordinating a broad array of local youth services in the community.
The Job Corps provides intensive, long-term training in a residential setting that includes a secure, drug-free learning environment; academic, vocational, and social skills development; medical care; and career and personal counseling.
Job Corps students come from economically disadvantaged families, are primarily high school dropouts, and are considered the hardest-to-serve population.
There are 118 Job Corps Centers located in 48 States plus the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico.
New centers have been funded and are under development in Rhode Island and Delaware.
The Youth Opportunity Grants concentrate resources for a variety of youth services for all young people residing in 36 high-poverty urban neighborhoods, rural areas and Indian Reservations, and in selected migrant and seasonal farm worker communities.
The decrease in net costs in FY 2000 may be substantially attributed to the transition from the Job Training Partnership Act program to that under the Workforce Investment Act.
The subsequent increase in costs in FY 2001 and FY 2002 reflect: (1) the increased spending by the States on program operations as the training tempo increased following the start-up activities in FY 2000; and (2) the start-up of a new youth opportunity grant program funded at $300 million.
FY 2002 costs reflect a continuation of increased spending in Youth Opportunity Grants and Youth Formula Grants.
The youth population between the ages of 15-24 years old is increasing.
Unemployment levels among youth ages 16 to 24 have risen over the past two years, accounting for 53 percent of total U.S. job losses.
Also, studies indicate that the rate of youth dropping out of school is increasing, apparently because youth are struggling to meet the new State standards for attaining a high school diploma.
In order to meet the challenge of serving young people most in need, DOL will continue to focus its efforts to improve the delivery of youth services under the Workforce Investment Act formula grant program, Job Corps, and the Youth Opportunity Grants.
The Department will continue to assist DOL youth programs in sustaining the momentum and progress made over the last two years by focusing on these key areas: Recruiting and Retaining Out-of-School Youth.
Recruiting, retaining, and providing increased services to dropouts and out-of-school youth will continue to be a priority for States and local areas.
WIA services for these youth will continue to focus on the provision of educational and occupational skills training that will prepare them for postsecondary education, advanced training, and jobs with a career.
Providing Technical Assistance and Identifying Effective Practices.
The Department will provide technical assistance to States and local areas through academies, conferences, policy guidance issuances, and continued funding and dissemination of studies, reports, and other products that identify best practices in the field.
Engaging Additional Faith-Based and Community Organizations.
DOL will develop and implement creative outreach and coordination strategies, action plans, and service delivery priorities to promote greater participation of faith-based and community groups in the delivery of WIA services to eligible youth.
In Program Year 2001, of the 14-18 year-old youth registered under the WIA youth program, 50% will be either employed, in advanced training, post-secondary education, military service, or apprenticeships in the third quarter after program exit.
Results: This goal was achieved, with 50.2 percent of youth either employed, in advanced training, post-secondary education, military service, or apprenticeships in the third quarter after program exit.
Program Description: Title I of the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) authorizes services for eligible low-income youth between the ages of 14-21 who have barriers to employment, including one or more of these criteria: deficient in basic skills; homeless, a runaway, or a foster child; pregnant or parenting; an offender; or a school dropout.
The program also serves youth with disabilities and others who may require additional assistance to complete an educational program or to secure and hold employment.
Programs and services are offered to both in and out-of-school youth.
Service strategies prepare youth for post-secondary education by stressing strong linkages between academic and occupational learning, and preparing youth for employment.
Local communities create opportunities for youth by providing required program elements, including: tutoring, alternative schools, summer employment, occupational training, work experience, supportive services, leadership development, mentoring, counseling, and follow-up services.
Analysis of Results: The Department established the target for this performance goal at 50 percent because the outcomes measured apply primarily to youth between the ages of 16 and 18 years old, a majority of whom are dropouts and out-of-school youth.
Most 14-15 year old youth who receive WIA services are attending school, and the preferred results for this age group—the attainment of a diploma, General Educational Development (GED), or skill—are not measured by this goal.
Studies have shown that the sluggish economy has taken the greatest toll among youth (ages 16-24), who account for 72 percent of the total jobs lost among all U.S. workers for the last year and a half.
The drop-out status of many of the 16-18 year olds served by WIA increases the difficulty of placing them in post-secondary education, military service, or apprenticeships because they lack the requisite credentials, and the program's strategy focuses on placing these youth in employment or advanced training.
In developing the targeted level of performance for this goal, the Department considered its experience under the Job Training Partnership Act program, the predecessor to WIA, which measured the percentage of out-of-school youth who entered training, completed education, or returned to school following participation in the program.
During Program Year 1999, the last year of the Job Training Partnership Act, only 44 percent of out-of-school youth enhanced their employability by returning to school or entering training, and only 57 percent entered employment at termination.
The 50 percent of WIA youth between the ages of 14 and 18 who remain in employment, advanced training, post-secondary education, military service, or apprenticeships for at least nine months after their initial placement represents a significant advance over the initial placement results achieved under the Job Training Partnership Act.
Brad participated as a summer intern in the Rewarding Youth Achievement (RYA) component of Tampa's Youth Opportunity Grant Program.
His internship gave him first hand experience through an opportunity "that isn't given out every day to young people who are trying to make important decisions in their lives."
Brad spent five weeks rotating among several local architecture firms.
His experiences involved learning about various aspects of building and renovating local schools.
He learned about all the skills needed as an architect, from drafting and design to construction.
In a letter to the Tampa program, Brad affirmed how the internship "played a big part in helping me confirm my reasons for wanting to become an architect."
Internships, like those in the RYA, help young people make important career decisions because they are "exposed sooner to an actual professional working environment."
Strategies: To improve retention for youth between the ages of 16 and 18, DOL is challenging State and local areas to use a three-pronged service strategy to address the needs of out-of-school youth for employment, credentials, and advanced education: ■ Helping them find gainful employment, while providing available support services; ■ While employed, providing education and skills training needed to attain educational credentials, participate in post-secondary education, or become gainfully employed in a career with advancement opportunities; and ■ Retaining out-of-school youth engaged in the required education/skills training activities until program completion.
Other strategies to assist out-of-school youth will include enhancing the use of One-Stop centers, developing close mentoring relationships, and identifying and disseminating effective practices for serving and retaining these young people.
Audits and Program Evaluations: The United States General Accounting Office issued a report, *Workforce Investment Act: Youth Provisions Promote New Service Strategies but Additional Guidance Would Enhance Program Performance* (GAO-02-413), on April 8, 2002.
5) facilitate linkages between the board, youth council, and their required youth-serving partners.
In response to these recommendations, DOL provided additional policy guidance and technical assistance to State and local areas; awarded competitive grants to 15 local boards and youth councils to develop and implement strategies to improve youth connections to the One-Stop system, and disseminated the resulting information; and collaborated with the Departments of Education and Health and Human services to encourage the creation of cross-cutting initiatives among programs.
In a September 2002 report, *Workforce Investment Act Performance Outcomes Reporting Oversight*, the Office of Inspector General raised concerns about whether the third party data reported by States for WIA performance were accurate and supportable.
The Department generally agreed with the concerns raised by the Office of Inspector General and indicated that it believed that the concerns would be addressed with the deployment of a data validity and verification policy and tools that have been under development and are scheduled to be deployed in 2003.
The specific findings and recommendations of the reports as well as additional details on DOL's actions taken in light of these recommendations can be found in Appendix 3.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The retention measure for 14-18 year old youth will be discontinued as a goal because the diploma/GED measure is a more appropriate outcome measure to gauge success for this age group.
Likewise, by establishing the achievement of academic credentials as a goal, it communicates the national importance of this measure for America's school age youth.
Results: The goal was achieved.
75 percent of the 19-21 year-old youth served under the Workforce Investment Act youth program who were employed in the first quarter after program exit were employed in the third quarter after program exit.
Program Description: Title I of the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) authorizes services for eligible low-income youth between the ages of 14-21 who have barriers to employment, including one or more of these criteria: deficient in basic skills; homeless, a runaway, or a foster child; pregnant or parenting; an offender; or a school dropout.
The program also serves youth with disabilities and others who may require additional assistance to complete an educational program or to secure and hold employment.
Programs and services are offered to both in and out-of-school youth.
Service strategies prepare youth for post-secondary education by stressing strong linkages between academic and occupational learning, and preparing youth for employment.
Local communities create opportunities for youth by providing required program elements, including: tutoring, alternative schools, summer employment, occupational training, work experience, supportive services, leadership development, mentoring, counseling, and follow-up services.
Program Year 2001 activities resulted in increasing the numbers of youth being served to 365,300 from 262,200 the prior year, and steadily increasing expenditure rates when compared to Program Year 2000 expenditure levels.
Analysis of Results: The Department has set a high standard for performance with the goal of a 75 percent retention rate for this youth population, and the States have now met the retention goal for a second year in Program Year 2001.
Program Year 2001 marks the first year when reported performance relied almost exclusively upon youth who entered the program and received services under the WIA program design, as compared to Program Year 2000 when many youth registrants were carried in from the prior Job Training Partnership Act program.
Approximately half of the States exceeded their negotiated level of performance for this measure.
The Department is encouraged by the sustained performance against this measure, since research shows that youth suffer a disproportionate and rapid impact during economic downturns when national unemployment rises overall.
Strategies: The Department presented strategies for enhancing program performance in numerous conferences and forums across the country, and worked directly with States experiencing data collection and reporting problems to resolve such issues.
In an effort to improve the quality of youth programs, particularly in the area of performance management, Federal staff began conducting comprehensive onsite assessments of at least half of State and local programs to determine program effectiveness, identify technical assistance needs, and to identify and share effective practices.
3) problematic management information and reporting systems.
1) low performance outcomes in the older youth credential rate and the younger youth diploma or General Jeremiah is an excellent example of how youth with disabilities can make a successful transition from a supported living environment to self-sufficiency and work.
After joining the Southwest Training Services, Inc.
Youth Employment Program in April 2000, Jeremiah began a paid work experience as a teacher's aide.
His ability to relate to a lot of the students made him a very useful addition to the life skills class.
That work experience led to a substitute aide position for the Intermediate Unit I at the school.
After much help and support from One-Stop system partners, Green County Association for Retarded Citizens, Office of Vocational Rehabilitation, Department of Public Welfare, and Southwest Training Services, Inc., Jeremiah's dream has become a reality.
Now a twenty-year-old, Jeremiah has been hired as a full-time permanent teacher's aide.
Jeremiah's perseverance gained State recognition and he was given the 2002 Governor's Achievement Award for Outstanding Performance in Workforce Investment Act Programs as the Youth Program Participant of the Year.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: In addition to this retention measure, the Department will institute an additional measure for the older youth population that will measure placement in employment in the first quarter after program exit.
The goal for Program Year 2002 includes targets of 63 percent for placement in employment and 77 percent for retention in employment.
3) inadequate services for youth in the One-Stops.
A few of the promising practices identified include: State-funded youth One-Stops, Statewide youth councils, strong linkages to schools in local areas, and jointly funded projects that include WIA, HHS, juvenile justice, and education funds.
4) enhancing out-of-school youth use of One-Stop Career Centers.
Audits and Program Evaluations: The United States General Accounting Office issued the final report on *Workforce Investment Act: Youth Provisions Promote New Service Strategies but Additional Guidance Would Enhance Program Performance* (GAO-02-413) on April 8, 2002.
5) facilitate linkages among the board, youth council, and required partners.
In a September 2002 report, *Workforce Investment Act Performance Outcomes Reporting Oversight*, the Office of Inspector General raised concerns about whether the third party data reported by States for WIA performance were accurate and supportable.
The Department generally agreed with the concerns raised by the Office of Inspector General and indicated that it believed that the concerns would be addressed with the deployment of a data validity and verification policy and tools that have been under development and are scheduled to be deployed in 2003.
The specific findings and recommendations of this report, as well as the status of the Department's response to these recommendations, can be found in Appendix 3.
In Program Year 2001, 85% of Job Corps graduates will get jobs with entry average hourly wages of $7.25 or be enrolled in education; 70% will continue to be employed or enrolled in education six months after their initial placement date.
Results: The goal was substantially achieved.
90 percent of Job Corps graduates obtained jobs at an average hourly wage of $7.96 or were enrolled in education, exceeding the targets for both of these indicators.
64 percent of graduates continued employment or were enrolled in education six months after their initial placement date.
Program Description: DOL's Job Corps program is an intensive, primarily residential training program for severely disadvantaged youth ages 16 to 24.
Job Corps provides occupational skills and academic training, social education, and other support to some 68,000 participants at 118 centers.
In accordance with the Workforce Investment Act, DOL continues to expand Job Corps' scope to provide career support services to program graduates for up to 12 months after graduation.
Analysis of Results: In Program Year 2001, the Department succeeded in placing Job Corps graduates into employment or further education.
The graduate placement rate exceeded its target by five percentage points.
Similarly, the average hourly wage rate exceeded the target by 71 cents per hour, virtually mirroring the prior year's hourly rate of $7.97.
Although placement and wage results for both program years were similar, the results are reflective of consistent strong performance in these areas.
Job retention six months after initial placement did not reach the 70 percent target.
The Department established an indicator for the first time in Program Year 2001 to measure the six-month retention of Job Corps graduates in employment or education.
Results from a 13-week retention period were relied upon for a baseline, on the assumption that six-month retention results would be comparable.
For the previous year, the Department had measured retention for a 90-day period, and 67 percent of graduates remained in employment or educational programs for this length of time, below the target of 70 percent.
Several factors may have contributed to the placement retention results.
Actual baseline data was not available to establish the six-month placement retention goal.
The Department developed a new data collection system for this measure, and refined it during this first year of implementation.
Further, DOL may have set a high target in light of economic conditions that could have influenced "new hire" activity among employers.
DOL has restructured the service delivery system for Job Corps graduates, enhancing services to meet their broader career transition needs.
While the retention results reflect a national average across all Job Corps centers, many centers performed at or above the target.
Job Corps' efforts to improve placement retention have placed greater focus on retaining students in the program to maximize academic achievement and skills attainment; customizing service delivery to meet individual student needs; and partnering with businesses to meet labor market demands and expand career exploration, work-based learning, and long-term employment opportunities.
The Office of Job Corps' Student Pay/Management Information System serves as the source for this data.
This comprehensive data collection system is rigorously designed to ensure data reliability and integrity.
Further, the system is monitored and reviewed by Job Corps national management, an independent research contractor retained to provide data verification services, and the Office of Inspector General.
Strategies: To maximize the benefits of the Job Corps program, the Department emphasizes a number of strategies to ensure students' long-term success.
These strategies primarily focus on improving program quality and providing individualized services to meet students' needs.
To improve program quality, strategies include integrating performance measurement into the competitive procurement process and maintaining partnerships with employers, communities, and educational institutions to create growth opportunities for graduates.
Services to address individual needs include academic programs (including high school diploma programs), competency-based vocational training, work-based learning at employer sites, employability skills development, information technology skills training, counseling/support services, driver's education, child care support, and support for placement and transitional services after departure.
In the future, to address graduates' long-term attainment, the Department will continue to emphasize academic and vocational credential attainment, high quality placements and wages, enhanced career offerings that better meet labor market demands, improved career transition services, and strong partnerships to support graduates' career advancement.
The quality and effectiveness of performance improvement strategies is assured through formal on-site assessments, detailed action planning at the service delivery level, and rigorous and frequent performance monitoring of data and key activities.
For example, vocational training programs are evaluated continuously and intensively to ensure the highest quality of instruction and the incorporation of state-of-the-art equipment and industry standards.
DOL, along with private consultants and industry, regularly assesses the Job Corps program's vocational outcomes and continues to make changes in vocational offerings where performance is less than satisfactory.
Moreover, new, innovative vocational offerings that are identified through job labor market research and/or business advisory groups continue to be offered to enhance the job placement and job retention results of Job Corps graduates.
Academic performance is being enhanced by Job Corps' High School Diploma Initiative.
The positive relationship between labor market success and the attainment of a high school diploma is well documented.
Since the inception of this initiative, the number of high school diplomas attained has already increased.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: In Program Year 2002, the targeted performance levels for placement in employment or education will increase to 90 percent and for average hourly wages at placement to $8.20, while the six-month employment retention target will be 65 percent.
A new indicator will also be introduced pertaining to the attainment of high school diplomas by Job Corps students, to measure the outcomes of an interagency agreement with the Department of Education.
Wendy was born in McAllen, Texas but raised across the border in Reynosa, Mexico until she was sixteen.
Her brother Christian was enrolled at the Gary Job Corps center and suggested to Wendy that she might like to go to school there as well.
She spoke little English, but was positive and determined to succeed.
After earning her G.E.D. in the Business Office Technology program, Wendy accepted a Work Based Learning assignment with RS Information Systems, which led to a permanent job as their webmaster.
Although Wendy went on to earn a bachelor's degree and launch her own IT company, she still states enthusiastically, "Everything I am and everything I have is through Job Corps."
Overview The Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) is responsible for producing some of the Nation's most sensitive and important economic indicators.
The Office of Management and Budget has designated several of the key BLS data series as Principal Federal Economic Indicators.
As a producer of economic statistics on the U.S. economy, BLS must work in partnership with other Federal, State, and international statistical agencies.
These organizations sometimes encounter common issues that must be coordinated for the benefit of the users of the data.
BLS works with these organizations to coordinate methodologies, reduce and avoid duplication, increase compatibility of data, and improve communication.
Such collaboration not only maximizes BLS performance, but also helps to improve the accuracy, efficiency, and relevancy of economic measures produced by BLS.
These cooperative efforts take many forms on many different levels, including: In response to the need for more labor market information for State and local areas under the Workforce Investment Act, BLS works in partnership with the States and the Employment and Training Administration in the Workforce Information Council (WIC).
During FY 2002, a WIC workgroup developed a system of standardized methods, tools, and software that State Employment Statistics Agencies can use to conduct job vacancy surveys at the local area level.
These surveys provide Workforce Investment Boards with current data on occupations in demand, including wages and benefits offered, full or part-time opportunities, and education and experience requirements.
BLS, along with 14 other Federal statistical agencies, is a member of the Interagency Council on Statistical Policy, which addresses many common issues, including identifying areas for collaboration.
During FY 2002, the Council worked on enhancements to FedStats, a "one-stop shopping" website for Federal statistics.
As a representative on the Economic Classification Policy Committee of the United States, BLS, in partnership with the statistical agencies of Canada and Mexico, continued work in 2002 on a joint multi-year project to develop a common product classification system, the North American Product Classification System.
The effectiveness of BLS data is determined by their timeliness, accuracy, and accessibility.
BLS also continuously improves its statistical processes and products to ensure that data and dissemination methods are useful and relevant to its customers.
Below are a few examples of such improvements: BLS published a new official measure of price change at the consumer level to supplement the existing Consumer Price Index (CPI) series.
The new index more closely approximates a cost-of-living index by reflecting consumer responses to changes in relative prices.
BLS released its first national monthly Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) data as a developmental series to provide a more complete picture of conditions in the U.S. labor market.
The job openings data from JOLTS indicate the unmet demand for labor in the economy, and the turnover data profile the dynamic nature of the economy.
This year, BLS published the CPI, Producer Price Index (PPI), and the U.S. Import and Export Price Indexes using updated weights.
By more frequently updating the weights used to calculate these indexes, BLS produces indexes that reflect more accurately changes and patterns in the economy.
In FY 2002, net costs for Outcome Goal 1.3 were $509 million.
The Bureau's budget and costs grew incrementally from 1999 to 2002.
This trend is attributed primarily to mandatory cost increases; the creation of new programs, such as the JOLTS and the American Time Use Survey (ATUS); and important improvements to the CPI, PPI, and Employment Cost Index.
Substantial challenges face BLS, including the changing economy, maintaining sufficient response levels, and evolving technology.
BLS uses various strategies to address these challenges, which include the following: To respond to the changing economy: Develop and publish new surveys and products, such as the ATUS and the JOLTS, to meet the data needs of the American public.
Expand service sector coverage in the PPI and in Industry Productivity Measurement to reflect current service-producing industries.
To maintain a high level of response for its voluntary surveys: Continue to build upon a national training curriculum whereby all field data collectors are trained on the best techniques and methods to use in approaching respondent contacts.
Provide more options to respondents for reporting their information by expanding the use of electronic data collection methods, such as Internet data collection, touch-tone data entry, computer-assisted telephone interviews, electronic mail, and electronic file transfer.
To meet the challenges of evolving technology: Continue to identify ways to improve the accessibility and usability of BLS data through enhanced dissemination methods, such as providing users Internet access to interactive maps that will improve their understanding of geographically based data series.
Continue to ensure the security of our computer systems and confidential data by improving virus protection and developing and testing continuity of operations plans.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics reports performance for this goal using such measures as timeliness, output, relevancy, accuracy, and access.
Extracted from those measures and presented here are the following measures: timeliness, accuracy, and access.
The first, timeliness, addresses how often the Department's Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) meets the release dates in the published schedule of its Principal Federal Economic Indicators.
The second measure is accuracy.
Decision-makers need to know how well BLS statistics reflect the economic activity described.
The third, access, reflects the continuous improvements to the BLS Internet site.
FY 2002 Results: The goal was achieved.
Performance measures were met fully for all three of the goal's dimensions.
Analysis of Results: The Department met the timeliness measures for all programs.
An evaluation of the Office of Publications and Special Studies report of release dates against the release schedule of BLS Principal Federal Economic Indicators provides the data for measuring the results of the timeliness indicator.
The report includes the results of these indicators: National Labor Force; Employment, Hours, and Earnings; Consumer Price Index; Producer Price Index; U.S. Import and Export Price Indexes; and Employment Cost Index.
For these indicators, the Department scheduled 52 releases in 2002, comprised of quarterly releases of the Employment Cost Index and separate monthly releases of the National Labor Force; Employment, Hours, and Earnings; Consumer Price Index; Producer Price Index; and U.S. Import and Export Price Indexes.
Strategies: The public-mail Anthrax incidents produced major challenges to BLS processes since several surveys collect data from respondents by mail.
This was especially the case for two monthly indicators, U.S. Import and Export Price Indexes and the Producer Price Index.
Using a combination of fax and telephone collection methods, BLS ensured release dates were met and index quality was retained.
These actions have improved some processes; for example, respondents of the U.S. Import and Export Price Indexes now routinely fax responses back to BLS, which has improved the timeliness of respondents' data.
Between January 1992 and January 2002 the cost of medical care rose nearly twice as fast as the cost of all items surveyed by DOL's Bureau of Labor Statistics, and published in the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
To enable members of the medical community and related businesses to keep pace with the rapidly changing costs and trends in this field, Nicholas Zelver has produced a newsletter since 1982.
Included in the newsletter are charts and graphs of targeted monthly CPI and Producer Price Index (PPI) information, along with news items from media sources, in a format customized to meet the interests of insurance and pharmaceutical companies, health maintenance organizations (HMO's), hospitals, and other subscribers.
Clients such as employer benefit managers use the data to negotiate contracts, forecast medical costs, analyze medical markets, and follow inflation trends.
Analysis of Results: The indicators met the established accuracy targets.
Each of the indicators addressed in this goal has a unique accuracy measure.
Appendix 4 provides information on individual program measures and performance.
The accuracy measure not only assures that the indicator reflects the economic activity described, but also that it is relevant to the user.
To remain responsive to those who rely on BLS data, the Department continuously invites advice and ideas from users and experts in business, labor, professional and academic organizations, and from members of the public.
In FY 2002, the Federal Economics Statistics Advisory Committee (FESAC), which is composed of economic, statistical, and behavioral science researchers, continued its work.
This committee provides advice and recommendations in areas such as statistical methodology, survey design, and data collection and analysis.
For example, the FESAC reviewed two papers on the advisability of seasonal adjustment practices with data from the National Labor Force and the Employment, Hours, and Earnings programs.
Committee members endorsed the proposed use of concurrent adjustment.
Additionally, spring and fall meetings of the BLS Business and Labor Research Advisory Councils took place as scheduled.
These two Councils advise BLS regarding its statistical and analytical work, providing perspectives in relation to the needs of the business and labor communities, respectively.
Strategies: The Department continues to use various strategies to maintain a high level of cooperation for its voluntary surveys.
One strategy has been to increase the number of options available to respondents for transmitting their information to the Bureau.
By giving respondents more data collection options, the Department hopes to ease their burden.
For example, the Employment, Hours, and Earnings program encourages respondents to provide data monthly through the Internet, in addition to other options such as touch-tone data entry, computer-assisted telephone interviews, and electronic file transfer.
As already discussed, the U.S. Import and Export Price Indexes program has expanded the use of fax.
Finally, the Employment Cost Index employs email as a data collection vehicle.
Many of the Department's other statistical programs will offer these data reporting options in the future.
Analysis of Results: The BLS Internet site continues to improve.
In June, for example, the Department added features to enable users to obtain data from the BLS website and view the information in a graphical format.
Line graphs now are available for every time series on the BLS Internet site; with a few clicks of a computer mouse, a user can access over 60 million line graphs.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The performance measures for the timeliness and accuracy dimensions remain the same in FY 2003.
The access measure will change to reflect the continued improvements to the BLS Internet site.
The new performance indicator for FY 2003 is: Improve the BLS Internet site, to include (1) providing access to interactive maps that will improve user understanding of geographically based data series, and (2) expanding access to National Labor Force statistics by building a new interactive query tool tailored to the program's wealth of demographic information.
This goal measures achievement of significant milestones that reflect the Department’s Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) commitment to continuous improvement of its statistical processes and products.
Results: This goal was fully achieved.
All FY 2002 milestones for improving the accuracy, efficiency, and relevancy of the economic measures were achieved.
Milestones for Significant* *New or Enhanced Efforts in FY 2002* *Consumer Price Index, Superlative Index:* DOL published a new measure of price change at the consumer level to supplement the official Consumer Price Index with release of July data.
This index more closely approximates a cost-of-living index by reflecting more completely the consumer responses to changes in relative prices.
Production of this type of index was a 1996 recommendation of the “Boskin Commission,” and is supported by the recent “Schultze Committee” report published by the Committee on National Statistics.
Consumer Price Index, Expenditure Weights:* Beginning with January data, DOL updated consumption expenditure weights to reduce the age of the Consumer Price Index market basket, and will continue to update the weights every two years.
The age of the weights used in the index will now range between two and four years, a substantial reduction from the 7.5 years when the 1993-1995 weights were dropped in January 2002 and the 14.5 years when the 1982-1984 weights were revised in January 1998.
The use of more current weights will reflect more accurately how consumers allocate their spending.
Consumer Price Index, Computer-Assisted Data Collection:* DOL successfully completed a full field test of a new computer-assisted data collection system to electronically collect Consumer Price Index items other than rent, and will phase the system into production during FY 2003.
Electronic collection offers numerous benefits, including the reduction in time required to transmit and process data; increased accuracy and efficiency (as direct data entry and review by field staff replaces the completion of paper surveys for later input by clerical staff); and editing of data during the collection process.
Producer Price Index:* DOL re-weighted the Producer Price Indexes using 1997 shipment values and updated input/output ratios.
The updated weights provide a more current revenue value for each industry, and the updated input/output ratios allow for more accurate adjustment for transactions among companies within any industry grouping.
Sprains and strains account for half of all workplace injuries and illnesses involving days away from work in services and in transportation and public utilities industries, according to DOL's Bureau of Labor Statistics.
As a Staff Industrial Hygienist in the Safety and Health Department of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, Azita Mahshaykhi helps warehouse and public services workers use BLS data to improve workplace safety.
Ms. Mahshaykhi compares BLS occupational injury and illness data to Teamsters workplace safety records to determine where to focus future research, special projects, and training.
At a recent warehouse division national meeting, Ms. Mahshaykhi presented information on safety and health risks to workers and worker representatives, encouraging workers to recognize and prevent unsafe conditions at the job site, and identifying areas to target when negotiating contract provisions.
Safety and Health Statistics can be found on the website of DOL's Bureau of Labor Statistics at http://stats.bls.gov/iif/home.htm.
U.S. Import and Export Price Indexes: To accommodate the fast pace of products entering and exiting the marketplace in the international economy, DOL re-weighted and published U.S. Import and Export Price Indexes using 2000 trade values with the release of January data.
Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey: DOL released its first monthly Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) data as a developmental series to provide a more complete picture of conditions in the U.S. labor market.
The job openings data from JOLTS indicate the unmet demand for labor in the economy, and the turnover data profile the dynamic nature of the economy.
Covered Employment and Wages: For the first time, DOL published Covered Employment and Wages data (CEW) for calendar year 2001 using a North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) 2002 structure.
NAICS replaces the Standard Industrial Classification system, and offers a new and more consistent approach to industrial classification that better reflects the modern economy.
BLS establishment survey programs use the CEW program output as a sampling frame.
Productivity: DOL produced 18 new measures of labor productivity for 3-digit Standard Industrial Classification service-producing industries.
These measures will provide valuable information on the changing dynamics and performance of the service-providing sector — the largest and fastest growing segment of the economy.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The performance measures for this goal in FY 2003 are: ■ Complete conversion of Current Employment Statistics, Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey, and Current Population Survey data series to the North American Industry Classification System.
Begin implementation of a two-year rotation process to update item samples within existing establishments for the Consumer Price Index.
Complete a staged implementation of electronic data collection for Consumer Price Index items other than rent.
Complete all the system components of the modifications necessary to support the 2004 introduction of annually weighted U.S. Import and Export Price Indexes.
Produce measures of labor productivity and unit labor costs for two additional service-producing industries and multifactor productivity and related cost measures for one additional service-producing industry.
Implement the use of the BLS Internet Data Collection facility in at least two surveys.
Goal 1.3B — FY 2002 Annual Performance Plan) Women made up 46.6 percent of the US workforce and 50 percent of managerial and professional specialty positions in 2001, according to data from the Current Population Survey (CPS) produced by DOL's Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).
Catalyst, a nonprofit research and advisory organization, supplements CPS data with its own sources for use in speeches, publications, and the organization's website as it works to advance the status of women in business and the professions.
Jan Combopiano, Director of the Information Center, uses CPS data on topics such as mothers in the workforce, flexible work arrangements, and workplace diversity to provide a context for research and consulting services delivered to clients - primarily corporations and professional firms, but also including academic and nonprofit organizations, professional associations, researchers, writers, and the media.
Current Population Survey data can be found on the website of DOL's Bureau of Labor Statistics at http://stats.bls.gov/cps/cps_over.htm.
A Secure Workforce DOL is committed to promoting the economic security of workers and their families by protecting workers' hours, wages, and other job conditions; providing unemployment compensation and other benefits when workers are unable to work; and expanding, enhancing, and protecting pension, health care, and other benefits.
Priorities are to increase compliance with minimum wage and overtime requirements; promote secure retirements for working Americans; provide more pensions for women and employees of small businesses; broaden access to health care; and shorten periods of unemployment in those areas suffering from rapid economic change.
The Department of Labor administers and enforces more than 180 Federal laws.
These mandates and their governing regulations cover over 10 million employers and 130 million workers in various workplace activities.
DOL enters the 21st Century having recently celebrated both the 64th anniversary of the Fair Labor Standards Act, which established minimum wage, overtime standards and child labor restrictions, and the 28th anniversary of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), which protects the integrity of private pension, health, and other employee benefit plans.
While these hallmark worker protection laws have endured, many new and difficult issues have arisen as dynamic and complex changes transform America's workforce.
In furthering the economic security and welfare of workers and families, the Department utilizes a multi-pronged approach, which includes compliance assistance, education, private/public partnerships and, should this approach fail, a balanced, consistent enforcement program.
The Department involves all segments of business and industry—contractors, manufacturers, retailers, consumers, worker advocacy groups, financial and health care communities, and unions—in advancing the economic well being of the Nation's workers.
The DOL organizations dedicated to achieving this goal are the Employment Standards Administration and the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration.
Both agencies have developed programs that assist businesses and other organizations subject to DOL's regulations to comply with their provisions through public education and outreach, as opposed to limiting their efforts to traditional enforcement techniques that detect violations after workers have suffered harm.
The Department devotes significant resources to increasing public access to vital information that enables individuals and practitioners to better understand and monitor their rights under the law.
1. Reducing employer violation recidivism.
2. Increasing compliance in industries with chronic violations, i.e., garment manufacturing, long-term health care and agriculture.
Results: The goal has been substantially achieved.
The two sub-objectives contain 18 indicators; performance for 16 indicators was fully achieved, and not achieved for two others.
However, the two indicators not achieved involved the garment industry in New York City, which was significantly impacted by the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.
Program Description: DOL administers and enforces a number of federal statutes that establish minimum standards for wages and working conditions, including the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (MSPA), the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), certain provisions under the Immigration and Nationality Act, and various government contract laws.
This goal includes two sub-objectives, with various indicators to measure progress.
A specific analysis of the results, strategies, and future plans by indicator follows.
1. Reduce employer violation recidivism.
In FY 2002, establish baselines for the percentage of reinvestigations without violations; percentage of reinvestigations with any violation; and percentage of reinvestigations with identical violations.
Results: This performance indicator was achieved.
Analysis of Results: In FY 2002, DOL completed 4,942 reinvestigations of employers who had been the subject of an earlier DOL enforcement action.
The employers may or may not have violated DOL standards when previously investigated.
Of the total reinvestigations, 1,677 (34 percent) found no violations.
Of the remaining 3,265 reinvestigations in which violations were found, 1,242 (25 percent) of the employers continued to violate one or more of the statutes administered by DOL.
Another 938 employers (19 percent) committed violations identical to those identified during the previous enforcement action.
DOL laws protect over 130 million workers in more than 7 million workplaces.
Given available investigative resources, DOL is working to improve the effectiveness of its compliance assistance program and enforcement interventions to help ensure that employers subject to an investigation understand the law and compensate their employees as required.
Recidivism data will assist the Department to develop more effective compliance assistance programs and materials, and will provide the opportunity for targeted enforcement interventions against serious and repeat violators.
Strategies: DOL is implementing a number of strategies to decrease the number of employers that fail to compensate employees according to the law, especially those that commit identical violations.
For example, the Department will offer a revised comprehensive education program, including technology-based compliance assistance.
DOL also provides compliance assistance on all applicable statutes during the conduct of an investigation; secures specific commitments for future compliance following an intervention; and obtains commitments for corporate-wide compliance by multi-establishment employers following a history of interventions.
The Department assesses penalties, pursues litigation and prosecution, and publicizes the consequences of non-compliant behavior for willful and repeat violators.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: DOL has set the following modest improvement goals for FY 2003: * Increase the percentage of reinvestigations without any violations by two percentage points; and * Decrease the percentage of prior violators with identical violations by two percentage points.
In recognition of the agency's core complaint work and to add a customer-focused goal to address the timely resolution of employee complaints, in FY 2003 DOL has established a new goal to decrease the average number of days to conclude a complaint by two percent.
2. Increase compliance in industries with chronic violations, including garment manufacturing, the long-term health care industry, and agriculture.
In FY 2002, the Department established a number of indicators on an industry-by-industry basis that, according to our performance data, relate directly to overall compliance in the industries.
Successful achievement of the targets for these indicators will have a positive impact on overall industry compliance that will be measured in subsequent fiscal years.
Background: The indicators for this sub-objective measure progress toward improving conditions in industries with significant historical levels of non-compliance.
The factors that originally led the Department to target these industries—increasing reliance on immigrant and minority workforces, intense external competitive pressures and high turnover rates—remain prevalent today, and continue to influence the compensation of workers in these industries.
The major garment centers in the U.S. are in New York City and southern California.
According to BLS data, in July 2002 the garment industry employed approximately 525,000 workers in the U.S.—down from just over one million in January 1990.
These garment workers are mostly immigrant (both legal and illegal), vulnerable to exploitation and unlikely to complain about unsafe working conditions and failure to receive wages.
The 525,000 figure does not, however, include what is believed to be a relatively large number of workers in the underground economy in areas where the garment industry is most unstable.
Several investigation-based compliance surveys in garment manufacturing in recent years have determined that low levels of these employers compensate their workers as required by law.
In southern California, the latest survey in 2000 found only 33 percent of the contractor shops in compliance; a 2001 survey in New York City found 52 percent in compliance.
With respect to the employers, 63 percent of southern California and 62 percent of New York City garment workers received proper wages.
The Department's surveys have also provided data showing that monitoring of contractor shops by manufacturers improves compliance, that new contractors are less likely to comply with the law, and that employees paid "off the payrolls" are more likely to be under-compensated.
The long-term health care industry—which employs 2.3 million workers—is one of the fastest growing in the country.
BLS projects that the industry will add 1.1 million jobs in healthcare support occupations by 2010, in part because of the aging population.
The nursing home industry has—over the last several years—suffered increasingly common staffing shortages, bankruptcies, and limits on government reimbursements, and these pressures contribute to overtime violations.
As in garment manufacturing, DOL has been conducting investigation-based compliance surveys in the long-term health care industry.
A 2001 survey of residential care facilities found 60 percent of employers in compliance with the FLSA; a 2000 survey of nursing homes found 40 percent.
These surveys found that 86 percent of the employees in residential care and 89 percent in nursing homes were paid or employed in compliance.
Most employers that violated the law had failed to pay required overtime.
Since 1990, DOL has been targeting the agriculture industry in an effort to increase compliance.
The U.S. is harvesting more labor-intensive crops, such as vegetables, fruits, nuts, and berries, than ever before.
The workers' wages are low, and the work is seasonal and sporadic.
Because of the migratory nature of the work, workers are often transported by others and housed in temporary quarters.
The Justice and Equality in the Workplace Partnership informs Latino workers about their rights in the workplace by raising awareness of U.S. labor laws and available remedies.
DOL's Wage and Hour Division in partnership with the Equal Opportunity Commission, the Mexican Consulate and the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund launched a very successful media campaign in the Houston area.
A hot line staffed by the Mexican Consulate handles primarily Wage and Hour questions and issues, resulting in the restoration so far of nearly $780,000 in wages to almost 1,000 workers.
The success of the Partnership led to a recent expansion.
New partners include DOL's Occupational Safety and Health Administration, several additional Consulates from Latin American nations, the Galveston Houston Diocese, and the National Interfaith Committee for Worker Justice.
DOL’s initial approach was to improve compliance in identified agricultural commodities, such as tomatoes, cucumbers, garlic, lettuce and onions.
As in the other industries with chronic violations, DOL conducted investigation-based compliance surveys in these commodities.
These surveys all found low levels of compliance with the disclosure, housing, wages and transportation provisions of MSPA, which have the greatest impact on agricultural workers.
Throughout the 1990s, investigations in other commodities found similar violations, and DOL therefore changed its focus in FY 2002 from identified commodities to compliance with the disclosure, housing, wages and transportation provisions in labor-intensive agriculture.
For all three industries with chronic violations (previously identified as “low-wage industries”), DOL now measures the number of employees paid or employed in compliance as well as the number of employers in compliance.
An industry-specific analysis of the indicator targets follows.
Results: All three indicators for southern California were achieved; the two indicators for New York City were not achieved.
Analysis of Results: In FY 2002, 53 percent of the manufacturers contacted were monitoring—an increase of 12 percentage points over the FY 2001 measure (41 percent).
In the FY 2000 investigation-based compliance surveys in southern California, DOL found that the level of compliance for contractor shops effectively monitored by their manufacturers was 44 percent compared to 11 percent for shops not monitored.
Strategies: Several strategies were implemented to encourage manufacturers to monitor.
DOL made face-to-face visits with manufacturers to discuss and obtain an agreement to implement an effective monitoring program or improve an existing program.
If these manufacturers initiate or improve monitoring practices, an estimated 500 or more contractors in the Los Angeles Basin could be affected.
DOL also conducted monitoring training sessions, including two in the Korean language.
Analysis of Results: In addition to a higher level of compliance for contractors’ shops monitored by their manufacturers, DOL’s investigative surveys showed that more effective monitoring—especially payroll reviews and unannounced visits—improved the level of compliance even more.
During the visits to manufacturers, training seminars, and investigations discussed above, DOL emphasized the effectiveness of monitoring.
In FY 2001, the average number of elements was 5.5 (out of the possible eight).
In FY 2002, the average number of elements used by those manufacturers that monitored their shops for compliance was 6.37 (a 15 percent increase), exceeding the target.
A further analysis of the data shows that 84 percent of the manufacturers that monitored conducted unannounced visits (an increase from 67 percent in 2001) and 84 percent conducted payroll reviews (a decrease from 88 percent in 2001).
Analysis of Results: The 2000 survey in southern California found that 63 percent of the contractors investigated paid all their employees on the payroll.
The cases subject to measurement in FY 2002 found that 92 percent of the contractors were paying their employees on the payroll, exceeding the target.
The 2000 survey found that those shops paying employees “on the payroll” were more likely to be in compliance.
None of the shops paying employees “off the payroll” were found in compliance during the 2000 survey.
Strategies: The FY 2002 Contractor Compliance Assistance Program included visits to garment contractors employing 6,932 production workers.
DOL also conducted compliance assistance seminars, emphasizing the benefits for paying workers “on the payroll.”
Enforcement included 25 investigations to gauge the effectiveness of the Contractor Compliance Assistance Program, and 48 percent of the shops were in compliance — higher than the level determined in the 2000 survey.
Analysis of Results: The 2001 New York City compliance survey found 51 percent of new contractors compensated their employees in compliance with the law.
In FY 2002, DOL found that six of 14 new contractors (43 percent) participating in the NYC Compliance Assistance Program for New Contractors were in compliance and the indicator, therefore, was not achieved.
Although the target was not met, the findings represent an improvement over the 1999 survey, when contractors in business for 2 years or less had compliance rates of 25 percent compared to the rate of 52 percent for those in business longer than 2 years.
Although not quantifiable, the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, significantly impacted the viability of the New York City garment industry and DOL's efforts to increase compliance.
Strategies: In conjunction with the payroll audit phase of the Compliance Assistance Program for New Contractors, DOL contacted shops newly registered by New York State.
Only about half participated in an audit, during which DOL provided materials on compliance, reviewed payroll records, and recommended corrective action, if appropriate.
Of the 14 shops randomly selected for investigation in the second phase, six (43 percent) paid their workers in compliance with the law.
Other compliance assistance targeting new contractors included IRS and SBA outreach events in garment districts.
Analysis of Results: The 2001 New York City compliance survey found 52 percent of the contractors paid employees "on the payroll."
In FY 2002, only 43 percent (31 of 72 contractors) paid their employees "on the payroll," and the indicator was therefore not achieved.
A large proportion of the contractors investigated during FY 2002 engaged in business with manufacturers with a history of "hot goods" violations, were located in geographic areas where violations are prevalent, or were investigated as a result of potential indications of violations.
As a consequence, the compliance level could be expected to be less than the 2001 baseline developed from a random sampling of all registered contractors in New York State.
Strategies: DOL was an active participant in the New York City Apparel Industry Compliance Program, including improving the contractor screening tool for training, helping to develop the training syllabus, and conducting contractor training.
Also, DOL conducted training seminars for contractors identified as a result of "hot goods" investigations of manufacturers.
In addition, DOL collaborated with the State of New York Department of Labor, referring cases to the New York State Attorney General's Office for consideration of criminal prosecution against contractors that paid employees "off the payroll."
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: DOL will add an objective for garment manufacturers in southern California: establish a baseline of the percent of employees paid "on the payroll."
In New York City, DOL will continue efforts to increase the number of garment employees who are paid "on the payroll" and add an objective: increase by 2 percent the number of manufacturers that monitor their contractor shops for compliance.
Results: All three indicators were achieved.
Analysis of Results: In FY 2002, DOL finalized an agreement with one of the major nursing home chains that provides for proactive steps to promote FLSA compliance among their multiple establishments.
Alterra Health Care is a multi-state nursing home enterprise with some 400 facilities, employs 12,500 full and part time employees.
The enterprise has agreed to undertake internal monitoring of FLSA compliance in its facilities and agreed to a program of training and enterprise-wide compliance assistance.
Also, a California-based nursing home chain, Pleasant Care Corporation, entered into a consent judgment with the Department, and agreed to, among other things, cooperate with DOL in developing a program of corporate training and self-monitoring to compensate its 3,926 employees as required by law.
Altogether, an additional 16,426 employees will benefit from these agreements.
Strategies: DOL developed a proactive compliance assistance program to encourage corporations, their management staff, and facility operators to prioritize paying wages and setting work hours that comply with the FLSA.
This strategy maximizes the impact of the laws and prevents violations before they occur.
Litigation was also used as a strategy to compel recalcitrant employers to take responsibility for corporate-wide compliance.
Increase by 5 percent the number of employers (nursing homes) that were provided compliance assistance information through seminars and other outreach efforts.
Analysis of Results: DOL provided compliance assistance in FY 2002 to 7,681 employers in the nursing home industry either through mailings, seminars or during conference exhibits, a 215 percent increase over the 2,437 employers reached in FY 2001.
Strategies: During FY 2002, DOL officers developed seminars for health care employers; attended seminars; staffed booths at national and regional association conferences; and sent mailings to nursing home establishments.
DOL reached out to human resources professionals and nursing home administrators in an effort to educate those individuals in a position to impact compliance.
The agency also collaborated with State agencies and employer associations to maximize the impact of compliance assistance and effectively utilize agency resources.
Establish a baseline of the number of employers (residential living/group homes) in compliance with the record keeping requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act Analysis of Results: Seventy-seven percent of employers in the residential living (group home) segment of the health care industry complied with the record keeping requirements.
Employers in the residential living segment of the long-term care industry often fail to accurately record the number of hours that employees work, and pay caregivers a flat per week or per month rate regardless of the number of hours worked.
As a result, employers may fail to compensate workers for overtime hours worked.
Improvements in record keeping should result in increased compliance with the FLSA overtime provisions.
However, since the baseline data are drawn from employers selected for investigation for a variety of reasons, including previous history of violations, the data are not reflective of record keeping compliance in the industry as a whole.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: In FY 2003, in the nursing home segment of the industry, DOL will seek to increase the number of employees paid in compliance with FLSA.
Hand-in-hand with this objective, DOL has established a customer satisfaction objective to increase the percentage of nursing home complaint cases concluded in 180 days.
Results: The seven indicator targets were achieved.
Establish baselines of compliance with the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (MSPA) provision of disclosure, wages, housing and transportation and with the child labor provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act relative to selective agricultural commodities in various locations in the U.S. Analysis of Results: During 2002, DOL completed 2,012 cases in agricultural hand-harvested industries, and identified MSPA findings in 1,337 investigations of some 38 different commodities.
Investigation findings were analyzed to determine the level of compliance with the four core MSPA provisions that provide the greatest protections for agricultural workers – disclosure, wages, housing and transportation.
The data provided the following percentages of investigated employers in compliance.
Of the total agricultural investigations completed, 40 found child labor violations.
The percentage of contractors found in compliance with the MSPA housing provisions are drawn from the agency’s database of investigations.
These percentages are not intended to represent the levels of compliance in the industry, since nearly 95 percent of the completed cases targeted employers in commodities like tomatoes, onions, lettuce and cucumbers that have been the focus of the agency’s compliance efforts or had a history of prior violations.
The data do, however, provide the agency with a relative perspective on which of the MSPA critical provisions are most commonly violated and thus, where the agency should direct its resources.
The data also support the agency’s decision to shift from a commodity-based targeting strategy to a targeting strategy more closely based on the statutory provisions.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: Based on the analysis of the FY 2002 data, DOL will direct its FY 2003 compliance assistance and enforcement resources to increasing employer compliance with the MSPA housing safety and health standards.
Program Description: Through its administration and enforcement of the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA), DOL's Employment Standards Administration (ESA) safeguards union democracy and financial integrity and the transparency of union operations.
The LMRDA requires reporting by unions and other covered entities for the purpose of public disclosure; establishes certain standards for union officer elections; and provides certain union financial integrity protections, including criminal provisions for the embezzlement of union funds.
In carrying out its responsibilities under the LMRDA, ESA performs four types of activities: civil and criminal investigations and enforcement actions; union compliance audits; reports/public disclosure administration; and compliance assistance.
Analysis of Results: The filing of timely and accurate financial reports by unions remains a critical objective of the LMRDA program to safeguard union democracy and financial integrity.
The electronic reporting format will substantially improve reporting compliance by unions through automated error checks, error summary reports, and increased ease of filing.
Increasing compliance with reporting requirements will significantly expand public access to filed union reports via the Internet.
In analyzing the baseline of 44 percent timely report filings, the Department noted that there was a substantial mail delay, which at one point during FY 2002 amounted to two weeks, as a result of postal security procedures implemented following anthrax incidents.
In FY 2002, 85 percent of reports required of unions with receipts greater than $200,000 were received within 14 days after the due date.
Although every late submission cannot be attributed to mail delays, this circumstance did have a substantial impact on the timely filing rate.
Performance data with respect to criminal investigations are continually reviewed to enhance the effectiveness of agency efforts to advance LMRDA union financial integrity protections.
Strategies: The Department employs a variety of partnership, compliance assistance, and enforcement strategies to achieve timely and accurate reporting by unions, and these will continue in FY 2003.
These strategies include reminding unions delinquent in the prior year to file their reports on time and establishing partnerships with international unions to promote timely report filing by their affiliates.
DOL will emphasize expanded use of the electronic forms in order to ensure reporting completeness and accuracy.
The Department will seek greater efficiency in conducting criminal investigations to optimize the use of agency resources in extending financial integrity protections to more labor organizations.
Compliance assistance and liaison with union officials, as well as union audits, will complement criminal investigations and enforcement as essential components of a balanced strategy to advance union financial integrity protections.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: The Department plans to implement a goal to improve the completeness and accuracy of filed reports following the development of baseline information in FY 2003.
In addition, DOL plans to expand the goal to address in a more comprehensive manner the LMRDA program's missions to ensure union democracy and financial integrity.
Increase by 5% per year (to 1,993) the number of closed fiduciary investigations of employee pension plans where assets are restored, prohibited transactions are corrected, participant benefits are restored, or plan assets are protected from mismanagement and risk of future loss is reduced.
Results: The Department substantially achieved this goal, increasing by 4.5 percent to 1,985) the number of closed fiduciary investigations where assets were restored, prohibited transactions were corrected, participant benefits were restored, or plan assets were protected from mismanagement and the risk of future loss was reduced.
Program Description: When a fiduciary's mismanagement of assets or imprudent administration places pension benefits at risk, the Department's Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration (PWBA) acts on behalf of plan beneficiaries to minimize potential loss or to restore losses to the plan.
Increasing the number of cases with fiduciary results demonstrates the Department's success in protecting plan assets.
PWBA oversees the benefit security of a universe of 6 million plans, 150 million participants and beneficiaries, and approximately $4.8 trillion in assets.
Analysis of Results: During the past year, the Department continued to improve the quality of cases selected for investigation as demonstrated by the continuing increases in the number of cases closed with fiduciary results, a primary strategy for achieving the goal.
In FY 2002, the Department restored approximately $690 million to pension plans as a result of its investigative efforts — assets that might otherwise have been lost to participants and beneficiaries.
While monetary recoveries may fluctuate significantly and past performance cannot predict future performance in any given year, recoveries have followed a generally upward trend over the past several years.
During FY 2002, the Department opened a number of high profile, resource intensive, pension investigations with far reaching effects on the participant benefits community.
These high profile cases resulted in numerous staff being dedicated to a single case.
In addition, FY 2002 results were impacted by the Health Disclosure and Claims Initiative (HDCI) which began in FY 2001 and concluded in early FY 2002.
More details on the HDCI may be found in Goal 2.1D and Appendix 3.
The HDCI was a major program emphasis in FY 2001 and ultimately continued to impact pension case results into FY 2002.
PWBA's Enforcement Management System (EMS) provides the data used to measure the achievement of this goal, and the Department has confidence in the accuracy and reliability of the data.
OIG conducts regular reviews of the EMS system and PWBA has continually received high marks for its system of checks and balances to ensure high quality data.
In addition, individuals not involved directly with the data input or the investigation must approve case openings.
Cases with monetary results ultimately receive scrutiny throughout the management hierarchy including national office oversight and review.
Strategies: During FY 2002, regional offices continued to employ more effective targeting techniques to increase the number of cases converted from limited reviews to investigations which identify possible fiduciary or criminal violations.
These techniques included: using special computer-generated targeting reports to aid the analysis of specific types of plans or investment/asset categories; working directly with financial institutions to identify plans which may have a delinquent contribution problem or which may have been abandoned by responsible plan officials; targeting issues that were prevalent in specific jurisdictions, then sharing successful strategies nationally for consideration by other regions; and leveraging limited investigative resources through continued use of the Case Opening and Results Analysis (CORA) initiative to refine our efforts at identifying quality cases and their sources.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: Developing a quantifiable outcome goal to measure PWBA's success is extremely challenging.
The Department has developed a combination of new performance indices for FY 2003 which, considered collectively, will better communicate PWBA's performance.
In developing these indices, PWBA intends to: (1) maintain maximum flexibility for the Secretary to make policy judgments regarding enforcement, compliance assistance, outreach and education; (2) reflect effectiveness in achieving these policy choices; (3) avoid unintended incentives (i.e., complex v. easy, monetary v. non-monetary recovery, big v. small plans, health v. pension); and (4) measure a multitude of diverse strategies (e.g., education/outreach, technical assistance, enforcement).
These indices, coupled with additional statistical and underlying management information, will measure the effectiveness of DOL's program in enhancing benefit and retirement security.
Between January 1996 and March 2002 a small business owner operated a financial planning, investment, and insurance firm that provided investment management services to individuals as well as employee benefit plans.
The firm also conducted business with numerous companies that sponsored 401(k) benefit plans.
One plan had transferred approximately $472,000 in plan assets for intended investment in insurance and annuities.
These funds were never deposited, instead, the firm's owner retained them for his own personal use, including speculative stock trading and gambling.
This practice was prevalent throughout the firm's operations, impacting elderly clients' life savings as well as those covered by benefit plans.
The Department's intervention resulted in the firm's operator being sentenced to 87 months in prison and ordered to pay restitution of over $4 million to more than 50 pension plan victims.
PWBA also strives to ensure that stakeholders — plan professionals and participants — are empowered with knowledge to comply with the law and/or to make personal choices.
Audits and Program Evaluations: The General Accounting Office conducted an evaluation of the enforcement program and found, in general, that the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration is a well-managed program.
Further details of the evaluation and specific recommendations may be found in Appendix 3.
Analysis of Results: The Department's Health Disclosure and Claims Initiative (HDCI) introduced during FY 2001 continued to play a role in the increase in health plan investigations closed with positive results.
In recent years, DOL has dedicated substantial enforcement resources to the targeting and investigation of both civil and criminal violations relating to health benefit plans, and the Health Disclosure and Claims Initiative expanded the Department's sources of information about plans that merit attention.
As was indicated in the FY 2001 Annual Report on Performance and Accountability, the Department anticipated that the Health Disclosure and Claims Initiative would continue to have positive impact into FY 2002.
In FY 2002, the Department restored approximately $140 million, or an increase of 112 percent over FY 2001, to benefit plans or directly to participants as a result of its investigative efforts — assets that, in the absence of investigative efforts, may have been lost.
Monetary recoveries may fluctuate significantly and past performance cannot predict future performance in any given year, but recoveries have followed a generally upward trend over the past several years.
PWBA's Enforcement Management System (EMS) provides the data used to measure the achievement of this goal, and the Department has confidence in the accuracy and reliability of the data.
The system checks described in Goal 2.1C also apply to the data used to measure this goal.
Increase by 5% per year (to 620) the number of closed fiduciary investigations of employee health and welfare plans where assets are restored, prohibited transactions are corrected, participant benefits are restored, plan assets are protected from mismanagement, and risk of future loss is reduced.
Results: This goal was exceeded.
The Department increased by 51 percent the number of closed fiduciary investigations where assets were restored, prohibited actions were corrected, participant benefits were restored, or plan assets were protected from mismanagement, and risk of future loss was reduced.
Program Description: The Department's role in the health care arena has expanded as a result of the enactment of legislation that includes regulatory and enforcement requirements to be implemented by the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration (PWBA).
The Department exercises leadership and oversight to protect the interests of in excess of 150 million participants and beneficiaries by ensuring the financial solvency and prudent operations of approximately 6 million health and welfare plans.
When a fiduciary's mismanagement of assets or imprudent administration places health and welfare benefits at risk, the Department acts on behalf of the plan's beneficiaries to minimize potential loss of benefits or to restore losses to the plan.
Several subsidiaries of a company filed for bankruptcy while one subsidiary continued to operate and maintain its health plan.
As a result of the bankruptcy, hundreds of retirees from the bankrupted subsidiaries were at risk of losing their health insurance.
The health plan of the remaining subsidiary denied that they were responsible for offering COBRA insurance coverage to the retirees of the bankrupted subsidiaries.
The Department's Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, in coordination with the Internal Revenue Service, conducted several compliance assistance sessions and explained to the employer that the remaining subsidiary's health plan was responsible for offering COBRA insurance to the affected retirees, retroactive to the date of the bankruptcy.
The health plan attorneys thanked the Department for their compliance assistance on these issues.
As a result of the Department's intervention, the employer agreed to send out COBRA notices to the retirees offering them the opportunity to elect COBRA coverage.
Audits and Program Evaluations: The General Accounting Office program evaluation referenced in Goal 2.1C and further detailed in Appendix 3 also relate to this goal.
In addition, the HDCI evaluation and further details may be found in Appendix 3.
Goal Assessment and Future Plans: See discussion under Goal 2.1C.
In September Secretary of Labor Elaine L. Chao released the final report of the 2002 National Summit on Retirement Savings with a message to all generations of Americans to save for a secure retirement.
The Summit report contains important findings and recommendations targeted to various generations to improve education as a way to increase retirement security.
In breakout sessions, the Summit participants examined the differences in attitudes, behaviors and concerns important to generations and at specific life stages.
The final report includes messages and approaches for educating various generational groups developed by each breakout session.
It is available on on DOL's website at http://www.dol.gov/pwba/PDF/SummitFinalReport.pdf.
DOL improves the economic security of America's working families through the administration of benefit programs dealing with unemployment insurance, expansion of private pension coverage, protection of Federal workers from the effects of work-related injuries, and timely and uninterrupted payment of pension benefits.
DOL's longstanding role in protecting worker benefits arose in response to specific concerns about the well-being of American workers and their families.
The Department's Employment and Training Administration, Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, Employment Standards Administration, and Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation administer DOL programs that safeguard the economic security of the Nation's workers and retirees.
The Social Security Act of 1935 authorized the creation of the Unemployment Insurance program to alleviate personal hardship due to involuntary unemployment and to stabilize the economy.
In 1963, over 4,000 workers with vested pension rights lost some or all of their pensions when Studebaker stopped producing automobiles and closed its plants.
This experience and similar stories of losses in the private pension system became the impetus for pension reform through the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
Under this legislation, the defined benefit plan retirement incomes of about 43 million American workers — one of every three working persons — are currently insured.
The Federal Employees' Compensation program has been protecting Federal workers from the effects of work-related injuries since President Wilson signed the first comprehensive law in 1916 to minimize the human, social, and financial costs of job-related injuries.
Several pieces of legislation enacted during the past decade created new roles for the Department in protecting health care benefits for workers, retirees, and their families.
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 made health care coverage more portable and secure for employees, and gave the Department broad additional responsibilities with respect to private health plans.
The Newborns’ and Mothers’ Health Protection Act of 1996 established minimum requirements for hospital stays relating to childbirth.
The Mental Health Parity Act of 1996 established certain minimum requirements relating to mental health coverage.
The Women’s Health and Cancer Rights Act provided new protections for patients who elect breast reconstruction in connection with a mastectomy.
The protection of employee benefits is vital to the future of both America’s workers and the National economy.
Most recently, the continued economic downturn and unexpected collapse of some very large companies have left many workers unemployed and serve to underscore the need for strong systems to provide timely temporary income support to sustain eligible workers and their families, and to help connect job seekers with job openings.
Longer-term challenges to be addressed in this new century can be seen in the demographics of the workforce.
Americans will live and work longer and require pension and health care benefits for longer periods of time.
The worker who spends an entire career with one company is now the exception rather than the rule.
DOL anticipates an even greater emphasis in the future on pension and health care benefits that provide the flexibility, portability, and coverage that American workers deserve.
Make timely and accurate benefit payments to and facilitate the reemployment of Unemployed Workers and set up Unemployment Insurance (UI) tax accounts promptly for new employers.
Payment Timeliness: 91% of all intrastate first payments will be made within 21 days; * Payment Accuracy: establish a baseline to improve Unemployment Insurance accuracy nationwide; * Reemployment of UI Claimants: establish a baseline to increase the entered employment rate of Unemployment Insurance claimants; and * Establishment of UI Tax Accounts: 80% of new employers will receive a determination about their UI tax liability within 90 days of the end of the first quarter they become liable for the tax.
Results: The goal was not achieved.
Payment Timeliness: This indicator was not achieved.
For FY 2002, 88.7 percent of first payments were made within three weeks, versus a target of 91 percent.
Payment Accuracy: This indicator was achieved.
The Department developed alternative measures of accuracy and overpayment management, and developed a baseline and a performance target for FY 2003.
Reemployment of UI Claimants: This indicator was not met.
During the year, the Department developed alternative methodologies for obtaining entered employment information on UI claimants as an indicator of facilitation.
A measure will be selected in FY 2003 and data are expected to be available to establish a baseline.
Establishment of UI Tax Accounts: This indicator was achieved.
For the four quarters ending June 30, 2002, 81.7 percent of status determinations of whether employers were newly liable to file UI reports and pay UI taxes were made within 90 days of the end of the quarter they first became liable, versus a target of 80 percent.
Program Description: By temporarily replacing part of lost wage income, the Federal-State UI system—one of the nation's most successful and enduring Federal-State partnerships—ameliorates personal financial hardship due to unemployment and stabilizes the economy during economic downturns.
For both workers and employers, the program's success depends upon: timely and accurate payment of benefits; timely establishment of the liability of new employers to ensure the reporting of workers' wages and payment of taxes to fund benefits; and the promotion and facilitation of workers' return to suitable work.
Analysis of Results: Processing workloads generated by the current recession and the burden of implementing a new program have extended the time required to make first payments.
For FY 2002, the number of regular initial claims exceeded by 14 percent, on average, the comparable period the year before, and surpassed the levels expected based on the Administration's planning assumptions.
In addition, the Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation (TEUC) program, which became effective in March, generated numbers of new claims averaging 33 percent higher than the same period in the previous year.
Since the increased workload was not anticipated, the hiring and training of processing staff was not timely and processing delays resulted in slower first payments.
While the combination of more regular claims plus the additional TEUC workloads during FY 2002 caused the deterioration in first payment timeliness, the States maintained commendable timeliness in issuing regular payments under these extreme conditions.
The States responded positively to the emphasis placed on timely determinations of the UI tax liability status of new employers through the creation of a performance indicator and DOL's issuance of regular reports on time lapse.
Although the recession slowed first payments, it may have contributed to States exceeding the target for new status determination timeliness, as the rate of creation of new businesses slowed and the number of new status determinations decreased.