Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, Members of Congress, distinguished guests, and fellow citizens: America this evening is a nation called to great responsibilities, and we are rising to meet them.
As we gather tonight, hundreds of thousands of American service men and women are deployed across the world in the war on terror.
By bringing hope to the oppressed and delivering justice to the violent, they are making America more secure.
Each day, law enforcement personnel and intelligence officers are tracking terrorist threats; analysts are examining airline passenger lists; the men and women of our new Homeland Security Department are patrolling our coasts and borders.
And their vigilance is protecting America.
Americans are proving once again to be the hardest working people in the world.
The American economy is growing stronger.
The tax relief you passed is working.
Tonight Members of Congress can take pride in the great works of compassion and reform that skeptics had thought impossible.
You're raising the standards for our public schools, and you are giving our senior citizens prescription drug coverage under Medicare.
We have faced serious challenges together, and now we face a choice: We can go forward with confidence and resolve, or we can turn back to the dangerous illusion that terrorists are not plotting and outlaw regimes are no threat to us.
We can press on with economic growth and reforms in education and Medicare, or we can turn back to old policies and old divisions.
We've not come all this way, through tragedy and trial and war, only to falter and leave our work unfinished.
Americans are rising to the tasks of history, and they expect the same from us.
In their efforts, their enterprise, and their character, the American people are showing that the state of our Union is confident and strong.
Our greatest responsibility is the active defense of the American people.
Twenty-eight months have passed since September the 11th, 2001—over 2 years without an attack on American soil.
And it is tempting to believe that the danger is behind us.
That hope is understandable, comforting— and false.
The killing has continued in Bali, Jakarta, Casablanca, Riyadh, Mombasa, Jerusalem, Istanbul, and Baghdad.
The terrorists continue to plot against America and the civilized world.
And by our will and courage, this danger will be defeated.
Inside the United States, where the war began, we must continue to give our homeland security and law enforcement personnel every tool they need to defend us.
And one of those essential tools is the PATRIOT Act, which allows Federal law enforcement to better share information to track terrorists, to disrupt their cells, and to seize their assets.
For years, we have used similar provisions to catch embezzlers and drug traffickers.
If these methods are good for hunting criminals, they are even more important for hunting terrorists.
Key provisions of the PATRIOT Act are set to expire next year.
The terrorist threat will not expire on that schedule.
Our law enforcement needs this vital legislation to protect our citizens.
You need to renew the PATRIOT Act.
America is on the offensive against the terrorists who started this war.
Last March, Khalid Sheik Mohammed, a mastermind of September the 11th, awoke to find himself in the custody of U. S. and Pakistani authorities.
Last August the 11th brought the capture of the terrorist Hambali, who was a key player in the attack in Indonesia that killed over 200 people.
We're tracking Al Qaida around the world, and nearly two-thirds of their known leaders have now been captured or killed.
Thousands of very skilled and determined military personnel are on the manhunt, going after the remaining killers who hide in cities and caves, and one by one, we will bring these terrorists to justice.
As part of the offensive against terror, we are also confronting the regimes that harbor and support terrorists and could supply them with nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons.
The United States and our allies are determined: We refuse to live in the shadow of this ultimate danger.
The first to see our determination were the Taliban, who made Afghanistan the primary training base of Al Qaida killers.
As of this month, that country has a new constitution guaranteeing free elections and full participation by women.
Businesses are opening.
Health care centers are being established, and the boys and girls of Afghanistan are back in school.
With the help from the new Afghan army, our coalition is leading aggressive raids against the surviving members of the Taliban and Al Qaida.
The men and women of Afghanistan are building a nation that is free and proud and fighting terror, and America is honored to be their friend.
Since we last met in this Chamber, combat forces of the United States, Great Britain, Australia, Poland, and other countries enforced the demands of the United Nations, ended the rule of Saddam Hussein.
And the people of Iraq are free.
Having broken the Ba'athist regime, we face a remnant of violent Saddam supporters.
Men who ran away from our troops in battle are now dispersed and attack from the shadows.
These killers, joined by foreign terrorists, are a serious, continuing danger.
Yet we're making progress against them.
The once all-powerful ruler of Iraq was found in a hole and now sits in a prison cell.
Of the top 55 officials of the former regime, we have captured or killed 45.
Our forces are on the offensive, leading over 1,600 patrols a day and conducting an average of 180 raids a week.
We are dealing with these thugs in Iraq just as surely as we dealt with Saddam Hussein's evil regime.
The work of building a new Iraq is hard, and it is right.
And America has always been willing to do what it takes for what is right.
Last January, Iraq's only law was the whim of one brutal man.
Today, our coalition is working with the Iraqi Governing Council to draft a basic law with a bill of rights.
We're working with Iraqis and the United Nations to prepare for a transition to full Iraqi sovereignty by the end of June.
As democracy takes hold in Iraq, the enemies of freedom will do all in their power to spread violence and fear.
They are trying to shake the will of our country and our friends, but the United States of America will never be intimidated by thugs and assassins.
The killers will fail, and the Iraqi people will live in freedom.
Month by month, Iraqis are assuming more responsibility for their own security and their own future.
And tonight we are honored to welcome one of Iraq's most respected leaders, the current President of the Iraqi Governing Council, Adnan Pachachi.
Sir, America stands with you and the Iraqi people as you build a free and peaceful nation.
Because of American leadership and resolve, the world is changing for the better.
Last month, the leader of Libya voluntarily pledged to disclose and dismantle all of his regime's weapons of mass destruction programs, including a uranium enrichment project for nuclear weapons.
Colonel Qadhafi correctly judged that his country would be better off and far more secure without weapons of mass murder.
Nine months of intense negotiations involving the United States and Great Britain succeeded with Libya, while 12 years of diplomacy with Iraq did not.
And one reason is clear: For diplomacy to be effective, words must be credible, and no one can now doubt the word of America.
Different threats require different strategies.
Along with nations in the region, we're insisting that North Korea eliminate its nuclear program.
America and the international community are demanding that Iran meet its commitments and not develop nuclear weapons.
America is committed to keeping the world's most dangerous weapons out of the hands of the most dangerous regimes.
When I came to this rostrum on September the 20th, 2001, I brought the police shield of a fallen officer, my reminder of lives that ended and a task that does not end.
I gave to you and to all Americans my complete commitment to securing our country and defeating our enemies.
And this pledge, given by one, has been kept by many.
You in the Congress have provided the resources for our defense and cast the difficult votes of war and peace.
Our closest allies have been unwavering.
America's intelligence personnel and diplomats have been skilled and tireless.
And the men and women of the American military—they have taken the hardest duty.
We've seen their skill and their courage in armored charges and midnight raids and lonely hours on faithful watch.
We have seen the joy when they return and felt the sorrow when one is lost.
I've had the honor of meeting our service men and women at many posts, from the deck of a carrier in the Pacific to a mess hall in Baghdad.
Many of our troops are listening tonight, and I want you and your families to know: America is proud of you, and my administration and this Congress will give you the resources you need to fight and win the war on terror.
I know that some people question if America is really in a war at all.
They view terrorism more as a crime, a problem to be solved mainly with law enforcement and indictments.
After the World Trade Center was first attacked in 1993, some of the guilty were indicted and tried and convicted and sent to prison.
But the matter was not settled.
The terrorists were still training and plotting in other nations and drawing up more ambitious plans.
After the chaos and carnage of September the 11th, it is not enough to serve our enemies with legal papers.
The terrorists and their supporters declared war on the United States, and war is what they got.
Some in this Chamber and in our country did not support the liberation of Iraq.
Objections to war often come from principled motives, but let us be candid about the consequences of leaving Saddam Hussein in power.
We're seeking all the facts.
Already, the Kay Report identified dozens of weapons-of-mass-destruction-related program activities and significant amounts of equipment that Iraq concealed from the United Nations.
Had we failed to act, the dictator's weapons of mass destruction programs would continue to this day.
Had we failed to act, Security Council resolutions on Iraq would have been revealed as empty threats, weakening the United Nations and encouraging defiance by dictators around the world.
Iraq's torture chambers would still be filled with victims, terrified and innocent.
The killing fields of Iraq, where hundreds of thousands of men and women and children vanished into the sands, would still be known only to the killers.
For all who love freedom and peace, the world without Saddam Hussein's regime is a better and safer place.
Some critics have said our duties in Iraq must be internationalized.
This particular criticism is hard to explain to our partners in Britain, Australia, Japan, South Korea, the Philippines, Thailand, Italy, Spain, Poland, Denmark, Hungary, Bulgaria, Ukraine, Romania, the Netherlands, Norway, El Salvador, and the 17 other countries that have committed troops to Iraq.
As we debate at home, we must never ignore the vital contributions of our international partners or dismiss their sacrifices.
From the beginning, America has sought international support for our operations in Afghanistan and Iraq, and we have gained much support.
There is a difference, however, between leading a coalition of many nations and submitting to the objections of a few.
America will never seek a permission slip to defend the security of our country.
We also hear doubts that democracy is a realistic goal for the greater Middle East, where freedom is rare.
Yet it is mistaken and condescending to assume that whole cultures and great religions are incompatible with liberty and self-government.
I believe that God has planted in every human heart the desire to live in freedom, and even when that desire is crushed by tyranny for decades, it will rise again.
As long as the Middle East remains a place of tyranny and despair and anger, it will continue to produce men and movements that threaten the safety of America and our friends.
So America is pursuing a forward strategy of freedom in the greater Middle East.
We will challenge the enemies of reform, confront the allies of terror, and expect a higher standard from our friend.
To cut through the barriers of hateful propaganda, the Voice of America and other broadcast services are expanding their programming in Arabic and Persian, and soon a new television service will begin providing reliable news and information across the region.
I will send you a proposal to double the budget of the National Endowment for Democracy and to focus its new work on the development of free elections and free markets, free press, and free labor unions in the Middle East.
And above all, we will finish the historic work of democracy in Afghanistan and Iraq so those nations can light the way for others and help transform a troubled part of the world.
America is a nation with a mission, and that mission comes from our most basic beliefs.
We have no desire to dominate, no ambitions of empire.
Our aim is a democratic peace, a peace founded upon the dignity and rights of every man and woman.
America acts in this cause with friends and allies at our side, yet we understand our special calling: This great Republic will lead the cause of freedom.
In the last 3 years, adversity has also revealed the fundamental strengths of the American economy.
We have come through recession and terrorist attack and corporate scandals and the uncertainties of war.
And because you acted to stimulate our economy with tax relief, this economy is strong and growing stronger.
You have doubled the child tax credit from 500 to $1,000, reduced the marriage penalty, begun to phase out the death tax, reduced taxes on capital gains and stock dividends, cut taxes on small businesses, and you have lowered taxes for every American who pays income taxes.
Americans took those dollars and put them to work, driving this economy forward.
The pace of economic growth in the third quarter of 2003 was the fastest in nearly 20 years; new home construction, the highest in almost 20 years; homeowner-ship rates, the highest ever.
Manufacturing activity is increasing.
Inflation is low.
Interest rates are low.
Exports are growing.
Productivity is high, and jobs are on the rise.
These numbers confirm that the American people are using their money far better than Government would have, and you were right to return it.
America's growing economy is also a changing economy.
As technology transforms the way almost every job is done, America becomes more productive and workers need new skills.
Much of our job growth will be found in high-skilled fields like health care and biotechnology.
So we must respond by helping more Americans gain the skills to find good jobs in our new economy.
