This report, prepared in accordance with the Reports Consolidation Act of 2000, presents the results of the Department of Labor’s (DOL) program and financial performance for FY 2004.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis begins with the Secretary’s Message, introduces the Department’s mission, vision and organization, summarizes the other three sections (beginning immediately following this introduction) and includes a brief report on DOL’s progress in implementing the President’s Management Agenda.
The Performance Section conveys, through data, analyses and examples, progress in achieving the Department’s goals as presented in the Department’s Strategic Plan and Annual Performance Plans.
The two appendices provide additional details.
The Financial Section demonstrates our commitment to effective stewardship over the funds DOL receives to carry out the mission of the Department, including compliance with relevant financial management legislation.
It includes the Principal Financial Statements and Notes and the Independent Auditor’s Report – an independent opinion on the Financial Statements provided by the Department’s Office of Inspector General.
The Management and Performance Challenges section presents the top management issues identified by the Office of Inspector General and the Department’s progress and plans to meet these challenges.
This year, DOL will publish in print form a summary version of the report for public consumption, aptly titled FY 2004 Summary Performance and Accountability Report.
Although format differs, content is identical to corresponding sections of the full “official” report.
The summary version includes: the full Management’s Discussion and Analysis; Strategic Goal introductions and Outcome Goal summaries from the Performance Section; the CFO letter; a summary of the Inspector General’s internal control and compliance reports; a summary of the independent financial audit; condensed Financial Statements; the complete Management and Performance Challenges section; and Acronyms and Internet links appendices.
Both versions of the report are online at http://www.dol.gov/_sec/media/reports.
FY 2004 marks the sixth year that the Department of Labor has reported program results under the Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA).
Program and management goals that are key to the accomplishment of Departmental strategic and outcome goals as presented in the FY 2003-2008 Strategic Plan were selected for inclusion in the Department’s annual plans.
These performance goals and their indicators provide the basis for assessments of the Department’s effectiveness in this section.
This report includes performance goals from two different annual plans2 because some programs administered by the Employment and Training Administration are “forward-funded,” meaning that their spending and performance goals are tracked on a cycle that lags the Federal fiscal year (FY) by nine months.
This period is referred to as a Program Year (PY); such goals being reported on in this document cover July 1, 2003 to June 30, 2004 (PY 2003).
PY 2004 goals will appear in the FY 2005 report.
The Department’s goal structure has three levels.
Strategic goals describe outcomes that emerge from the Department’s mission.
Each of these goals in turn has several outcome goals that define general results DOL agencies can influence.
These are long term objectives that in most cases involve more than one DOL agency.
Finally, performance goals that support each outcome goal provide program-level clarity of purpose.
Each performance goal has associated indicators and targets to measure our impact on a continuous basis.
Of the 42 performance goals DOL is reporting on in FY 2004 (30 program goals plus 12 management goals), the Department achieved 25, substantially achieved five and did not achieve 12.
The percentage achieved or substantially achieved totals 71 percent.
In FY 2003, the Department achieved or substantially achieved 66 percent of its goals.
The assessment category of substantially achieved recognizes results that were very close (i.e., 80 percent of targeted year-on-year improvement).
The table below presents each performance goal for which results are being reported in this document.
It includes the goal number, responsible agency, goal statement, result and period covered.
Two versions of Goa 1.1F appear because ETA moved its dislocated worker goals from Outcome Goal 2.3 before VETS changed its goal to a program year basis, deferring it to this year’s report.
Goal 3.1D (OSHA) appears three times because prior year results were not reported on schedule.
This table lists goals that appeared in DOL’s FY 2004 Revised Final Annual Performance Plan for which results will be reported in the FY 2005 Performance and Accountability Report.
All apply to ETA’s forward-funded Program Year 2004 (July 1, 2004 – June 30, 2005).
DOL’s four strategic goals – A Prepared Workforce, A Secure Workforce, Quality Workplaces and A Competitive Workforce – express outcomes associated with our mission, vision and theme, and serve to focus Departmental efforts on the links between activities and their higher purpose.
The table below indicates FY 2004 program performance goal achievement by strategic goal.
Costs devoted toward achieving the Department’s strategic goals (see table below) are dominated by the second goal, A Secure Workforce, for which net costs in FY 2004 amounted to $47.0 billion.
Ninety-seven percent ($45.6 billion) of this amount is accounted for by benefit payments to unemployed workers or workers disabled as a result of work-related injuries or illnesses.
The first goal, A Prepared Workforce, required $8.7 billion (15 percent of total net costs), spent mostly in the form of grants to States and other organizations to offer job training and a host of employment-related services to assist workers to improve their skills and obtain productive, longterm employment.
Approximately $1 billion (less than 1 percent) went toward the third goal, Quality Workplaces, to fund direct services (such as salaries of Federal employees) aimed at improving safety and health in the workplace.
The fourth goal, A Competitive Workforce, is new; moreover, most of its programs expend funds on a Program Year that lags the fiscal year by nine months.
Its costs were the lowest, at just $6 million.
Charts that display net costs from FY 1999-FY 2004 to illustrate trends are provided in each outcome goal summary; brief explanations of significant changes since FY 2003 are provided, as well.
In future reports DOL plans a more robust discussion of cost information, eventually at the performance goal level.
This will be facilitated by full cost information provided by the new managerial cost accounting system, Cost Analysis Manager (CAM), which is described in more detail in the Outcome Goal FM summary and the Performance Goal FM2 narrative.
Cost models that describe relationships between resources, activities, outputs and outcomes have been completed and will be populated with data in FY 2005.
Reports from this system will inform management how much it costs to provide the Department’s major services, thereby supporting sound decision making and accountability for results.
A tally of goals achieved, while providing a quick indication of whether DOL is on schedule with its plan, does not convey any actual performance information.
To understand what was achieved in terms of benefits to the public, it is necessary to look not just at whether targets were reached but also at whether observed results indicate positive program impacts.
The following summaries focus on significant trends that have continued or have become apparent in the past year and what they mean in terms of DOL’s past performance and future strategies.
As indicated in the Program Performance Goal Achievement table above, DOL had 12 performance goals under this strategic goal in FY 2004.
The Department achieved seven (58 percent) and did not achieve five (42 percent) This achievement percentage is below the Department wide average of 71 percent.
In FY 2004, positive trends included: employment, retention, and earnings improved for Workforce Investment Act (WIA) adult programs; the number of disabled workers served in pilots funded by the Office of Disability Employment Policy nearly tripled; homeless veterans’ employment rate exceeded 60% (well above target) for the second year in a row; and diploma attainment for younger youth (14-18) and entry to employment and retention for older youth (19-21) increased substantially.
WIA Dislocated Worker and Trade Adjustment Assistance programs obtained disappointing results, both having difficulty assisting workers affected by mass layoffs in replacing their income in new jobs.
Further improvement in the preparedness of America’s workforce will be promoted by DOL’s demand-driven strategy of identifying employers’ needs and using that information to identify skilled workers and to develop suitable training programs.
In response to recommendations from the Administration’s Program Assessment Rating Tool (PART) reviews of the Trade Adjustment Assistance program, new agreements between the Secretary of Labor and the States’ Governors will include performance expectations to encourage better results.
DOL’s Workforce Investment Act reauthorization proposal places emphasis on serving out-of-school youth, the special population DOL is uniquely qualified to serve.
Of six performance goals, DOL achieved two (33 percent), substantially achieved two (33 percent), and did not achieve two (33 percent).
The total achieved and substantially achieved (67 percent) is slightly below the Departmental average.
The Department reached targets for increasing compliance with the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) in industries with the worst violation records, but failed to reach its targets for reducing recidivism of prior violators in those same industries.
Labor unions’ financial integrity and transparency indicators improved by targeted quantities.
The Unemployment Insurance program reached its target for recovery of estimated overpayments while maintaining its high level of administrative efficiency and building its capacity to facilitate reemployment.
Employee benefit security programs reached all targets, including those for successful conduct of civil and criminal cases against benefit plan malfeasance, and customer satisfaction with participant assistance received.
Federal workers’ compensation results were positive, overall; while lost production days rose, medical costs rose less than the national healthcare inflation rate and claims processing improved significantly.
Finally, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation did not reach its targets for customer satisfaction.
In FY 2005, DOL will continue its targeted compliance assistance programs for employers with respect to wage and working condition standards, including detailed agreements and reinvestigation plans; support an amendment to the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act authorizing civil monetary penalties for delinquent union reports; and improve processing of workers’ compensation claims through greater Internet access.
Of 11 performance goals, DOL achieved eight (73 percent) and did not achieve three (27 percent), for an achievement ratio above the Departmental average.
In FY 2004, mine fatality and all-injury incidence rates reached the lowest levels recorded in over a quarter century.
Other evidence of improved mine safety is the further reduction in coal dust, silica dust and noise overexposures observed at inspected mine sites during the past year.
Fatalities in all workplaces actually rose slightly, according to DOL estimates; safety in its broader definition improved in all occupations, as measured by the estimated rate of days away from work resulting from workplace injuries.
Equal opportunity to work advanced, as incidence of discrimination among evaluated Federal contractors was just one percent, and compliance with all other workplace standards rose sharply to 91 percent.
Veterans’ employment and reemployment rights were further protected by rulemaking (clarification of procedures that implement the Act of Congress) and by collaboration with the Department of Defense on an annual survey to identify the issues most troublesome for service members returning to the civilian workforce.
Evolving strategies for safety and health regulatory activity include enforcement, training and delivery systems that address workplace demographic trends such as increasing age of workers and likelihood that employees may not speak English.
Meanwhile, DOL continues to increase outreach, assistance, and cooperative programs to complement enforcement activity.
The one performance goal being reported on this year was not achieved.
Nevertheless, the Department has made progress implementing plans to focus its programs’ strategies on winning strategies in a global economic environment.
To better build a demand-driven workforce system, DOL implemented the President’s High Growth Job Training Initiative and the Career Voyages WebSite, and began implementing the ETA Management Information and Longitudinal Evaluation (EMILE) reporting system.
In the regulatory arena, all targets for increased flexibility and reduced burden were not reached, but the important step of incorporating cost/benefit analysis in all impact evaluations is proceeding according to schedule.
Next year’s report will report on the first results of investments made in support of Goal 4 – the High Growth Job Training Initiative (HGJTI) Grants awarded in PY 2003.
The Performance Section presents, by strategic goal, summaries of performance at each level.
Each strategic goal section is introduced by an overview of the goal, its component outcome goals, results for FY 2004 and near term plans for improvement.
Each outcome goal section similarly begins with a summary of results, adds net cost information and highlights and concludes with a brief discussion of future plans.
Finally, within each outcome goal section are individual performance goal narratives that introduce the indicators and discuss the program perspective, present results, analysis and future plans and disclose management issues such as data quality and program evaluations that have implications regarding impact or effectiveness.
Appendix 1 contains performance goal histories and Appendix 2 summarizes significant evaluations and audits of DOL programs completed during FY 2004 that have implications for performance goals in this report.
Sound financial management is the keystone of the Federal Government’s efforts to improve accountability and deliver better results.
Decision makers at all levels need timely, accurate and useful financial management information and user-friendly, state-of-the-art tools to facilitate and enhance decision-making.
In keeping with the President’s goals, the Department of Labor continued to enhance its performance in financial management.
This year, DOL successfully reached green on the President’s Financial Management Agenda scorecard for financial management.
All financial systems at the Department maintained substantial compliance with the Federal Financial Management Improvement Act of 1996 (FFMIA), assuring that the systems support full disclosure of the costs of the Department’s programs and activities.
In addition, the Department continued to comply with the Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act (FMFIA), indicating that the Department’s accounting systems and internal controls were sufficient to safeguard the resources entrusted to the Department.
No material weaknesses were found in the audit of the Department’s financial statements.
The Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) has begun replacing DOL’s core accounting system with a financial management information system using a JFMIP-compliant COTS package.
DOL’s current accounting system has enabled the Department of Labor to achieve unqualified audit opinions and has provided accurate financial information over the past 14 years.
However, advances in technology, opportunities arising from E-Government initiatives and the Department’s need to better integrate financial and performance information with a broader user-based support the need for a new system.
On a Government wide perspective, OCFO is co-chairing the Financial Management Line of Business (FMLOB) initiative.
This initiative seeks to establish a Government-wide financial management solution that is efficient and improves business performance while ensuring integrity in accountability, financial controls and mission effectiveness.
Standardization of business processes and data definitions across the Government will allow consistent reporting of inter-agency accounting events and aid in the reconciliation of inter-agency transactions – providing better accountability.
OCFO also participates in the E-Payroll initiative, which involves consolidation of Federal payroll operations to three providers.
Cost savings will result from standardizing policies affecting payroll process and the elimination of duplicative IT investments across the Government.
The Department has begun the process of migrating its payroll operations to the National Finance Center (NFC) run by the Department of Agriculture.
DOL’s goal is to complete the transition to NFC in FY2005.
DOL has embarked upon a department-wide managerial cost accounting initiative called Cost Analysis Manager (CAM).
CAM provides expenditure information to managers, analysts, and other decision-makers to help them better understand operational costs.
CAM’s costing methodology is consistent with the Statement of Federal Financial Accounting Standards (SFFAS) No.4, which provides the guidance for full cost of federal programs.
It answers the question of what are the full costs of a program and raises additional cost-based questions that help managers improve program performance.
CAM provides these improvements through the delivery of timely and frequent information regarding program costs, analyzing program efficiencies and effectiveness through “what if” scenarios, and determining whether its spending reflects an agency’s priorities.
Furthermore, CAM will provide Departmental management with cost information to evaluate past performance and guide future decision-making.
The OCFO intends to enhance its efforts to monitor the Department’s internal control structures and procedures and alert management of potential financial issues.
This initiative will allow OCFO to assess the efficiency and effectiveness of financial operations, the reliability of financial reporting, and compliance with applicable Federal laws and requirements.
This will also provide DOL with the financial management information needed to support its quarterly process to attest to the existence and effectiveness of internal controls throughout the organization to ensure compliance with FMFIA and FFMIA requirements.
The Department’s financial statements received an unqualified or “clean” audit opinion for the eighth consecutive year.
The independent CPA firm of R. Navarro & Associates, Inc. issued reports for Fiscal Years 2004 and 2003.
This independent assessment provides assurance that the money managed by the Department is accounted for properly.
The principal financial statements in this report summarize DOL’s financial position, net cost of operations and changes in net position; provide information on budgetary resources and financing; and present the sources and disposition of custodial revenues for fiscal years 2004 and 2003.
DOL’s Balance Sheet presents its financial position through the identification of agency assets, liabilities and net position.
Over 99 percent of DOL’s investments are Unemployment Trust Fund investments.
DOL total assets decreased from $64.8 billion at the end of FY 2003 to $62.4 billion in FY 2004.
Seventy three percent of DOL assets are invested in U.S. Government securities, compared to 75 percent in FY 2003.
Liabilities totaled $15.0 billion and $13.9 billion at the end of FY 2004 and FY 2003 respectively, leaving a difference, or net position, of $47.4 billion and $50.8 billion at the end of each year.
The total net cost of DOL operations in FY 2004 was $56.7 billion, a 16 percent decrease from the prior year.
The major portion of DOL costs comprise of Income Maintenance programs.
Income maintenance expense includes costs such as unemployment checks paid to individuals who are laid off or out of work and seeking employment as well as payments to individuals who qualify for disability payments due to injury or illness suffered on the job.
Employment and Training programs comprise the second largest cost.
These programs are designed to help individuals deal with the loss of a job, research new opportunities, find training to acquire different skills, start a new job or make long-term career plans.
DOL’s remaining costs fund programs to protect worker safety, health, and employment standards; to safeguard pension and health plan benefits; to provide statistical information; and to support departmental management and infrastructure.
The Statement of Financing reconciles the net cost of operations with the obligation of budgetary resources for the Department.
DOL’s operations are funded primarily by Unemployment Program employer taxes, appropriations received, and investment interest earned from various trust funds.
This statement reports the amount of resources received to effectively carry out the activities of the Department as well as the status of those resources at the end of the fiscal year.
DOL had direct obligations of $61 billion in FY 2004, a decrease of $10 billion from FY 2003.
As required by the Government Management Reform Act of 1994 (31 U.S.C. 3515 (b)), the principal financial statements report DOL’s financial position and results of operations.
While the statements have been prepared from the books and records of DOL in accordance with formats prescribed by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), the statements differ from the financial reports used to monitor and control budgetary resources, which are prepared from the same books and records.
The statements should be read with the realization that they are a component of the U.S. Government, a sovereign entity, and that liabilities reported in the financial statements cannot be liquidated without legislation providing resources to do so.
Identifying and reducing improper payments continues to be a major financial management focus for the Federal Government in FY 2004.
A key component of the President’s Management Agenda is to improve agency financial performance through reductions in improper payments.
The Improper Payments Information Act of 2002 (IPIA) broadened the original erroneous payment reporting requirements to programs and activities beyond those originally listed in Circular A-11.
The IPIA requires Agencies to report annually on the extent of improper payments and the actions taken to increase the accuracy of payments.
The Department has historically been engaged in efforts to reduce improper payments, as shown by the Agency’s commitment to the Benefit Accuracy Measurement (BAM) program, which statistically quantifies and reports the Unemployment Insurance Program’s erroneous payment performance.
This measurement program has been in place for more than 15 years and includes sampling activities to identify errors, fraud, and abuses.
To coordinate and facilitate the Department’s efforts under the IPIA, the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) was designated as the Erroneous Payment Reduction Coordinator for the Department in FY 2004.
The Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) worked with program offices to develop a coordinated strategy to perform annual reviews for all programs and activities susceptible to improper payments.
This cooperative effort included developing actions to reduce improper payments, identifying and conducting ongoing monitoring techniques, and establishing appropriate corrective action initiatives.
To identify Agency programs that meet IPIA reporting requirements, the Department established an inventory of existing programs and conducted an initial risk assessment.
This risk assessment identified those programs and activities with potential improper payments exceeding both 2.5% of outlays and $10 million.
The Department then conducted statistical sampling for any program or activity meeting the initial risk assessment thresholds, except for certain grant programs, which are discussed in the paragraph below.
To produce timely and accurate results, the Department conducted the sampling using FY 2004 data.
Agency programs and activities with an estimated annual amount of improper payments in excess of $10 million, and those required by Section 57, were identified as meeting the threshold for reporting.
To achieve compliance for susceptible grant programs, the Department faces challenges similar to those of many other Federal Agencies.
Often, grant programs are structured to provide Federal funds that empower local entities to operate programs based on local need.
The Federal Government provides the monies to States, cities, counties, private non-profits, and other organizations to distribute these Federal funds.
The Federal Government relies on single audit report findings from the Single Audit Act to monitor the recipients of these Federal funds.
However, the single audits do not always contain the details necessary to meet the reporting requirements of the IPIA.
Specifically, single audits do not have the detailed testing criteria or sufficient reporting requirements to provide the data necessary to statistically estimate improper payments within the grant programs.
This limits access to the data needed to estimate aggregate Federal error rates.
In FY 2004, the Department conducted the required initial risk assessment, statistically sampling all programs deemed susceptible and established appropriate reduction targets (save for the grant programs).
The initial assessment identified 12 programs “susceptible” to improper payments.
The Department conducted statistical sampling for 7 of these 12 programs.
The remaining five programs, for which statistical sampling was not feasible for FY 2004, were grant programs.
Only two of the seven programs (Unemployment Insurance and Federal Employees Compensation) met the IPIA reporting requirement thresholds.
Using analysis of the sampling data, the Department developed corrective action initiatives for the programs reporting in the Performance and Accountability Report (PAR).
During the past year, many UI initiatives in particular delivered results.
Specifically, access to the National Directory of New Hires and the Social Security Administration Data Exchange will enable States to reduce payments to ineligible recipients, a significant source of improper payments.
Additionally, the Department is developing an approach to evaluate UI’s corrective action initiatives through a performance measurement metrics pilot.
This pilot will enable the sharing of best practices and comparative performance metrics among States by quantifying the successes associated with each initiative.
Such data will allow States to direct funding to the initiatives with the most powerful effect on improper payments.
To address the challenges of grant programs the Department co-chaired the government-wide CFO Council’s Erroneous and Improper Payments Grants Subcommittee.
The Department made significant contributions to multiple recommendations that contemplate various solutions for grant programs.
In FY 2004, the OCFO analyzed the Department’s single audits to determine how modifications to the Circular A-133 Compliance Supplements will help to achieve IPIA compliance.
The analysis confirmed that the most efficient means to gather data regarding Federal grant programs is to use the existing infrastructure provided by the Single Audit Act.
The Department’s grant analysis also produced recommended changes to testing and reporting requirements of Circular A-133 that are necessary to statistically estimate error rates.
To further enhance these modifications, the Department intends to conduct a pilot for a selected grant program.
The pilot would gather data using the single audits for a selected grant program and allow the Department to refine its initial Circular A-133 recommendations on how to better achieve estimates of improper payment rates at the Federal level.
Finally, the Department believes that IPIA implementation requires concerted support from component Agencies to realize significant results.
As such, the Department’s OCFO has initiated the development of assistance activities that, while focused on improving financial management and internal controls, will also coordinate program Agency efforts to achieve compliance with the IPIA.
To ensure accountability for achieving real reductions, the Department will integrate IPIA efforts into the existing quarterly financial certification meetings with Agency heads.
The development of this infrastructure is an important step in supporting the environment of accountability.
The Inspector General Act Amendments of 1988 require explanations for all audit reports with recommendations open for more than one year.
DOL management and audit communities agree that some of these audit resolutions will require several years to complete the corrective action.
As of September 30, 2004, 158 audit reports have been open for over one year.
The total value of open audits of $236 million covers 739 separate recommendations.
DOL agencies and the OIG jointly manage and update an audit tracking system where the current status of each open audit is maintained.
Final closure of the audit is determined only by final decisions of the reviewing officials.
Many of these decisions take years before being rendered and the audit closed.
The most significant of the non-monetary open audit findings are discussed in this report.
A listing of all open audits is available upon request from the Department’s Office of the Chief Financial Officer.
The Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996 (DCIA) designated the Department of the Treasury as the central agency for collection of Federal debts over 180 days delinquent, and DOL cross services all delinquent debts in accordance with this statute.
Debt management accounts for a relatively small part of our financial management activity.
The majority of debts managed by DOL relate to the assessment of fines and penalties in our enforcement programs.
During FY 2004, the Department improved its compliance with DCIA and referred $79 million, which represents 96% of all eligible delinquent debt, to Treasury for collection.
The amount of debt referred to Treasury in FY2003 was 92%.
In accordance with the CFO Act and OMB Circular A-25, department wide guidance has been developed to establish policy, procedures, and responsibility for implementing and managing user charges in DOL.
The guidance includes the biennial review requirements of the CFO Act.
DOL continues to review and adjust user fees in programs to reflect current costs and market value of these services.
The Prompt Payment Act requires Executive agencies to pay commercial obligations within discreet time periods and to pay interest penalties when those time constraints are not met.
In FY 2004, of approximately $1.2 billion in gross payments, $115,452 was paid in interest fees and penalties.
Additionally, during FY 2004, there were over 66,000 payments made to vendors and travelers.
Of this amount, 1,451 invoices were paid late resulting in only 2% of the total payments made during FY 2004 incurred interest penalties.
On average, DOL made approximately 82 percent of its salary, awards, travel and miscellaneous payments electronically in FY 2004.
The Department continues to lag behind Government averages due to the low EFT participation and the heavy volume in ESA’s medical and benefits programs.
These ESA programs account for over 71 percent of DOL’s total payment volume.
Each issue is discussed briefly below, along with Departmental management’s responses.
Detailed descriptions of the challenges identified by the Office of Inspector General and the Department’s responses are in the Management and Performance Challenges section of this report immediately following the Financial Section.
Reducing improper payments in DOL administered benefit programs, including Unemployment Insurance (UI) and the Federal Employee Compensation Act (FECA) program, is a challenge to the Department.
Improper payments include those made in the wrong amount, or to an ineligible recipient, or improperly used by the recipient.
The need for Federal agencies to take action to eliminate overpayments is recognized by the President’s Management Agenda (PMA) and the Improper Payments Information Act of 2002.
UI overpayments by the states are projected by DOL at about $4 billion annually.
The Department’s estimate for FECA overpayments, which we consider conservative, is $10 million annually.
ETA was very pleased with the enactment of a law based on draft legislation proposed by the Department that gives State UI agencies access to the National Directory of New Hires.
This will enhance states’ ability to detect unreported work violations by UI claimants working in other states or for certain multi-state employers who may be all new hires to only one state.
ETA is working with the Department of Health and Human Services on the details of implementation and will encourage states to use the directory when it becomes accessible.
ETA continues to promote activities to prevent and detect overpayments.
In FY 2004, $2.3 million is being made available to states that submitted acceptable proposals to implement or enhance benefit payment control activities such as computer cross-matches to detect overpayments, for example, through the use of the states’ Directories of New Hires as well as through an electronic data exchange between State UI agencies and the Social Security Administration.
Improving the integrity and solvency of the UI program to better serve qualified recipients is a challenge for the Department of Labor.
During FY 2003, the UI program paid over $53 billion in income maintenance benefits to American workers.
Among the difficulties faced by the program are inadequate Unemployment Trust Fund (UTF) reserves, overcharges for UTF administration, and the program’s susceptibility to fraud schemes involving identity theft and organized crime.
ETA again notes that there is no Federal solvency standard.
There is nothing wrong from ETA’s standpoint if a state must borrow from the fund.
In fact, the greater the drawdown in states’ solvency positions during a downturn, the greater the system would impact as an automatic economic stabilizer.
Reducing the susceptibility of DOL foreign labor certification programs to abuse remains a challenge to the Department.
These programs allow U.S. employers to hire foreign workers when their admission does not adversely impact the job opportunities, wages, and working conditions of citizens and legal residents.
DOL received almost 400,000 employer applications for foreign workers through these programs in FY 2003.
Problems with the integrity of the labor certification process and fraud against the program persist.
This may result in economic hardship for American workers, the abuse of foreign workers, and may have national security implications when applications are not adequately screened before being certified.
ETA seeks to add clarification to the observations of the OIG.
Our authority is not to investigate aliens for possible security risks, but rather to ascertain whether the area of intended employment has been adequately tested such that there are no available, willing, able, and prepared U.S. workers for the position being proposed by an employer.
In order to manage DOL programs for results and fully integrate budget and performance, the Department needs timely financial data, a managerial cost accounting system that matches cost information with program outcomes, quality performance data, and useful information from single audits that cover 90 % of its expenditures.
While DOL has received high marks on the President’s Management Agenda scorecard for financial performance and budget and performance integration, it faces challenges in fully implementing improvements undertaken in these areas.
OCFO recognizes effective project management as a significant factor affecting the eventual success of the New Core Financial Management System Project (NCFMS).
Effective and responsive project monitoring, oversight and controls, clear and effective direction, and governance systems can mitigate the risk of missing the intended end result.
Project risks for NCFMS are managed through detailed project plans and resourced work breakdown structures (WBS).
The project plan and WBS enable effective management of project tasks to be performed at the activity level, monitoring resource and time consumption, and comparing baseline estimates with actual costs and schedule.
The project plan also includes activities associated with testing various software deliveries against DOL requirements documents and responding to regulatory requirements and changes.
OCFO’s partnership with the OIG will help ensure that all Federal financial system requirements and user needs are met.
Developing efficient and effective systems to perform the day-to-day business of DOL is also a challenge to the Department.
Judicious planning and program management are critical to the implementation of new systems.
Enduring problems in existing systems must also be addressed in a timely, effective manner.
The OIG has concerns about insufficient planning for new DOL information technology and other systems.
Lack of progress in addressing longstanding concerns in established programs like the Davis-Bacon prevailing wage determination process are also of concern.
The Office of Chief Information Officer (OCIO) continues to implement a comprehensive project management structure that employs a rigorous system development life-cycle management process.
This process includes checks and balances to ensure projects are executed according to plan, within budget, and meeting performance expectations.
Systematic quarterly reviews are conducted during which the OCIO and the Departmental Budget Center evaluate the progress of information technology (IT) projects against a range of parameters, including: cost, schedule and performance; enterprise architecture alignment; and compliance with security requirements.
IT development projects are then rated on quarterly review “scorecards” in each of these categories.
The OCIO has also established policy for and implemented an earned value management system (EVMS) for major IT investments in FY 2004, which allows the cost, schedule and performance of major IT investments to be monitored over time.
As is the case for all government agencies, information technology security is an ongoing challenge for the Department of Labor because of new threats and increased automation through E-Government initiatives.
Keeping up with these developments, and providing assurances that DOL systems will function reliably and safeguard information assets in an E-government environment require a sustained effort.
The security of DOL IT systems and data is vital, since it relates to key economic indicators and the payment of billions of dollars to workers.
The OCIO performed a comprehensive review of the Department’s Security Program to measure its efficiency and effectiveness.
This review included a broad assessment of security vulnerabilities identified by the OIG, as well as applicable Departmental IT security policies and procedures.
Based on this review, a DOL Plan of actions and Milestones (POA&M) was developed which mapped out a strategy to mitigate the identified security vulnerabilities, including other program areas needing improvement.
Agency senior management were advised by the Chief Information Officer to give priority and resources to their agency-specific vulnerabilities prior to funding new IT investments.
Agencies were also advised to ensure these vulnerabilities and their corrective actions were documented in their Plans of Actions and Milestones (POA&Ms).
In addition, the OCIO established several focus groups comprised of representatives from multiple Departmental agencies to leverage agency expertise and assistance in enhancing the Department’s Cyber Security Program.
Protecting the benefits of American workers, including pensions and health care, remains a significant challenge to the Department.
DOL is responsible for overseeing and protecting the interests of participants in about 730,000 private pension plans and six million health and welfare plans covered by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA).
These pension plans hold over $4.8 trillion in assets and cover more than 150 million workers.
Recent failures in corporate financial management and reporting, as well as in the auditing and oversight of these activities, show the need to enhance worker pension and healthcare security by expanding safeguards and improving benefit plan regulatory enforcement.
The Department has responded to the challenge of pension plan fraud and mismanagement with a strong enforcement program accomplished through civil and criminal investigations of plans, plan sponsors, fiduciaries, and service providers.
During FY 2004, the Department’s Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA) achieved more than $3.1 billion in monetary results and 121 criminal indictments.
Further, the Department continues to take steps to improve the financial audit process established by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA).
In February 2003, EBSA initiated its second nationwide review to assess the quality of employee benefit plan audits using a statistical sample of 300 plan audits, to assess compliance with professional accounting and auditing standards; a report of findings is pending.
EBSA is also fully committed to enhancing health care security by putting an end to the fraudulent and abusive practices of corrupt Multiple Employer Welfare Arrangements (MEWAs) and their operators with a three-pronged approach: (1) emphasizing prevention by educating employers and consumers; (2) aggressively pursuing civil and criminal enforcement actions to shut down scams; and (3) supporting legislation to establish a secure and affordable alternative for small businesses looking to purchase health insurance for their workers – Association Health Plans (AHPs).
The Department is challenged to improve accountability for and management of millions of dollars worth of real property.
The GAO designated Federal real property as a high-risk area in January 2003, and in February 2004 the position of Senior Real Property Officer for Federal Agencies was established by Executive Order.
The President’s Management Agenda also includes a government-wide initiative aimed at improving stewardship of Federal real property assets.
With respect to the DOL, OIG audits have highlighted opportunities for improvement in real property management.
ETA’s Office of Financial Administration Services (OFAS) completed its first annual (physical) inventory of Job Corps capitalized real property in January 2004, which effectively resolved differences between Job Corps site survey data and the Capitalized Assets Tracking and Reporting System (CATARS).
Procedures are in place to ensure that OFAS and Job Corp coordinate effectively to ensure future land acquisitions are entered within the ETA database in a timely manner.
ETA generally agrees with the OIG that an accurate, up-to-date inventory and valuation of State Workforce Agency (SWA) real property must be maintained.
Currently, ETA sends a letter to SWA Administrators every two years asking that ETA property records be reviewed and updated.
ETA also has a Training and Employment Guidance Letter (TEGL) on SWA real property in the final clearance process, which requires states to report changes and/or updates to their real property data by November 30, 2004.
States are also required to remit the proceeds from real property sales to DOL.
The Department also faces the challenge of improving Workforce Investment Act (WIA) programs through the WIA reauthorization process.
To date Congress has not reauthorized the WIA legislation.
Prior OIG audits identified areas in which WIA could be improved to better achieve its goals.
Based on our audit work, the recommended changes are: increase training provider participation, improve dislocated worker program services and outcomes, improve documentation of youth program outcomes, and better assess states’ current WIA funding availability.
DOL has agreed to most of our recommendations, but many have yet to be implemented.
As of September 2004, the House and Senate WIA reauthorization bills that were passed in 2003 are still awaiting conference.
As noted in the examples from specific ETA Program Offices, the Department has taken numerous steps to address the concerns outlined in the OIG findings, even while we await further action on WIA reauthorization.
In addition to the specific steps referenced above, ETA convened two Federal/State Policy Forums in 2004 to discuss high-level policy issues such as those identified by the OIG.
The continued implementation of the President’s High-Growth Job Training Initiative is also helping to address these key issues by funding innovative partnerships between the workforce investment system, business and training providers to train adults and young people for jobs that are in demand.
Market based, actively promoting rather than stifling innovation through competition.
Together, initiatives created to achieve these goals are referred to as the President’s Management Agenda (PMA).
The five government wide initiatives are: Strategic Management of Human Capital, Competitive Sourcing, Improved Financial Performance, Expanding Electronic Government, and Budget and Performance Integration.
In addition, DOL is responsible for two of the PMA components found in selected departments: Faith-Based and Community Initiatives and Federal Real Property Asset Management.
The latter was just added in June 2004.
The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) regularly assesses all Federal agencies’ implementation of the PMA, issuing an Executive Branch Management Scorecard rating of green, yellow or red for both status and progress on each initiative.
The breakdown by initiative, comparing last year’s ratings with those for FY 2004, is indicated in the table below.
Under the OMB-led Proud to Be campaign, DOL set ambitious goals, demonstrated measurable progress and in just nine months elevated five of its status scores.
The Department continues to be rated among the best Cabinet agencies in overall implementation of the PMA.
Highlights of achievements associated with each initiative follow the table.
Competency models are the main criteria for rating candidates and for conducting skills assessments for development.
Managerial and employee performance plans are being reviewed for clear links to outcome goals.
A recent survey indicated a time-to-hire of 41days.
DOL has an ambitious plan to compete designated commercial functions by the end of FY 2007.
In FY 2005, the plan includes 377 FTE – approximately half in Finance and Accounting and over 100 in Education and Training functions.
DOL earned elevation in the last quarter of FY 2004 by improving data integration practices.
In FY 2005, the new Cost Analysis Manager tool will capture and report data that will achieve operational and program efficiencies.
Improper payments identification and mitigation activity has moved beyond the sampling stage; a key priority for FY 2005 is development of approved plans for measurement of error rates and dollar amounts for remaining programs.
DOL achieved green status by developing acceptable business cases for all major systems in FY 2004 and by reaching other ambitious milestones.
In FY 2005, DOL plans release of a Technical Security Manual and completion of a revised Capital Investment Plan.
DOL earned a Green status score on this initiative by improving PART scores, creating efficiency measures for all programs, developing capabilities of full and marginal costing of performance goals and institutionalizing use of performance results to inform funding and strategic decisions.
Since 2001, DOL has awarded 417 grants totaling $140.5 million as part of its ongoing efforts to implement the President’s Faith-Based and Community Initiative.
The Department is working with workforce boards nationwide to increase partnerships with faith-based and community organizations that help transition hard-toserve individuals into employment.
DOL recently invested $10 million in the Ready4Work Offender Reentry Program to enhance training and employment services at 18 reentry sites nationwide.
The Department also published two final regulations in July 2004 designed to ensure the equal treatment of faith-based and community groups that partner with DOL.
DOL’s priorities for FY 2005 are development of an Asset Management Plan and performance measures for operational costs consistent with Federal Real Property Council standards.
A strong national economy depends, in part, on preparing workers to be qualified job candidates possessing skills that are relevant to the needs of today’s employers.
In addressing this challenge, the Department must work with a wide spectrum of job seekers, including those with special needs such as the disadvantaged, people with disabilities, veterans, disadvantaged youth, and those who have lost their jobs due to foreign competition.
Addressing the job seekers’ needs is further complicated by the dynamics of the changing workplace.
New technologies, increased competition, and changing labor markets have prompted employers to downsize, change employment patterns, and seek alternative labor sources such as qualified foreign workers.
While employers and workers bear ultimate responsibility for adapting to these challenges, the Department has a leadership responsibility to support the needs of the changing workforce and position the U.S. for continued economic development and growth.
This aspect of our mission is captured by the first strategic goal – A Prepared Workforce.
Agencies with programs supporting this goal are the Employment and Training Administration (ETA), Veterans’ Employment and Training Service (VETS), the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), and the Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP).
The Department’s performance in achieving this goal is determined by accomplishments organized at the outcome goal level and measured at the performance goal level.
Three broad objectives – Outcome Goals 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3 – support Strategic Goal 1, and they contain twelve performance goals (see table below).
In FY 2004, the Department made further progress in positively impacting employment outcomes for Americans – despite the challenge of a persistently sluggish economy and its disproportionate effect on DOL target populations.
Although just half of the performance goals were achieved, most targets were reached and all programs documented improved results.
The following charts illustrate DOL’s strategic goal net costs in FY 2004, with A Prepared Workforce shares set apart.
The first allocates total Departmental costs of $56.676 billion; the second allocates an adjusted net cost of $11.102 billion that excludes major non-discretionary items associated with Strategic Goal 2.7 Net costs of this goal in FY 2003 were $6.923 billion.
The increase occurred in large part because of relocation of the WIA Dislocated Worker and TAA programs to this goal from Goal 2; together, these two programs cost approximately $2 billion annually.
The outcome goals and programs listed above, along with their results, costs, and future challenges are discussed in more detail on the following pages.
America’s engine of prosperity is its skilled workforce.
The Department assists workers and employers with valuable information and specific training to help them take full advantage of the constantly changing demands and resources in the labor market.
Central to this effort is a nationwide network of approximately 2,000 DOLfunded One-Stop Career Centers which assist communities to match adults to work and skill enhancement opportunities.
This comprehensive workforce development system also helps businesses meet their ongoing recruitment and human services needs.
For those with disabilities, the One-Stop Centers have improved access to their facilities and services by installing assistive technologies.
DOL is also making a special effort to help our nation’s military service members adjust to and re-enter the civilian workforce, largely by providing priority services at all One-Stop Centers pursuant to the Jobs for Veterans Act of 2002.
The Employment and Training Administration (ETA) and the Veterans’ Employment and Training Service (VETS), with support from the Women’s Bureau, the Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives and the Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP), operate a number of programs that provide the information, assistance, and skill-building opportunities that lead to increased employment and earnings.
In the first column of the table below appear the numbers, agencies, reporting periods , goal statements, and achievement for DOL performance goals associated with this outcome goal.
The second column presents a summary of targets reached, substantially reached, and not reached for the indicators associated with each performance goal and the most significant result(s) for this past year.
FY 2004 program costs of $5.4 billion supported Employment and Training Administration programs to provide employment and training for adults through formula grants to States, registered apprenticeship, and employment services; programs for dislocated workers; Veterans’ Employment and Training Service assistance to veterans, including those who are homeless; Office of Disability Employment Policy efforts to develop, evaluate, and disseminate strategies to improve employment outcomes for job seekers with disabilities; Office of Faith Based and Community Initiatives contracting outreach; and Women's Bureau efforts to increase job opportunities for women.
The $2 billion increase in costs for Outcome Goal 1.1 resulted almost entirely from moving the Dislocated Worker Program and Trade Adjustment Act performance goals from Strategic Goal 2 (Outcome Goal 2.3 in the DOL FY 2003 Performance and Accountability Report) and into Outcome Goal 1.1 in Strategic Goal 1.
Therefore, these costs do not represent an increase in DOL costs but a shift of costs from one strategic goal to another.
Performance for most of DOL’s employment and training programs is measured by entered employment – the percentage of participants who obtain jobs subsequent to receipt of services – and by retention – the percentage of those who obtained jobs who are still employed six months later.
Earnings are another important indicator but until very recently, such data were not collected by all grantees, nor were the measures uniform.
The charts below plot, for each program that tracks employment and retention rates, the result for the previous year (if available), the target for the reporting period and its actual (or estimated) result.
There are significant differences in entry and retention rates between programs; this can be explained by the types of services offered and the populations they serve.
But year-on-year entry rates did not change significantly; in fact, they were unchanged for three of the five programs with data, increased slightly for one and declined slightly for another.
This lack of progress was not entirely surprising; given the slow economic recovery, several targets were below prior year actual levels.
The trend in retention rates is more positive.
For the three programs with prior year data, one held steady, another increased slightly and a third went up by several percentage points.
This, too, is consistent with what we know about the economic environment.
Workers tend to hold on to positions when growth is less robust.
Strategies that made positive contributions were: enhanced use of technology to provide universal access and target job search and training; further integration of the workforce development system via co-enrollment; expanded outreach to businesses (especially in high growth industries); and increased use of competitive grant processes.
Thanks to a Tennessee Customized Employment Partnership (TCEP) program funded in part by DOL’s Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP), Brandi recently started work with Community Kids Child Care.
She really enjoys interacting with the children and their families and appreciates the respect they show her.
She also appreciates her higher salary.
When she received her first paycheck, she tearfully told her Career Specialist “WOW! I think I’ll take my mom out to dinner and give my tithes to my church.”
Brandi exited high school at age 22 with a special education diploma and was referred to TCEP two years later by a Vocational Rehab Counselor who worked with students transitioning out of high school.
At that time, Brandi was working part-time but unhappy with her job because it featured very little social interaction.
One lesson from the first four years of WIA is that separate funding streams for services can have a negative impact on program performance due to duplication of the services and additional administrative support.
The President proposed to consolidate funding streams for adult, dislocated worker, labor exchange and youth services when WIA is reauthorized.
DOL will further implement its demand-driven strategy of identifying employers needs and using that information to identify skilled workers and to develop suitable training programs.
This includes expanded outreach to employers through the Business Relations Group (BRG), which encourages highgrowth industries to list jobs with the one-stop delivery system.
In addition, the Department is attempting to leverage its resources wherever possible by taking advantage of other workforce investment system services and focusing DOL efforts on core employment and training services.
Another effort aims at providing an integrated service system for trade workers; alignment of Federal and State processes will enhance program results.
Management challenges include fully implementing the Jobs for Veterans Act of 2002, which calls for consideration and accommodation in integrating services for veterans at the State and local levels.
An older challenge is data availability and timeliness, which received attention by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) in its June 2004 report States and Local Areas Have Developed Strategies to Assess Performance, but Labor Could Do More to Help (see Study 9 in Appendix 2).
Similarly, the Department’s Office of Inspector General has questioned whether data reported by States for WIA performance were accurate and supportable.
In response, DOL developed a data validation methodology, and provided handbooks, user guides, and software for all State workforce agencies.
States were required to validate their PY 2003 WIA performance data reports using this methodology.
The Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) program has struggled with performance issues for several years, but is taking remedial action.
In response to recommendations from the Program Assessment Rating Tool (PART) reviews in recent years, new agreements between the Secretary of Labor and the States’ Governors will include performance expectations to encourage better results.
Additionally, TAA will adopt the common measures for Federal employment and job training programs, with implementation complete by late FY 2005 or early FY 2006.
Use of common measures will align Trade Act program measures with those for the WIA Dislocated Worker program and promote the goals of co-enrollment and coordination between the two programs.
Also, DOL is conducting a five-year impact evaluation of the TAA program (final report in FY 2010).
Recommendations will be used to improve performance, to assess implementation of the Trade Reform Act and to inform the TAA reauthorization process.
Increase the employment, retention, and earnings of individuals registered under the Workforce Investment Act Adult program.
The average earnings change will be $3,100 for those who are employed in the first quarter after program exit and are still employed in the third quarter after program exit.
The Workforce Investment Act (WIA) Adult program is designed to help adult participants acquire the skills and jobs that they need to compete in a global economy.
Funds are provided by formula to states and local communities allowing them to operate statewide networks of One-Stop Career Centers, which provide core, intensive, training, and supportive services to workers and employers.
DOL uses three indicators to evaluate the success and effectiveness of WIA employment and training services for adults: entered employment, retention and earnings change.
A high entered employment rate indicates that participants have improved financial security.
A high retention rate indicates stability of participants’ new positions.
Higher earnings reflect effective assistance, especially of training services.
National labor market conditions strongly influence the WIA Adult program outcomes.
In periods of economic expansion, as experienced in the late 1990s, outcomes met or exceeded targets.
In recent years, as the economy began to recover from the recession of 2001, further improvement in employment and retention rates and earnings change has been more difficult.
Despite this challenge, DOL continued to improve its integrated one-stop delivery system, thereby allowing the program to raise standards for performance beyond FY 2000 baselines.
Over the past four years, targets for entered employment and retention increased a total of six and seven percentage points, respectively.
The earnings change target has been adjusted to more accurately reflect the current economic operating context.
Performance Goal 1.1A (ETA) was achieved.
74 percent were employed in the first quarter after program exit.
85 percent were employed in the third quarter after program exit.
3,260 was the increased average earnings for those employed in the third quarter after program exit.
The entered employment rate of 74 percent and the employment retention rate of 85 percent exceeded the targets by three percentage points, respectively.
The earnings change of $3,260 exceeded the target by $160.
As illustrated in the charts, conditions are generally improving.
The entered employment and retention outcomes have remained above the targets, while the outcomes for earnings increase rose significantly from $2,900 in PY 2002 to $3,260 in PY 2003.
The demand for goods and services over the past year, as indicated by the major economic indicators, has a positive effect on the people served by the Adult program.
The drop in the unemployment rate from 6.3 percent last year (CY 2003) to 5.6 percent gave a boost to the program outcome and partially accounts for the gains in earnings above the target.
To continuously improve the outcomes of WIA participants, the Department is producing new tools, creating incentives, and simplifying the coordinating process.
Strengthening business relationships to assure demand-driven services and to better identify and fill jobs in growth occupations.
The intent is to focus the workforce investment system on the President’s High Growth Job Training Initiative.
The purpose of which is to serve America’s growing industries and to match workers with jobs in demand.
Assuring universal access to the workforce investment system with emphasis on targeted outreach.
Leveraging WIA resources to increase total resources available to prepare the workforce.
DOL will work with other Federal agencies to set optimum conditions allowing for co-enrollment in programs without creating negative consequences for performance levels.
Craig has good reason to be a big believer in the public workforce investment system.
In 2002, shortly after learning of his infant daughter’s serious illness, Craig received the difficult news that he would be losing his job.
The months ahead proved strenuous, as his family of four fought to meet their most basic needs.
After a futile job hunt, Craig learned about Job Training for Beaver County, Inc. (JTBC) at the Beaver County CareerLink of Pennsylvania.
He was able to take courses in A+ and Network+ Computer Training and received a graduating certificate in August 2002.
His case manager referred him to the Job Search Training Program (JSTP) sponsored by JTBC.
JTBC staff helped build Craig’s interviewing skills and gave him the confidence to land a computer Network Administrator job with Challenges: Options in Aging – a Catholic Charities program operated through the Diocese of Pittsburgh.
In response to recent concerns raised by the Office of Inspector General regarding whether data reported by States for WIA performance were accurate and supportable, DOL developed a data validation methodology, and provided handbooks, user guides, and software for all State workforce agencies.
States were required to validate their PY 2003 WIA performance data using this methodology.
One lesson from the first four years of WIA is that separate funding streams for services can have a negative impact on program performance because of the duplication of the services and additional money spent on administrative support.
The Department proposes to address this barrier by consolidating these funding streams when WIA is reauthorized.
The Government Accountability Office (GAO) released a report on WIA in June 2004: States and Local Areas Have Developed Strategies to Assess Performance, but Labor Could Do More to Help (Study 9 in Appendix 2).
The report examined data availability and timeliness issues.
ETA also contracted with an independent research team to conduct an evaluation of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998.
The study, The Workforce Investment Act in Eight States: State Case Studies from a Field Network Evaluation (Study 21 in Appendix 2), examined national goals and the roles of Federal, State, and local partners in implementing the law in eight states.
Another independent study, Creating Partnerships for Workforce Investment: How Services are Provided Under WIA (Study 20 in Appendix 2), presents findings from case studies of sixteen local boards across eight states that may help other local boards in developing local systems.
Improve the outcomes for job seekers and employers who receive public labor exchange services.
The number of job openings listed with the public labor exchange (with State workforce agencies and America’s Job Bank (AJB) will increase 1% over PY 2002, as adjusted for economic fluctuation.
The number of resume searches conducted by employers from America’s Job Bank will be collected to determine a baseline for setting future performance targets.
The purpose of the public labor exchange is to match labor market demand with supply by providing businesses that have employment openings with appropriate job seekers to fill their vacancies.
As part of this process, the public labor exchange system receives and publishes job openings, either through businesses posting their openings with State workforce agencies, or through America’s Job Bank, a national Internet site that provides another access point to the public labor exchange system.
The public labor exchange system’s effectiveness is measured by the success of job seeker customers in finding and retaining employment.
The performance of the public labor exchange is largely a function of the labor market – the number and quality of jobs and workers available.
For example, during Program Year 2003 (July 2003 to June 2004), the nation’s unemployment rate dropped from 6.2 percent to 5.6 percent.
In this period, ETA saw an increase in the number of job openings posted with State workforce agencies and America’s Job Bank, in particular in the information, professional and transportation industries.
Second, ETA encouraged States to register job seekers that receive automated, self-directed and/or staff-assisted services.
Job seekers using selfservice tools have been shown to have a positive impact on the entered employment rate, since they are generally more job ready than other (traditional) customers of the public labor exchange.
Performance Goal 1.1B (ETA) was achieved; all indicator targets were reached.
61 percent of job seekers registered with the public labor exchange entered employment with a new employer by the end of the second quarter following registration.
80 percent of the job seekers that entered employment continued to be employed two quarters after initial entry to employment with a new employer.
6.6 million job openings were listed with the State workforce agencies and 5.9 million were listed with America’s Job Bank for a total of 12.5 million openings in PY 2003.
A baseline of 169 million job searches conducted by job seekers on America’s Job Bank was established in PY 2003 and will be used to set future performance targets.
A baseline of 8 million resume searches conducted by employers on America’s Job Bank was established in PY 2003 and will be used to determine a baseline for setting future performance targets.
These reports also contained two quarters of employment retention data on a subset of PY 2002 labor exchange registrants for whom retention outcomes using wage record matches are available.
The number of job openings in PY 2003 represents a roughly 22.5 percent increase over the PY 2002 level.
The entered employment rate and the retention rate together function as true indicators of the labor exchange’s success.
The entered employment rate points to the ability of the workforce system to meet the employment needs of workers, the majority of whom are unemployed, in an efficient and cost effective manner.
The retention rate outcome shows registrants are being placed in jobs that match employers’ needs and the individuals interests.
Among strategies to continually improve performance, DOL has aggressively expanded outreach efforts to employers through the Business Relations Group (BRG) which has worked to partner high-growth industries to list jobs with the one-stop delivery system.
This dialogue is helping to match willing jobseekers with willing employers.
In PY 2004, the Employment Service will actively participate in DOL efforts to research statistical models for goal setting purposes and implement a pilot with the Veterans Employment and Training Service to move toward an earnings gain measure for the public labor exchange.
Electronic tools are changing the way the public workforce system does business by making important employment services just a “click” away.
The Employ Kentucky Operating System (EKOS), a new electronic self-registration system for employers and job seekers, is helping match qualified job seekers to employers needs.
Employers can register jobs and search for qualified applicants using the system’s userfriendly features while job seekers receive phone calls and e-mails alerting them to job openings that fit their occupation criteria.
Currently, there are over 500,000 job titles listed in the system.
Employers who place job orders in EKOS have exposure to over 200,000 registered applicants.
Help American workers with the right skills find the right jobs.
The Employment Service (ES) is a participant in ETA’s data validation initiative which ensures the reliability of performance data submitted to ETA from state partners.
A significant number of states are using the ES Report Validation Software and/or the Data Analysis and Reporting Tool (DART) software, both of which have been validated as accurate by ETA.
In addition, a data warehousing project was recently completed at the America’s Job Bank Service Center against which queries can now be run to provide more accurate counts of the number of job openings received and job and resume searches conducted on America’s Job Bank.
The primary management issue facing the Employment Service is accomplishing closer integration of the program with the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) Adult and Dislocated Worker programs, either through reauthorizing the WIA and possibly consolidating all adult services into a single funding stream or through policy guidance and administrative and/or regulatory action.
The implementation of the common measures initiative and its associated single data collection and reporting system to capture outcomes will also be a major activity for the Employment Service over the coming year.
Strengthen the registered apprenticeship system to meet the training needs of business and workers in the 21st Century.
Increase the number of new apprentices registered by OATELS staff over the established baseline from 67,401 to 68,592.
Registered Apprenticeship combines on-the-job learning and related technical and theoretical instruction in a skilled occupation.
Industries develop Apprenticeship programs based on the skills and knowledge that these industries require of their employees.
Sponsors voluntarily operate and cover costs of the programs that are registered with the DOL or a federally approved State Apprenticeship Council (SAC) or Agency.
Registered Apprenticeship program provides positive returns on investment, as it requires a formal employer-employee relationship, including provision of incremental wage gains during the instruction period.
At the successful completion of the instructional training and on-the-job learning, apprentices receive Certificates of Completion from DOL that are portable and recognized nationally.
The President’s High Growth Job Training Initiative (HGJTI) identified the following as growth industries: aerospace; automotive; biotechnology; energy; geospatial; health care; high-technology manufacturing; hospitality; information technology; retail trade; and transportation.
DOL seeks to strengthen the National Registered Apprenticeship System to provide more opportunities for workers to find jobs requiring recognized credentials.
It allows employees to get the skilled workers that they need to stay competitive and keep the economy growing.
Performance Goal 1.1C (ETA) was achieved.
The number of new apprenticeship programs in industries that comprise the HGJTI was 526, exceeding the target of 366, and the number of new apprentices registered by ETA’s Office of Apprenticeship Training, Employer and Labor Services (OATELS) staff was 69,597, compared to its target of 68,592 apprentices.
OATELS has promoted, marketed, and provided technical assistance to new and existing sponsors to develop, register, and maintain apprenticeship programs and apprentices, and provided technical assistance to SAC staff.
Consultative sales techniques have been instrumental in the program’s success.
Since the initial Consultative/Solutions Sales Techniques training began in June 2003, the number of programs and apprentices in new and emerging High Growth Jobs Training Initiative (HGJTI) industries has grown significantly.
Activities in HGJTI are thriving throughout the country.
Employers in new and emerging industries are becoming increasingly interested in using the apprenticeship concept to develop professional workers.
DOL mounted several pilot programs to improve OATELS.
President Bush showcased the National Information Technology Apprenticeship System project at a community college in Arizona.
This pilot is designed to improve the productivity of American information technology (IT) workers, lower the cost of hiring and training for American employers and provide a structured approach to IT career development throughout the national workforce investment system.
Another pilot, the National Institute for Metalworking Skills (NIMS), has designed the National Competency Based Apprenticeship System.
This new system of training and credentialing fundamentally changes and dramatically improves the way that skilled workers are trained in the American metalworking industry.
Key to the new system is the integration of standards-based credentialing assessments linked with relevant on-the-job-training.
This provides maximum flexibility for apprentices and employers alike, increases precision and productivity through the introduction of technology as part of the skill standards, and opens career ladders through the metalworking industry.
Charles had his dreams of becoming a world-class athlete come to fruition the day he was drafted by the Los Angeles Rams in 1993.
Charles had graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree from the University of Wisconsin at Madison, earlier that same year.
He continued this dream until an injury ended his professional football career in 1997.
Unwilling to be discouraged, Charles set out on a new path to further his skills and find new success.
In 1999, Charles registered as an Electrician Apprentice where he has worked his way up to Journeyperson Electrician this past June 2004.
He has had the opportunity to work on high profile assignments such as the Center for the Arts Project in Madison, Wisconsin.
Though his salary is less than his football playing days, his current yearly earning is a competitive $52,300.
According to Charles, football and apprenticeship are similar.
In football, there is a start and finish process (touchdown).
In apprenticeship, you need to keep learning and honing skills, troubleshoot, and train other apprentices as you pass on the skills.
He has his eyes set on a new prize, Master Electrician!
During FY 2004, modifications to the Registered Apprenticeship Information System (RAIS) were made.
RAIS provides extensive data regarding the Apprenticeship system itself, participants, programs, and demographics.
Some mandatory fields for reporting were instituted as well as restrictions on reported values.
These changes have made RAIS a more reliable database that is easier to use for detailed analysis.
As part of the OATELS performance management process, each region was required to conduct an audit of 80 percent of all existing Apprenticeship programs to insure that all data and fields were complete and correct.
Preliminary reports from the regions indicate that over 70 percent of the RAIS data has been reviewed.
While the Apprenticeship program has made significant progress in improving data quality over the past years, there is still a need to continue to improve data quality through ongoing data validation.
Efforts continue to obtain more participation by SAC States to make RAIS a reliable database of the National Registered Apprenticeship System.
Expansion of new Registered Apprenticeship programs is dependent upon economic conditions.
If certain industries are downsizing their workforce, they are less likely to institute new Registered Apprentice programs.
Conversely, as success in the new and emerging high growth jobs and industries demonstrates, there are opportunities to expand the Apprenticeship programs.
FY 2005 will be a transitional year for evaluating performance in the Apprenticeship program.
This will be the first year that the program will be using measures of employment, retention, wage gain, and efficiency.
However, due to data limitations, the program will not be able to calculate outcomes based on the Common Measures methodology.
Rather, the program will have proxy measures that resemble the Common Measures.
This first step will allow the program to collect valuable data that will help inform the establishment of baselines.
Actions to resolve data issues will continue to be pursued in FY 2006 to enable ETA to use the Common Measures for the Apprenticeship program.
Provide national leadership to increase access and employment opportunities for youth and adults with disabilities receiving employment, training, and employment support services by developing testing, and disseminating effective practices.
Increase by 5% the number of people with disabilities served through ODEP projects.
Increase by 5% the entered employment rate at pilot sites.
Increase by 10% effective practices identified through pilot projects and other research-related initiatives.
The Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP) provides national leadership on disability employment policy to the Department of Labor (DOL) and other Federal agencies.
ODEP develops and influences disability employment policy through reviewing legislation and policies; collaborating on inter- and intra-agency Federal efforts; partnerships with State, local, and non-governmental stakeholders; designing and conducting research studies and pilot projects; and promoting policies, practices and initiatives that increase the employment of people with disabilities.
ODEP implements the employment-related goals of President Bush's New Freedom Initiative.
This initiative expands research in and access to assistive and universally designed technologies, further integrates Americans with disabilities into the workforce and helps remove barriers to participation in community life.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, among the non-institutionalized population aged 16-64 in the United States, 33 million people have disabilities.
Of this group, 18.6 million people with disabilities, or 56 percent, are employed.
According to the Department of Labor’s Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), projections for employment between 2002 and 2012 show an increase of 21.3 million jobs, about 600,000 more jobs than were added in the previous decade.
This presents a unique opportunity to promote disability employment policies and practices that will most effectively reach into the untapped pool of people with disabilities.
Nineteen year-old Martin came to the Tennessee Career Center to find a job.
After meeting with Martin and learning about his experience and interests, a customized employment Career Specialist provided Martin with more intensive assistance.
Martin had no prior work experience, but he cared for a miniature horse and pygmy goats at home and was very interested in working with animals.
Martin and the Career Specialist determined that Martin would benefit from having an opportunity to observe work with animals.
The Career Specialist placed Martin at a local farm where he assisted with the care and training of horses, but he soon discovered that he was better suited to working with small animals.
The Career Specialist identified the John Sevier Animal Clinic, which hires kennel workers who aspire to become veterinary technicians, as having a need for part-time assistance.
The supervisor arranged an “observation day” for Martin at the clinic.
Martin greatly enjoyed his observation and soon started work there.
Martin is successfully completing his kennel worker duties and performing some veterinary technician duties.
ODEP achieved its goal.
In FY 2004 ODEP adopted a new goal and four new indicators that measure increases in the number served, employed, retained (at three and at six months), and in the number of effective practices identified through ODEP pilot projects.
ODEP was able to use data from pilot projects implemented in FY 2003 to compile results for indicators one and two (number served and number employed).
Based on available data through the end of the 3rd quarter, performance has surpassed expectations.
For indicators three and four, ODEP established baselines.
In FY 2004, a total of more than 6,000 people were served through the various pilot projects administered by ODEP.
More than 900 participants (19.2 percent) entered employment through the pilot sites.
Retention baselines were established at 12.3 percent at three months and 6.9 percent at six months.
The baseline for effective practices is ten.
In FY 2005 the Department will continue evaluating workforce development system practices through pilot and research projects and programs.
These activities develop effective practices and policies for dissemination to the workforce development system and partners providing employment, training, and employment support services to adults and youth with disabilities.
Keith, an amiable young man with Cerebral Palsy, was one of the first referrals to ODEP’s Customized Employment project in Hempstead, NY.
The search for competitive employment has been a long road.
Keith is a wheelchair user, has limited use of his hands, and his speech can be difficult to understand.
Through grant funding, we were able to assess his skills, interests and assistive technology needs.
Keith revealed during a planning meeting that he had very limited work experience and was willing to explore any available opportunities.
With all this in mind, the Placement Specialist developed an individualized employment plan and negotiated a clerical job tryout at a local church.
DOL staff had an idea of what he was capable of doing, however on the first day he accomplished things we had not even considered.
His job tasks include photocopying documents and stuffing envelopes.
ODEP’s pilot projects collect data to determine the effectiveness of disability employment strategies evaluated in ODEP pilot projects for dissemination throughout the workforce development system.
Data are collected and assessed internally and externally.
ODEP requires quarterly project reports, visits project sites, and holds regular conference calls with project staff.
ODEP also contracts with an external evaluator to independently verify data collected in pilot project reports, review project documents and activities, and visit project sites.
ODEP’s multi-year external evaluation of pilot projects assess the nature and extent of systems change to determine the effectiveness of strategies employed for expanding and strengthening the capacity of the workforce development system to respond to the needs of people with disabilities.
Findings thus far include: (1) the capacity of the workforce development system has expanded and is strengthened to better serve people with disabilities; (2) people with disabilities are moving from low-skill, minimum wage work to higher-paid jobs in technical or other new career fields; (3) attitudes at One-Stop Centers regarding the provision of services to people with disabilities are changing; and (4) governmental agencies are now working together to share information and leverage resources to better serve people with disabilities.
ODEP’s multi-year case study examines strategies implemented to serve the employment needs of persons with disabilities and the supports needed to provide efficient and universal access to the services of the workforce development system at 12 WIA-assisted locations (six adult and six youth).
Findings thus far include the needs: (1) to enhance physical accessibility to service centers; (2) to increase staff familiarity with assistive technology; (3) to integrate mandated and non-mandated disability partners into the overall services of the One-Stop Centers such as Vocational Rehabilitation; (4) to train and educate staff to work with individuals with a disability; (5) to centralize data banks and standardize data collection techniques; and (6) for cross-agency training.
72% of veteran job seekers will continue to be employed two quarters after initial entry into employment with a new employer.
VETS delivers employment services to veterans through grants to State Workforce Agencies (SWAs), so that unemployed and underemployed veterans receive the assistance needed to obtain suitable employment.
These grants fund positions for Disabled Veterans’ Outreach Program (DVOP) specialists and Local Veterans’ Employment Representatives (LVER), who are assigned to public labor exchange offices nationwide.
The DVOP and LVER staff cadre focuses the resources of the public labor exchange on veterans’ specific employment needs.
VETS currently measures entry to employment and retention in employment as fundamental outcomes of public labor exchange services.
Because results through June 30, 2004 represent the first year’s outcomes under a new reporting system, comparable historical results are not available.
A key strength of the new reporting system is that it links delivery of services with the earnings of the veterans served, as documented in Unemployment Insurance (UI) wage records.
Performance Goal 1.1E (VETS) was achieved.
Targets for Entered Employment Rate and Employment Retention were reached, as 58 percent of veteran job seekers were employed in the first or second quarter following registration and 79 percent of veteran job seekers continue to be employed two quarters after initial entry into employment with a new employer.
The reports submitted for the quarter ending June 30, 2004 provide the first entered employment outcomes for veteran job seekers reported over a full Program Year (PY), based upon the new UI wage record reporting system.
These reports also provide the first employment retention outcomes for veterans using the UI reporting system, including data from the first two quarters of PY 2003.
These first outcomes represent the fulfillment of a longterm process of development, initial implementation, and transition of the new reporting system.
During that same time period, in partnership with ETA, VETS has been developing and implementing new performance measures.
VETS conducted pilot data collection initiatives applying the new reporting procedures to Program Years 1999, 2000, and 2001 in order to establish baseline measures under the new system.
For PY 2002-2003 VETS field staff and staff affiliated with State Workforce Agencies in every State negotiated performance measures for veterans served by the public labor exchange.
Extensive coordination with program stakeholders likely played a key role in the success of the public labor exchange in reaching this first set of targeted outcomes for veterans under the new reporting and measurement conditions.
Entry to employment for veterans served by the public labor exchange was applied as an indicator under the prior system of measurement and reporting.
However, PY 2003 marked the first time retention in employment was applied.
The successful outcomes attained during this first year of experience with this target provide a basis for VETS to adjust future performance targets.
For PY 2004, an Entered Employment Rate target for disabled veterans has been added.
In addition to these enhancements to VETS’ performance measurement systems, which are scheduled for implementation during PY 2004 and PY 2005, VETS and ETA will collaborate to establish baseline values for measures of Earnings Gain and Efficiency, in accord with the Common Measures.
Donald was wounded in combat during Operation Desert Shield in 1990.
His wounds resulted in the loss of an arm below the elbow and the loss of a leg below the knee.
Keeping a positive attitude throughout this ordeal, Donald was determined that his disabilities would not keep him from leading a productive life.
In 1992, he was honorably discharged from the Army and received a 100% service connected disability rating from the US Department of Veterans Affairs.
Donald started his own excavating and snow plowing business and wanted to expand.
He contacted the Erie CareerLink because his disability precluded him from obtaining the commercial driver’s license he needed to expand his business.
The veterans staff helped him with enrollment and funding assistance for a training program that led to acquisition of the license.
Because of his persistence and dedication, the Erie CareerLink nominated Donald for the Disabled Veteran of the Year award.
Early in FY 2004, Battelle Memorial Institute completed a long-term policy research project examining the needs of unemployed veterans, and the extent to which those needs are met by the public labor exchange (Study 25 in Appendix 2).
The study indicated that traditional labor exchange services, such as job search and referral, were associated with the most favorable outcomes for young, recently separated veterans.
Case management, which is an intensive service typically provided by VETS funded staff, was associated with the most favorable outcomes for older, recently separated veterans.
An implication of these results is that further exploration is called for to identify a service delivery approach that would improve outcomes for veterans who are not recently separated.
With the advent of UI wage record based reporting, lag time in reporting outcomes has become a major concern.
A study conducted during FY 2004 by Bradson Corporation identified two potential supplementary measurement strategies (Study 26 in Appendix 2).
The first involves an application of unemployment data to identify those States in which veteran unemployment is high relative to non-veteran unemployment.
The second calls for enlisting selected States to apply Report of Hires data to provide an early indication of expected outcomes based on subsequent application of UI wage records.
VETS is confirming the technical feasibility of the first strategy, and the operational feasibility of the second strategy.
The Jobs for Veterans Act, passed late in 2002, established a new statutory requirement that veterans be accorded priority of service in all Department of Labor training programs.
The impact of this new provision falls primarily upon workforce development programs funded by ETA.
In response to the new mandate, DOL funded a study, conducted by the Urban Institute, to identify strategies that could be applied to implement this requirement (Study 27 in Appendix 2).
An urgent financial management issue involving the DVOP/LVER grants – VETS’ contribution to the public labor exchange – has arisen in connection with recent legislative changes that expanded permissible expenses.
Open questions include expense categories to be applied to direct and indirect charges and the acceptable ratio of indirect to direct charges.
VETS has launched an initiative to resolve this issue in consultation with representatives of the SWAs.
At least 54.5 percent of veterans enrolled in Homeless Veteran Reintegration Project grants enter employment.
The Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program focuses on the provision of employment and training services to homeless veterans to enable their successful reintegration into the workforce.
This program also funds provision of or referral to related support services such as medical treatment, temporary and/or permanent housing, counseling, and transportation.
Organizations receiving grants under this program typically provide job search, counseling, placement assistance, remedial education, classroom training, on-the-job training, and supportive services such as transportation and transitional housing.
These services are often provided in concert with HUD, VA, HHS, and other service providers.
Grantees are also strongly encouraged to collaborate with rehabilitation agencies for other services such as drug and alcohol counseling.
Entry to employment has been emphasized as the most appropriate outcome indicator, and for the last two years, the entry rate has averaged at or above 60 percent.
Recently, however, VETS has communicated clearly to all HVRP grantees that retention in employment is the most significant outcome indicator.
We intend to continue this emphasis on retention for the foreseeable future, since stabilizing the earning capacity is a prerequisite to stabilizing the living situation of homeless veterans.
Performance Goal 1.1F (VETS) was achieved.
The target rate of 54.5 percent entry to employment was exceeded, as 61 percent of veterans enrolled in Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program grants entered employment.
In PY 2003, 13,094 homeless veterans enrolled as HVRP participants and 8,027 of these participants entered employment.
The high rate of success achieved by HVRP grantees in serving this subset of the veteran population, which typically is characterized as having multiple barriers to employment, is attributable, in part, to the program design established by VETS.
That design calls for a network of community-based organizations, including faith-based grantees, which focus their limited fiscal resources on the delivery of customized employment services.
These grantees are to achieve integration of the required services by closely coordinating their efforts with other local providers in order to provide participants with a full range of specialized services.
HVRP grants are awarded on a competitive basis and are limited to a three-year performance period.
Award of annual funding increments for the second and third (option) years within the three-year cycle is based upon satisfactory achievement of the performance goals set forth in the grant application.
The combination of limited grant duration and ongoing competitive awards lead to greater effectiveness.
For PY 2004, we will measure retention in employment, with a target of 55 percent of HVRP participants maintaining employment six months following entry to employment.
To maintain the entry to employment rate accomplishments while improving employment retention rates, VETS will continue to provide guidance to the HVRP grantee network, sharing best practice experiences.
The HVRP grantee network consists predominantly of locally-based organizations, widely dispersed across the nation, with limited management resources.
The network of VETS staff members who serve as Grant Officer’s Technical Representatives (GOTRs) mirrors this pattern.
Capitals and major cities across the nation.
VETS recently sponsored a conference attended by staff members from all HVRP grantees, and by VETS staff members serving as GOTRs.
The distribution of management responsibility for this program is consistent with the need expressed by grantee staff and GOTRs.
VETS plays a lead role regarding the Special Provisions; the DOL procurement unit plays a lead role regarding the General Provisions; and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) plays a lead role regarding financial operations (because of the program’s reliance upon the Payment Management System administered by HHS.
To improve the integration of the requirements and procedures in this shared management arrangement, VETS intends to apply contractor support during FY 2005 to prepare two management manuals.
One version of the manual will be oriented to grantee staff and the other version will be oriented to VETS staff serving as GOTRs.
In addition to improving integration, it is hoped that this initiative also will promote improved consistency in program operations and closer headquarters-field coordination.
Increase the employment, retention, and earnings replacement of individuals registered under the Workforce Investment Act Dislocated Worker Program.
Those who are employed in the first quarter after program exit and are still employed in the third quarter after program exit will have 93 percent of their pre-dislocation earnings.
The Dislocated Worker program aims to quickly reemploy laid off workers and preferably to enhance their employability and earnings by increasing occupational skills.
The Department allocates 80 percent of the funds by formula to the States.
The Secretary may use the remaining 20 percent for discretionary activities specified in the Workforce Investment Act (WIA), including assistance to localities that suffer plant closings, mass layoffs or job losses due to natural disasters.
State dislocated worker funds support One-Stop Career Center Services (as described under Performance Goal 1.1A) and “Rapid Response” assistance to plan services for employers and workers who are expecting mass layoffs.
Three key indicators are used to assess the program’s success.
The entered employment rate indicates how quickly participants’ incomes (hence family security) are restored and whether they maintain continuous attachment to the labor force with minimal disruption.
Retention rate and earnings replacement indicators demonstrate the program’s effectiveness at matching and/or enhancing participants’ skills and abilities to maximize their opportunities.
Labor market conditions have a major influence on the Dislocated Worker program outcomes.
During the last few years beginning with the recession of 2001, improving performance has proven more difficult than in times of economic boom.
Despite external economic forces, DOL has consistently looked for ways to increase targets while improving program management.
Performance Goal 1.1F (ETA) was not achieved.
82 percent of individuals registered who were not employed at registration were employed in the first quarter after program exit.
90 percent of those employed in the first quarter after program exit were employed in the second and in the third quarters after program exit.
Of those participants employed in the first quarter after program exit, average earnings in the third quarter after program exit were 91 percent of pre-dislocation earnings.
Although the indicators for entered employment rate and retention rate exceeded performance targets by four and two percentage points, respectively, the earnings replacement rate was two percentage points below the target.
Even with successes in employment and retention, the continuing decrease in post-dislocation earnings measure may reflect the broader economic conditions.
First, employers have a more qualified worker pool from which to select, as there has been an increase in the number of Americans obtaining high school diplomas and bachelor’s degrees over the past year.
Second, there was an increase in the supply of labor relative to the demand, putting downward pressure on wages.
In sum, while employment and retention rates remain fairly steady as dislocated workers more readily accept lower-paying jobs and stay with them until periods of growth, their post-dislocation earnings have continued to decline.
During Program Year 2003, DOL held six regional forums focused on providing an integrated service system for dislocated workers.
This is part of the Department’s effort to improve the alignment of federal and state processes and response times, and to maximize funding allocations to reach more customers and enhance program results.
To continuously improve the outcomes of dislocated workers, the Department is producing new tools, creating incentives, and simplifying the coordinating process.
3) Using non-WIA resources wherever possible thereby leveraging WIA resources committed to core functions necessary to prepare the workforce.
With implementation of the common measures for employment and training programs and with reauthorized WIA, the workforce investment system can better integrate the Adult and Dislocated Worker formula programs and the labor exchange functions under the Wagner-Peyser Act.
Combined with enhanced use of technology that will inform adult customers about the labor market, job opportunities, and services, this integrated workforce system will increase efficiencies and performance.
The importance of advancing occupational skills in an ever changing economy is something that Fritz, a former dislocated worker, can attest to.
After graduating with a bachelor’s degree in Computer Information Systems, Fritz thought his career was set in stone until the local economy took a downturn and he became an out-of-work Information Technology (IT) professional.
Not to be deterred, he visited his local One Stop Career Center at Richard J. Daley College in Chicago, Illinois and enrolled into the new a 10-week Advanced Manufacturing/Integrated Systems Technology (AM/IST).
Adding to his technology skill base, Fritz hit the ground running as he was quickly hired as a Mechanical Technician at Corn Products International, Inc., one of the world’s largest corn refiners.
This is a new type of training and not many people know about it, but the skills learned during the training are definitely in high demand.
As a lesson learned, Fritz’s has decided to take advantage of his company’s tuition reimbursement program as he continues to exemplify the goal of being equipped with the skills of the 21st century workplace!
In response to recent concerns raised by the Office of Inspector General regarding whether data reported by States for WIA performance were accurate and supportable, DOL developed a validation methodology, and provided handbooks, user guides, and software for all State workforce agencies.
States were required to validate their PY 2003 WIA performance data reports using this methodology.
One lesson from the first four years of WIA is that separate funding streams for services can have a negative impact on program performance because of duplication of services and redundant administrative cost.
The Department proposes to address this barrier by consolidating these funding streams when WIA is reauthorized.
The Government Accountability Office (GAO) released a report on WIA in June 2004: States and Local Areas Have Developed Strategies to Assess Performance, but Labor Could Do More to Help (Study 9 in Appendix 2).
The report examined data availability and timeliness issues.
ETA also contracted with an independent research team to conduct an evaluation of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998.
The study, The Workforce Investment Act in Eight States: State Case Studies from a Field Network Evaluation (Study 21 in Appendix 2), examined national goals and the roles of Federal, State, and local partners in implementing the law in eight states.
Another independent study, Creating Partnerships for Workforce Investment: How Services are Provided Under WIA (Study 20 in Appendix 2), presents findings from case studies of sixteen local boards across eight states that may help other local boards in developing local systems.
Increase the employment, retention, and earnings replacement of workers dislocated in important part because of trade and who receive trade adjustment assistance benefits.
Those who are employed in the third quarter after program exit will earn, on average, 90% of their pre-separation earnings.
DOL’s Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) program provides reemployment services to workers who lose their jobs due to increased imports or due to shifts of production to foreign countries.
TAA’s goal is to return workers to suitable employment as quickly as possible.
The readjustment services and benefits offered by the program include occupational, on-the-job and remedial training, job search and relocation assistance, and income support for eligible workers in training.
TAA’s success is measured by the extent to which it serves the individuals to achieve economic self-sufficiency by quickly securing and maintaining employment with wages that are close to those earned prior to lay-off.
As such, employment, employment retention, and earnings replacement are appropriate indicators.
Targets were selected by first assessing prior experience, and then projecting reasonable performance under anticipated labor market conditions.
In this way, allowance is made for the effect of economic forces external to the program.
72 percent wage replacement for the third quarter after exit.
Performance for the above measures is for individuals served under the trade program prior to the Trade Act of 2002 amendments.
Performance outcomes for individuals served under the Trade Act of 2002 will not begin to be reported until the fourth quarter of 2004.
Reported outcomes will not substantially reflect individuals served under these amendments until FY 2006.
States are not required to use supplemental data to capture individuals who have entered employment but do not show up in the wage records.
Preliminary results in one state from a related program indicate that the use of supplemental data resulted in an increase in the entered employment level by 18 percentage points.
The state intends to replicate the supplemental data process with trade participants.
The Department is issuing a directive to States that will provide guidance on these issues and has begun preliminary discussions with the National Dislocated Worker workgroup on methods to follow up with individuals who are not reported as entering employment.
The continuing decreased post-dislocation earnings measure may reflect broader economic conditions.
First, employers have a larger qualified worker pool from which to select, as there has been an increase in the number of Americans obtaining high school diplomas and bachelor’s degrees over the past year.
Second, there was an increase in the supply of labor relative to the demand, putting downward pressure on wages.
Third, displaced workers who experience lengthy periods of unemployment typically become increasingly willing to settle for jobs paying less than their previous jobs.
In sum, while employment and retention rates remain fairly steady, dislocated workers have been more ready to accept lower-paying jobs and stay with them until their prospects improve; this has contributed to the decline in the wage replacement performance measure.
During Program Year 2003, DOL held six regional forums focused on providing an integrated service system for trade workers.
This is part of the Department’s effort to improve the alignment of Federal and State processes and response times, and to maximize funding allocations to reach more customers and enhance program results.
Currently, DOL is reengineering the process of integrating three programs- National Emergency Grant (NEG), Trade, and Dislocated Worker- to ensure more effective and efficient operations and higher performance outcomes.
John had worked at the Segri Great Lakes Carbon plant in Charlotte, North Carolina until he was laid off on November 16, 2001.
His job as steel furnace electrodes inspector, which earned John $15.03 per hour, was nonexistent anywhere else in the area.
On the day I was laid off, one door shut and another one opened. The one that was opened was our petition for Trade Act opportunity.”
With help from the Trade Act program, John began training in Medical Lab Technology in May 2002.
He was always prompt with his appointments and worked hard to keep his grades up.
He got a job on May 4, 2004 at Broughton Hospital as a Medical Lab Technician, earning $16.75 per hour.
On May 12, John graduated from a local community college with a degree in Medical Lab Technology.
The Government Accountability Office (GAO) released a report on TAA in September 2004: Reforms Have Accelerated Training Enrollment, but Implementation Challenges Remain (Study 11 in Appendix 2).
ETA shares GAO’s concerns and intends to work closely with states in the coming months to assess the need for legislative remedies.
The Department continues to improve the accuracy, timeliness, and reliability of TAA data.
In an effort to obtain more current data about the effect of the program on trade affected workers, DOL has initiated a five-year study designed to fully evaluate the implementation of the new provisions of the Trade Reform Act of 2002, as well as the overall effectiveness of the Trade program using the independent services of Social Policy Research.
ETA will also consider whether concerns in the GAO report can be examined in this TAA evaluation study.
A final study report is expected to be available in FY 2010.
DOL will use recommendations of this five-year study to improve future performance and to assess success in implementing the provisions of the Trade Reform Act.
The results of this study will also inform the TAA reauthorization process.
In response to recommendations from the Program Assessment Rating Tool (PART) review conducted for the FY 2004 budget and updated for the FY 2005 budget, the TAA program will include performance expectations in the agreements between the Secretary of Labor and the States’ Governors to encourage better results.
Additionally, TAA will adopt the common measures for Federal employment and job training programs, with implementation complete by late FY 2005 or early FY 2006.
Use of common measures will align Trade Act program measures with those for the WIA Dislocated Worker program and promote the goals of co-enrollment and coordination between the two programs.
Even though the median age of the workforce is rising, the percentage of workers between the ages of 16 and 24 is expected to grow more rapidly than the overall labor force for the first time in 25 years.
The majority of jobs will continue to require workers who have acquired knowledge and skills via two-year colleges, vocational training, moderate to long-term on-the-job training and real work experience.
High school drop-outs are three to four times more likely to be unemployed than college graduates.
These statistics help to explain why an important part of DOL’s mission is to help disadvantaged youth prepare for competition in a 21st century work environment.
DOL administers three programs designed specifically to serve youth: the WIA Youth formula grant program, which provides comprehensive services through local workforce investment areas; Job Corps, an intensive residential training and support program; and the Youth Opportunity Grant demonstration program, which focuses on out-of-school youth in high-poverty communities.
Services to in-school youth help them remain in and complete secondary school, move into post-secondary education or advanced training, and ultimately transition into successful careers.
Out-of-school youth receive services that provide them with the necessary skills to attain educational credentials (i.e., high school diploma or GED), participate in vocational and post-secondary training opportunities, and transition into gainful employment or a career.
Through these programs, our nation makes the type of meaningful investment in at-risk teenagers and young adults that is necessary to help them become productive and self-sufficient members of the nation’s workforce.
FY 2004 program costs of $2.7 billion supported ETA programs providing employment and training assistance to youth through formula grants to States, and Job Corps.
After three years of costs that trended upward, FY 2004 saw a $254 million (approximately 10 percent) decline from FY 2003.
Decreased costs in this area resulted largely from the phase-out of the Youth Opportunity Grant Program (FY 2002: $225 million v. FY 2004: $0) and reduced funding for WIA Youth Activities (FY 2002: $1.13 billion v. FY 2004: $995 million).
One of the three goals was achieved.
As indicated in the table, WIA Youth program participants enjoyed healthy increases in all three indicators – diploma attainment for younger youth, entry to employment, and retention for older youth.
Job Corps reached its targets for diplomas and average hourly wages while falling short of its retention target.
In its final year, the Youth Opportunity Grant demonstration project failed to reach any of its three targets; diploma attainment and entry to employment saw healthy gains over PY 2002 despite failing to reach targets but employment retention declined significantly.
Overall, actual PY 2003 performance was better than the goal achievement count alone would indicate.
Results in seven of the nine indicators increased – most of them substantially.
The WIA Youth program’s success in raising all three indicator levels is attributed to extensive technical assistance targeting local performance management issues.
Job Corps’ diploma attainment rate increase resulted in part from a renewed focus on academic achievement and aggressive new strategies.
Hourly wage performance may have been aided by a change in the basis for calculation of wages from initial placement to six months after placement.
Youth Opportunity Grant performance was improved by numerous technical assistance strategies that focused on improving long-term employment and education placements.
Phyllis is a Clinical Instructor and Director of the School Nurse Program at the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) College of Nursing who volunteered her time and expertise to educate high school students on public health care concepts.
She spoke at a Women’s Bureau Group E-Mentoring in Nursing (GEM-Nursing) event promoting nursing careers.
Co-sponsored by the UIC College of Nursing, this event is part of a larger web-based project connecting young adults with mentors who are professionals in the nursing field.
Phyllis’ lesson on the “Web of Causation,” aided by her web model (pictured), outlined the complex relationships among environmental, economic, and social causes contributing to public health.
Her high school students developed a greater appreciation for how nurses contribute to the health of the community.
The GEM-Nursing project includes over 500 registered students and over 150 mentors from 16 different fields.
The delay of reauthorization of the Workforce Investment Act poses management challenges for the WIA Youth program.
The Department of Labor’s proposed legislation places emphasis on serving out-of-school youth, and DOL has begun developing strategies to do so.
However, the law currently requires grantees to spend only 30 percent of funds on out-of-school youth.
Because this group is more difficult and expensive to serve, few elect to allocate more than the statutory minimum – especially given greater pressure to meet employment, retention, earnings and efficiency targets.
The Government Accountability Office (GAO) conducted a study entitled Labor Actions Can Help States Improve Quality of Performance Outcome Data and Delivery of Youth Services (Study 10 in Appendix 2).
The report recommended that DOL and the US Department of Education coordinate efforts to connect school dropouts to local WIA youth programs and to establish standard monitoring procedures to improve the quality of data reported by states.
DOL is implementing these recommendations.
The Program Assessment Rating Tool (PART) review of the WIA Youth program, conducted for the FY 2004 budget, recommended an impact evaluation of the WIA Youth program.
ETA will commission such a study upon reauthorization, as knowledge of the program’s new direction will be critical to the design of any meaningful study.
DOL is conducting an impact evaluation of the Youth Opportunity Grant program that is scheduled for completion in 2005.
Increase entrance and retention of youth registered under the WIA youth program in education or employment.
78 percent of the 19-21 year-old youth employed in the first quarter after exit will be employed in the third quarter after program exit.
The Workforce Investment Act authorizes services to low-income youth (age 14-21) who have barriers to employment.
Eligible youth are deficient in basic skills or are homeless, are a runaway, are pregnant or parenting, are offenders, school drop-outs, or foster children.
The program also serves youth with disabilities and other youth who may require additional assistance to complete an educational program or to secure and hold employment.
Programs and services are offered to both in and out-of-school youth.
Service providers prepare youth for post-secondary education by stressing strong linkages between academic and occupational learning, and preparing youth for employment.
Local communities create opportunities for youth by providing required program elements, including tutoring, alternative schools, summer employment, occupational training, work experience, supportive services, leadership development, mentoring, counseling, and follow-up services.
The three performance indicators were selected from seven WIA youth measures as most appropriate for both inschool and out-of-school youth.
For the older youth population, entrance into and retention in employment are the most appropriate indicators of success because services are focused on preparation for and success in the workforce.
For the younger youth population, where services are geared toward academic achievement as a means of career preparation, achievement of a diploma or its equivalent is the most meaningful indicator of future success in the workforce.
External factors outside of the workforce system, such as secondary school quality and the advent of state standards of learning, have the potential to impact the diploma attainment rate.
However, a two year trend shows that the program is making steady progress against its indicators.
Strategies and partnerships are continually reviewed to ensure the best service delivery is provided.
The goal was achieved.
63 percent of the 14-18 year-old youth who entered the program without a diploma or equivalent attained a secondary school diploma or equivalent by the first quarter after exit.
71 percent of the 19-21 year-old youth were employed in the first quarter after program exit.
81 percent of the 19-21 year-old youth employed in the first quarter after exit were employed in the third quarter after program exit.
These results for Program Year 2003 (ending June 30, 2004) continue an upward trend that began with WIA implementation in 1998, and are significant.
Most important is the continued increase in high school diploma attainment, given the strong statistical correlation between educational attainment and success in the labor market.
This strategy has resulted in improved performance and has yielded valuable information on the specific challenges with which local areas continue to struggle.
One example of technical assistance is the Performance Enhancement Project (PEP), which offers a mechanism to identify and address local performance management issues.
DOL has also continued to emphasize performance and accountability, including extensive work developing the Common Performance Measures and collaboration with the US Department of Education and with State and local practitioners in developing guidance for their implementation.
DOL continues its program of conducting on-site assessments of State and local workforce investment areas to determine the effectiveness of local youth programs and to help regional offices develop strategies to improve program outcomes.
DOL will continue its performance improvement efforts by working with its partners to increase emphasis on alternative education, business demands (especially in high-growth industries and occupations), and at-risk youth, including those in foster care, those attached to the juvenile justice system, and migrant youth.
Robert embodies all the qualities that make an individual an achiever.
At birth, he was diagnosed with Cerebral Palsy, which hindered his educational progress and his social and psychological development.
When he was referred to the WIA-funded Goodwill Workforce Development Center in Virginia as a high school senior, he felt he had a new chance at a life of independence.
He credits Goodwill Industries of the Valleys, part of a world-wide network of 207 communitybased organizations, for providing him with the skills to become a disc jockey (DJ).
Working with Goodwill’s staff, a local radio station made accommodations to enable Robert to participate in a work experience.
The reliability of administrative data for non-employment measures, such as diploma attainment, has been questioned in the past by the Office of Inspector General (OIG).
In response, DOL implemented a data validation initiative during PY 2002.
Data quality and reliability has improved as a result of this initiative.
States will continue to conduct both report validation and data element validation for the current year’s data, thereby ensuring the completeness and reliability of performance data.
The delay of reauthorization of the Workforce Investment Act poses management challenges for the WIA Youth program.
The Department of Labor’s proposed legislation places emphasis on serving out-of-school youth, and DOL has begun developing strategies to do so.
However, because the law currently requires spending just 30 percent of funds on these traditionally expensive to serve out-of-school youth, it will be difficult to implement the new strategies absent reauthorization.
The Government Accountability Office (GAO) conducted a study entitled Labor Actions Can Help States Improve Quality of Performance Outcome Data and Delivery of Youth Services (Study 10 in Appendix 2).
The report recommended that DOL and the US Department of Education coordinate efforts to connect school dropouts to local WIA Youth programs and to establish standard monitoring procedures to improve the quality of data reported by states.
DOL is implementing these recommendations.
The Program Assessment Rating Tool (PART) review of the WIA Youth program, conducted for the FY 2004 budget, recommended adoption of common performance measures for Federal job training programs and recommended an impact evaluation of the WIA Youth program.
In response, ETA has adopted the four youth common measures in subsequent Performance Budgets and issued guidance to grantees to manage to these goals and measures.
States will begin reporting on common measures in November 2005.
The impact evaluation will be commissioned upon reauthorization, as knowledge of the program’s new direction will be critical to the design of any meaningful study.
Graduates with jobs at six months after initial placement will earn average hourly wages of $8.20.
Job Corps is an intensive educational and vocational training program (primarily residential) for economically disadvantaged youth ages 16 through 24 who often face multiple barriers to gainful employment.
This program provides occupational skills, academic training, social education, and other support services such as housing, transportation, and family support resources to more than 60,000 individuals at 122 centers nationwide.
Job Corps centers, ranging in size from 200 to 2,000 students, are located in both urban and rural communities and are operated by large and small companies under performance-based contracts.
Job Corps centers provide services tailored to each student’s needs to help them achieve the skills and credentials required to be successful, productive citizens and to obtain work opportunities that lead to long term employment.
DOL uses three performance indicators for this program: earning a diploma or its equivalent is the most meaningful indicator of preparedness, while entry to employment and employment retention are appropriate indicators of success in the workforce.
Targets are selected by assessing prior experience, and then projecting reasonable performance under anticipated labor market conditions.
The goal was not achieved.
Two of three indicator targets were reached.
In PY 2003, participants earned 8003 high school diplomas vs. a target of 7,658 – a 25 percent increase over PY 2002.
The target average hourly wage rate of $8.20 at six months after employment was reached, with an actual rate of $8.95.
The six-month retention rate was 63 percent, nearly reaching the 65 percent target.
From PY 2001-2003, the retention rate remained level.
However, the average hourly wage at six months and diploma attainment rate increased during that period.
Job Corps’ high school diploma attainment rate increased by 25 percent in PY 2003.
This outcome is attributed to a renewed focus on academic achievement and new strategies designed to facilitate students’ successful completion of diploma requirements.
In PY 2003, while the average hourly wage goal of $8.20 per hour for Job Corps remained the same as PY 2002, the basis for calculation of wages changed from initial placement to six months later.
As in past years, the average hourly wage for Job Corps graduates continues to increase.
Moreover, 63 percent were still employed or enrolled in advanced education programs six months later.
Job Corps’ success in meeting its diploma target is due in large part to numerous partnerships with other youth and adult serving programs: the Department of Education’s High School initiative, the former School-to-Work initiative, AmeriCorps, Head Start, Youth Challenge, Youth Build, America’s Promise, the Center for Workforce Preparation, and the military.
A significant number of the Job Corps centers have also entered into partnerships with local school districts to enable students to earn diplomas.
To assist career transition, Job Corps centers are represented on local workforce investment boards and youth councils.
Regional assessments and annual contract reviews of center operators and career transition service contractors include compliance measures for operations and performance measures related to student outcomes.
Performance based contracting for center operators and career transition service contractors links performance on specific measures of student success to center operators’ and contractors’ revenues.
Implementation of such provisions, for example incentive fees for contractors, has led to improved student outcomes.
In addition to improving student outcomes, Job Corps continues to focus on customer needs by maintaining safe and healthy environments at all Job Corps centers by working with other DOL agencies to conduct safety and health inspections.
Evelyn saw a better future unfold after catching a television ad for Job Corps.
Evelyn grew up in a very poor area of Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
Faced with limited employment opportunities because she dropped out of high school in the 11th grade to help support her family, she knew that education would free her from poverty.
In July 2001, at age 18, she enrolled at the Hubert H. Humphrey Job Corps Center in St. Paul, MN.
Evelyn completed the Business Technologies and Health Occupations career training programs and obtained her GED.
Soon afterward, she got a job as Student Intake Coordinator at Alternative Learning Center High School.
Evelyn is a full-time student and through a partnership with the Humphrey Job Corps Center has entered the Advanced Career Training program in Child Development at St. Paul Technical College.
She will graduate in December 2004.
Job Corps uses comprehensive data to measure program performance results.
To maintain data integrity, independent data analysts scrutinize performance details.
Job Corps also utilizes feedback from annual independent audits of system security and business policies and procedures to improve oversight and management of its performance data systems.
Increase retention of Youth Opportunity Grant participants in education or employment.
78 percent of the 19-21 year-old youth employed in the first quarter after exit will be employed in the third quarter after program exit.
Youth Opportunity Grants (YOGs), a demonstration program which began operation in 2000 and ends with Program Year 2004, has aimed to increase the long-term employment of youth who live in Empowerment Zones, Native American reservations, Enterprise Communities, and other high-poverty areas.
Although the focus has been to increase youth employment, especially for out-of-school youth, YOGs also aimed to reduce dropout rates and teen pregnancy, increase enrollment in post-secondary education, decrease crime, and improve existing systems in poor communities for serving at-risk youth.
For the older youth population, services have focused on preparation for and success in the workforce.
For the younger youth population, services were geared toward academic achievement as a means of career preparation.
Factors such as secondary school quality and the advent of state standards of learning can impact the diploma attainment rate.
Many enrollees are high school drop-outs with limited prospects for attaining a high school diploma or long term employment.
Another challenge was the program design; YOG was an open enrollment program that accepted any youth willing to enroll.
This helped target youth most in need of services, which may have affected completion rates, though results did show improvement from last year.
Performance Goal 1.2C (ETA) was not achieved.
73 percent of the 19-21 year-old youth employed in the first quarter after exit were employed in the third quarter after program exit.
Data from State Unemployment Insurance (UI) wage records for the older youth entered employment rate and older youth employment retention rate could only be obtained from approximately half of the Youth Opportunity Grantees.
The diploma attainment rate, however, includes data from all grantees.
Although the diploma attainment rate and entered employment rate improved markedly from the prior year, all three performance indicators fell short of their targets.
Performance targets were set using baseline data from the WIA Youth formula-funded program and goals were identical to that program despite this program’s focus on the harder to serve out-of-school youth population.
YOGs were able to significantly improve results in diploma attainment and entered employment from the prior year.
The diploma attainment improvement is significant given that academic advancement is strongly linked to improved employment opportunities and outcomes, both key long term goals of DOL youth programs.
The improvement in placing out of school youth in jobs is also a significant achievement in that youth tend to be harder to employ as the economy begins to recover.
Although the employment retention rate decreased from the prior year, performance was slightly below target.
During Program year 2003, DOL focused efforts on a number of technical assistance strategies.
DOL conducted training sessions on literacy, job development, and homeless and runaway youth.
DOL-sponsored Youth Development Practitioner’s Institute trained hundreds of front-line YOG staff in areas such as bi-level case management and data management.
DOL also convened a strategic planning session and several director meetings that focused on improving areas of performance, especially long-term employment and education placements.
Through DOL’s assistance, YOG-funded programs focused on key progress measures including youth participation, successful completion of goals, and placements in employment and post-secondary education.
Seaman Felisicia, a member of the Albany Youth Opportunity Center, recently graduated with honors from basic training at the Naval Training Center in Great Lakes, Illinois.
She used her exceptional physical fitness to distinguish herself from the other recruits during the nine weeks of strenuous basic naval training.
Her athletic performance, which earned her selection as an honor graduate, also earned her the treasured assignment to the Naval Base in Sasebo, Japan, where she will serve a threeyear tour as a fireman.
Before she graduated from Westover High School in 2003, Felisicia served as a member of the marching band, toured with the chorus and served as a state delegate for the 4-H program.
While she was in the Youth Opportunity program, Felisicia participated actively at Boys and Girls Club, Inc., where she received the Outstanding Achievement award.
She also was an active member at Unity Church of Albany’s youth program.
Furthermore, she worked with the Albany Police Department as a part of the Communities in School Summer Youth Job Program and volunteered in several other community service projects.
Her earlier experiences serving her community continue to motivate her to serve the nation.
Approximately half of the grantees were unable to report on the older youth employment indicators due to limited access to State Unemployment Insurance (UI) wage records, the data source necessary to calculate the measures.
Delinquent grantees continue to work with their respective States and ETA anticipates late receipt of some data.
ETA is confident the data that has been submitted is reliable and accurate.
Though this is the last year of YOGs, ETA is addressing this issue for future discretionary grant programs by ensuring better access to data.
Fortunately, these problems have been limited to the employment indicators; additional measures, such as participation and completion rates, have been timely and invaluable for management purposes.
DOL is currently conducting an impact evaluation of the YOG program, and will complete it in 2005.
America’s changing 21st Century workforce needs to know what employment opportunities are emerging to make better informed decisions for their future.
This critical information, as well as other information pertaining to the broad field of labor economics and statistics, is available from the Department of Labor’s Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).
BLS provides private citizens, business owners, and public officials with timely and accurate information that assists in making decisions on careers, staffing, and public policy.
For example, in FY 2004, BLS released projections to 2012 on future job growth by industry and occupation and on the likely composition of the workforce pursuing those jobs.
BLS produces some of the Nation’s most sensitive and important economic indicators to serve the needs of the 21st Century workforce.
FY 2004 program costs of $539 million support BLS programs to produce and disseminate timely, accurate, and relevant information on the economy.
The Bureau’s budget and costs grew incrementally from 1999 to 2004.
This trend is attributed primarily to mandatory cost increases; the creation of new programs, such as the American Time Use Survey; and important improvements to the Consumer Price Index (CPI), Producer Price Index (PPI), and Employment Cost Index (ECI).
Software publishers top the list of the ten fastest growing detailed-level industries in the U.S., all of which are in the serviceproviding sector.
Health and computer occupations account for nine of the ten fastest growing occupations, according to the 2002-12 Employment Projections data produced by DOL’s Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Private citizens, businesses, and public policy officials require information on high-growth industries and high-demand occupations to make career and staffing decisions and to plan programs on education and training.
Market Information Conference in Omaha, Nebraska.
The conference provided the opportunity for BLS, its State partners, and its customer community to share views on data usage and future information needs.
Employment projections information can be found on the BLS website at http://www.bls.gov/emp.
Substantial challenges face BLS, including the changing economy, maintaining sufficient response levels, and evolving technology.
BLS continued to provide information that informs the public of our changing economy.
BLS published the first annual estimates from the American Time Use Survey, providing a wealth of information on the way Americans spend their time, such as paid work, childcare, volunteering, commuting, and socializing.
BLS released official estimates of the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) which includes the number and rate of job openings, hires, and separations, which yields better information on the nature and function of the job market.
Previously, JOLTS data were released as a developmental series.
As the last phase of a comprehensive overhaul of its compensation surveys, BLS published new data on the incidence and characteristics of employee benefit plans.
The new publications initiate a regular program of reports that will be issued much more quickly than in the past.
They will include new data breakouts by employee and establishment characteristics, and allow for the simultaneous analysis of wages, employee benefit plan costs, and employee benefit plan details together for the first time.
BLS continued to develop strategies that address the causes of nonresponse.
During FY 2004, BLS distributed to respondents 14 program-related brochures that provide visual step-by-step guidance on developing customized data tables from the BLS website.
Respondents use the tool to extract information that meets their unique needs.
Thus, respondents better understand the importance of the data that they provide to BLS and the importance of their continued voluntary response.
BLS continued to expand the use of Internet data collection in order to provide respondents with quick and easy-to-use data reporting options.
In FY 2004, over 29,000 respondents to the Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses selected the BLS Internet data collection option to report their information, accounting for approximately 14.5 percent of the total respondents pool.
Additionally, the U.S. Import and Export Price Indexes initiated Internet data collection for their respondents; other BLS programs are analyzing opportunities to provide the option.
Improve information available to decision-makers on labor market conditions, and price and productivity changes.
Raise customer satisfaction with BLS products and services (e.g. the American Customer Satisfaction Index); Deliver economic data on time (Percent of scheduled releases issued on time); and Percent of accuracy measures met (e.g., revision, response rates, etc.).
BLS reports performance for this goal by producing timely and accurate data that meet customer needs.
Improvements to the data are measured through increases in the relevancy, coverage, and response of the statistics.
BLS revised its FY 2004 performance goal to focus more on outcomes and be more transparent to the general user.
This new framework and the indicators presented here represent the various dimensions of BLS products and services that are important to our customers.
The targets chosen balance respondent burden and data user needs, while supporting continuous improvement of our programs and products.
BLS continuously improves its statistical processes and products to ensure that decision-makers have available information that is useful and relevant.
The goal was not achieved.
However, targets were exceeded, reached, or substantially reached for seven of the eight performance indicators.
BLS reached its target for converting four data series from the SIC system to the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) in FY 2004; however, the release of the PPI using the NAICS was delayed.
The release of January data, planned for February, took place in March.
The Occupational Employment Statistics Survey, Industry Productivity statistics, and the Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries data were converted to NAICS.
Targets were reached for improving data coverage in the PPI and in labor productivity measures as BLS continued to improve the accuracy of its data.
While the PPI measures average changes in selling prices received by domestic producers for their output, labor productivity is the ratio of the output of goods and services to the labor hours devoted to the production of that output.
BLS improved data coverage for calculating the PPI by increasing the percent of service industries covered in the PPI from 38.8 percent (1997 baseline) to 59.2 percent in FY 2004.
BLS reached the target, 58 percent, for improving data coverage in labor productivity measures.
Additionally, BLS reached the target, 78 percent, for improving response of the ECI initiation indicator.
The ECI represents employers’ costs for employee compensation, including wages, fringe benefits, and bonuses for U.S. employees in all industries.
The NAICS conversion effort of the PPI required a temporary diversion of resources from a systems modernization project, causing BLS to miss its target for completing components of the new repricing system.
Seventeen percent of the components were completed as compared to a target of 33 percent.
A replanning effort is currently under way to identify and implement strategies to minimize the disruptions.
The BLS website receives an average of about 2.5 million user sessions each month, with over half of those sessions directed to the BLS Occupational Outlook Handbook (OOH) website.
The OOH is the Bureau’s nationally recognized source of career information.
Using the American Customer Satisfaction Index (ACSI) survey, the OOH website received a score of 82 in the third quarter of 2004, placing the website in the top 10 percent of government agencies.
The aggregated Federal government score for this time period was 71.2.
BLS met the timeliness indicator for 104 out of 108 (96 percent) scheduled releases.
The four untimely releases were in the PPI program and were caused by above mentioned difficulties with the NAICS conversion.
Additionally, BLS met the established accuracy target for 35 out of 42 (83 percent) measures.
Targeted response rates were missed for the American Time Use Survey, Current Population Survey, Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey, U.S. Import and Export Price Indexes (two separate rates), ECI (repricing), and the Employee Benefits Survey.
BLS uses various strategies to maintain a high level of cooperation for its voluntary surveys and continues to conduct research studies to better understand the causes of nonresponse.
BLS is confident that the performance data collected and reported are complete, accurate, and reliable.
BLS programs are evaluated both internally and externally to ensure that they provide taxpayer value.
As required by OMB Statistical Policy Directive #3, the seven statistical series designated as Principal Federal Economic Indicators are evaluated on a three-year schedule.
In FY 2004, BLS completed the performance evaluation for the Current Population Survey.
In response to the Program Assessment Rating Tool (PART) findings, BLS developed an efficiency measure and revised its performance goals to focus more clearly on outcomes and increase transparency.
The BLS PART score improved to 88, receiving an effective rating, the highest rating category.
During FY 2004, BLS responded to the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) Government Information Security Reform Act (GISRA) Review of the Current Population Survey (CPS).
Findings were related to the CPS Continuity of Operations Plan, CPS System Security Plan, security controls of the CPS, and a Bureau-wide Uninterruptible Power Supply system.
The review is described in Appendix 2 of this report (Study 1).
Protecting workers’ wages and working conditions, providing unemployment compensation and other benefits when workers are unable to work, and retirement and health benefit security are central to the DOL mission.
This strategic goal captures these priorities and consists of two outcome goals: Increase Compliance With Worker Protection Laws, which focuses on safeguarding employees’ wages, working conditions, and union democracy and financial integrity; and Protect Worker Benefits, which deals with relief in the form of unemployment, disability, and pension and health care insurance benefits.
Agencies supporting this strategic goal are the Employment and Training Administration (ETA), the Employment Standards Administration (ESA), the Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA), and the Pension Benefits Guaranty Corporation (PBGC).
Outcome goals 2.1 and 2.2 contain six performance goals (see table below), of which two were achieved, two substantially achieved and two not achieved in FY 2004.
The Department performed well, with significant progress in improving worker protection and union compliance, recovery of erroneous payment of unemployment benefits, improved effectiveness of pension and health benefit plan enforcement and workers’ compensation program administration.
Results for several performance indicators were shy of their targets but there were no major disappointments or reversals in our workforce security performance this past year.
The following charts illustrate DOL’s strategic goal net costs in FY 2004, with A Secure Workforce shares set apart.
Net costs of this goal in FY 2003 (less Income Maintenance) were $1.969 billion.
The decrease occurred in part because of relocation of the WIA Dislocated Worker and TAA programs from Goal 2 to Goal 1; together, these two programs cost approximately $2 billion annually.
In a global economy, the Employment Standard Administration’s (ESA) primary challenge in building a competitive workforce is to ensure that protections for workers are appropriate for – and keep pace with – the changes occurring in the American workforce.
Virtual workplaces, aging workers, more women and minorities in the workforce, immigration, organized labor, the growth of small businesses, and the ongoing shift from a manufacturing to a service economy will all be important factors as U.S. businesses strive to comply with worker protection laws in the future.
Under the Fair Labor Standards Act, the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act, the Family and Medical Leave Act and the Service Contract Act, ESA’s Wage and Hour Division (WHD) administers standards for wages and working conditions: the minimum wage, overtime, youth employment, and field sanitation standards in the agriculture industry.
Under the Davis-Bacon Act, WHD determines prevailing wages in the construction industry.
The key to ensuring worker protections is to focus on industries and employers with the most persistent and serious violations; to quickly resolve employee complaints; and to ensure accuracy in established wage rates.
ESA's Office of Labor-Management Standards (OLMS) ensures union transparency, financial integrity, and democracy by administering and enforcing the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA).
OLMS responsibilities under the Act include compliance assistance; civil and criminal investigations and enforcement; union compliance audits; and reports/public disclosure administration.
OLMS’ strategies are aimed at improving timeliness and quality of union reports filed for public disclosure and strengthening LMRDA compliance through union audits and outreach efforts.
FY 2004 program costs of $296 million supported ESA's Wage and Hour Division (WHD) and Office of Labor-Management Standards (OLMS) programs.
This is an increase of 8% ($23 million) over FY 2003.
The WHD budget increased to cover operating expenses.
Approximately 75 percent of WHD's resources are devoted to complaint investigations and resolution.
The success of this effort is reflected in the FY 2004 performance results that show ESA decreased the average number of days to conclude a complaint from 108 to 92 days.
DOL achieved one performance goal and substantially achieved the other.
WHD decreased the average number of days to conclude a complaint from 108 days to 92 days, greatly improving performance, and also increased compliance in industries with chronic violations in the garment manufacturing, long-term health care, and agricultural commodities industries.
A FY 2004 survey found 55 percent of nursing homes in compliance and 90 percent of industry employees paid in compliance with the FLSA.
WHD added ten compliance assistance programs to the three previous ones, affecting over 900,000 agricultural employers.
Following WHD investigations 335 agricultural housing providers corrected violations, an increase from 256 in FY 2003.
WHD did not reach its target for reduction of employer FLSA violation recidivism.
The Davis-Bacon Act (DBA) wage determination program reached targets to establish a wage determination processing baseline and to issue 80 percent of all survey-based DBA wage determinations within 60 days.
DOL reached both of its union financial integrity targets.
OLMS established a fraud baseline of nine percent of those unions filing reports under LMRDA; and the percentage of union reports meeting standards of acceptability increased in to 92 percent.
Better union public disclosure reports resulted from agency compliance assistance efforts and increasing use of electronic reporting formats.
A new way of doing business, where government goes directly to the people in an effort to better serve and protect."
This is how operation COACH (Compliance Outreach to Asian Communities and Hispanics) has been described by northern New Jersey local media.
This innovative program has also sparked positive response from community groups.
The Wage and Hour Division (WHD) instituted this program in December 2003 to promote awareness of WHD laws and programs in the Asian and Hispanic communities, and to work directly with employers and workers who traditionally have been reluctant to seek WHD’s services.
Under COACH, WHD investigators have visited over 650 businesses that employ more than 4,540 workers.
Seventy-four percent of the businesses reached were either Asian or Hispanic owned.
Fifty-nine percent of all the businesses visited indicated that prior to COACH, they had no knowledge of or experience with WHD.
Over ninety-five percent offered that they did not know how to reach the local WHD office or even how to access the DOL web page.
Much of the operation’s success is attributed to a non-adversarial compliance assistance based strategy that emphasizes face–to-face contact and bilingual investigators.
ESA faces many challenges to meeting its goal of achieving compliance with worker protection laws.
In FY2005, WHD will continue working within established employer partnerships; seeking new such agreements; and continuing compliance assistance to employers and employees.
WHD will also transition to goals and measures that more fully capture compliance in a broad spectrum of low-wage industries; continue its targeted compliance assistance programs; continue self-directed investigations in industries with chronic violations; and reinvestigate employers where future compliance is uncertain.
Performance success in the wage determination program depends on upgrades in information technology.
WHD is working to combine the DBA Wage Determination Generation and Automated Survey Distribution Systems into one automated data processing system that should greatly enhance the program’s ability to obtain, store and distribute construction wage determinations.
Covered American workplaces legally, fairly, and safely employ and compensate their workers.
Ensuring timely and accurate prevailing wage determinations.
ESA’s Wage and Hour Division (WHD) enforces laws establishing minimum standards for wages and working conditions.
These include the minimum wage, overtime and youth employment provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act; the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act; and the Family and Medical Leave Act.
WHD is also responsible for enforcing field sanitation standards in agriculture, and administers wage determination provisions of the Davis-Bacon Act.
The key to ensuring worker protections is to focus on industries and employers with the most persistent and serious violations; to resolve employee complaints expeditiously; and to ensure that established wage rates are accurate.
By focusing compliance efforts in low-wage industries like agriculture, health care, and garment manufacturing, WHD seeks to protect those low-wage workers most likely to be paid less than legally required or unsafely housed.
By reducing repeat violations, WHD can achieve lasting compliance on behalf of many employees.
WHD ensures responsiveness by reducing the time it takes to resolve employee complaints.
Timely and accurate prevailing wage determinations encourage efficiency and help ensure government contract workers receive the wages to which they are entitled.
A number of external factors influence WHD’s program outcomes.
As the supply of vulnerable immigrant workers increases, the potential for violations increases.
Compliance levels in many low-wage industries are also heavily influenced by competitive pressures and by subcontracting arrangements in which smaller companies have little opportunity to influence market prices.
The goal was substantially achieved.
Eight of ten targets were reached.
The average number of days to conclude a complaint declined from 108 days to 92 days, reaching the complaint response target.
DOL did not reach its target to reduce recidivism of prior violators; compliance for this group fell by two percentage points from the FY 2003 baseline of 73 percent.
WHD reached all but one of the targets associated with increasing compliance in industries with chronic violations: garment manufacturing, long-term healthcare, and agricultural commodities.
In the health care industry, WHD increased the percent of workers employed in compliance by 1.2 percentage points – just under the 2 percentage point target.
Targets and results appear in the table below.
WHD also reached its timely and accurate prevailing wage determinations targets, establishing a baseline of 1491 wage determination data submission forms processed per 1,000 hours, and issuing 86 percent (13 of 15) wage surveys within 60 days, against a target of 80 percent.
WHD improved customer service responsiveness by updating complaint intake procedures, regular review of complaint inventories, streamlining procedures to ensure early contact with complainants, and through good fact development.
WHD has established three key effective strategies to increase compliance in industries with a history of chronic FLSA violation: compliance assistance, enforcement and collaborative partnerships.
In garment manufacturing, monitoring through unannounced visits, payroll record and timecard reviews, employee interviews have all proven effective.
In the long-term care industry, compliance assistance, partnerships and enforcement have been effective in increasing FLSA compliance.
Across the board, compliance assistance has been effective – dissemination of industry-specific fact sheets and employee rights cards, face-to-face employer consultations, and entering into compliance partnerships with several major nursing homes.
In the agricultural industry, targeted compliance assistance and compliance partnerships have worked especially well.
A FY 2004 partnership with the Tennessee Farm Bureau accounts for the greatest increase of employers impacted by a compliance partnership, with just over 500,000 members.
Over the last several years, the DBA wage determination program took steps to improve the accuracy and timeliness of prevailing wage determinations for the construction industry.
Following OMB’s PART review of the DBA wage determination program, WHD added timeliness and accuracy performance indicators – the two aspects of the DBA wage survey program that significantly impact wage determination performance.
WHD is using a new complaint indicator in FY 2005 and will concentrate on the number of days it takes to resolve violation complaints.
This will prevent any unintentional emphasis on speed at the cost of finding and correcting violations.
To reduce FLSA violation recidivism, WHD will promote long-term compliance among employers through detailed compliance agreements outlining agreed-upon steps for compliance; and reinvestigating cases where future compliance is uncertain.
WHD will continue its transition to goals and measures that more fully capture compliance in a broad spectrum of low-wage industries.
As a result, there will not be specific indicators for the health care and agriculture industries.
However, WHD will continue its targeted compliance assistance programs and enforcement activities to promote housing and transportation compliance.
Performance success in the wage determination program depends on upgrades in information technology.
WHD is working to combine the DBA Wage Determination Generation and Automated Survey Distribution Systems into one automated data processing system.
This software development will greatly enhance the program’s ability to obtain, store and distribute construction wage determinations.
Data used in reporting performance against goals are derived largely from the WHD Investigative Support and Reporting Database (WHISARD).
An independent analysis conducted by the University of Tennessee this year found high levels of consistency between WHISARD data and case file information, with 90% or greater consistency on 25 of the 33 data elements.
Other performance data sources are Wage Hour’s statistically valid investigation-based compliance surveys, which are tabulated and reviewed by independent sources to ensure accuracy and completeness.
WHD has undertaken four program evaluations in FY 2004 focusing on: (1) identifying new compliance measures in low-wage industries; (2) integrating budget and performance information ; (3) conducting a cost/benefit analysis of recommendations to update the Youth Employment Hazardous Occupations rules; and (4) an assessment of WHD compliance assistance efforts.
2) an evaluation of the agency’s compliance assistance web information.
In the spring of 2004, the Office of Inspector General issued a final report on WHD’s Davis-Bacon Act wage determination program.
A summary of the findings is included in Appendix 2 (Study 5).
In the spring of 2003, WHD’s Davis Bacon wage determination program was assessed through a Program Assessment Rating Tool (PART) review.
The assessment found that the program did not demonstrate results.
In response, WHD has developed overarching goals to ensure program performance improvements in determining and issuing prevailing wage rates with specific numeric targets.
In addition, WHD contracted with an outside company to evaluate the Davis Bacon wage survey process.
Advance safeguards for union financial integrity and democracy and the transparency of union operations.
Increasing union transparency.
The percentage of union reports meeting standards of acceptability for public disclosure will increase to 75%.
OLMS ensures union transparency, financial integrity, and democracy by administering and enforcing the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA).
The Act requires annual publicly available union financial reports; establishes standards for union officer elections; and imposes criminal sanctions for union fund embezzlement.
OLMS assists union compliance; conducts civil and criminal investigations, and compliance audits; and administers public disclosure of required reports.
Improving the timeliness and quality of union reports filed for public disclosure and strengthening compliance through audits and outreach efforts are key strategies.
DOL reached both indicator targets for this performance goal.
OLMS audited a randomly selected sample of reporting unions to establish a baseline measure of union fraud.
The survey established that fraud is indicated in nine percent of unions subject to the LMRDA.
An audit finding of a criminal LMRDA violation, predominantly union funds embezzlement, was counted as an indicator of fraud.
OLMS will seek to reduce the percentage of unions with fraud to 7.5 percent in FY 2005.
Strategies to achieve the goal are union outreach, a visible audit presence, and a strong criminal enforcement program.
Union reports meeting standards of acceptability increased to 92 percent.
This resulted from agency compliance assistance efforts and increasing use of electronic reporting formats, which include error checks and report validation to assist filers in preparing complete and accurate reports.
Increased union transparency is critical to promoting union democracy and financial integrity.
In FY 2005, OLMS will increase compliance rates to 95 percent by continuing outreach and compliance assistance efforts, and increasing use of electronic forms.
When major revisions of annual reporting requirements for labor unions were announced on October 9, 2003, DOL’s Office of Labor-Management Standards (OLMS) took extraordinary steps to make sure union officials would clearly understand the changes.
OLMS hosted 155 seminars in 44 states, explaining to more than 5,000 union representatives the changes designed to promote union democracy and financial safeguards for millions of American union members.
Performance data comes from two systems.
The Case Data System includes comprehensive information about OLMS investigations, audit findings, and subsequent enforcement actions.
The labor organization report system (e.LORS) includes timeliness and LMRDA union report sufficiency information.
Maintaining effective union outreach and a visible audit presence will be essential to increasing union financial integrity.
Timely, accurate union financial reports are essential to promoting union democracy and financial integrity.
Completeness and accuracy of union reports are markedly increasing as a result of compliance assistance efforts and increasing use of the electronic union annual reporting.
Timely public disclosure reporting remains a continuing challenge in spite of OLMS’ comprehensive program efforts to correct a persistent delinquent report problem.
To address this challenge, DOL supports amendment of the LMRDA to authorize civil monetary penalties for late filing.
Protecting the benefits earned and promised to U.S. workers is a central feature of DOL’s secure workforce strategic goal.
DOL helps increase the economic security of America's working families by temporary protecting wages for the unemployed; protecting private employee pension plans, health plans and other benefits plans against fraud and abuse; protecting Federal and certain other workers from the economic effects of work-related injuries and illness; and protecting against lost or interrupted pension payments of workers whose companies terminate their defined benefit plan.
Three DOL agencies and one government corporation chaired by the Secretary of Labor create a more secure U.S. workforce by protecting worker benefits – the Employment and Training Administration (ETA), the Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA), the Employment Standards Administration (ESA), and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC).
ETA temporarily replaces the wages of the unemployed through the Unemployment Insurance (UI) program, which provides grants to State-operated programs and manages the Unemployment Trust Fund.
ETA ensures that States’ programs are administered efficiently according to Federal standards and requirements, and manages the trust fund to provide a buffer to volatile cycles in tax revenues and benefit claims.
EBSA protects private employee pension plans, health plans and other benefits plans against fraud and abuse by enforcing Title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended (ERISA); through compliance assistance, and through education.
Where there has been malfeasance, EBSA restores benefits and assets by bringing civil and criminal cases.
ESA protects Federal and certain other workers from the economic effects of work-related injuries and illness’s through the Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs’ (OWCP) four disability compensation programs.