This report, prepared in accordance with the Reports Consolidation Act of 2000, presents the results of the Department of Labor’s (DOL) program and financial performance for FY 2005.
The Secretary’s Message is a letter from the chief executive that identifies the Department’s “bottom line” at the mission level.
It includes highlights of achievements for the year and communicates direction and priorities.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) introduces the Department’s mission, vision and organization, summarizes program and financial performance, and addresses major management challenges.
The MD&A also reports on DOL’s progress in implementing the President’s Management Agenda.
The Performance Section narratives and graphic presentations of program results assess progress in achieving the Department’s goals as presented in the Strategic Plan and Performance Budget.
The Financial Section demonstrates our commitment to effective stewardship over the funds DOL receives to carry out the mission of the Department, including compliance with relevant financial management legislation.
It includes the Independent Auditor’s Report – an independent opinion on the Financial Statements provided by the Department’s Office of Inspector General (OIG); Management and Performance Challenges – a report on the top management issues identified by the OIG and the Department’s progress in resolving them; and the Annual Financial Statements.
In addition, five Appendices supplement the performance and financial sections by providing detailed performance information, summaries of significant audits and evaluations, additional information on improper payments reduction, a list of acronyms and a list of Web sites featuring labor programs and issues.
FY 2005 marks the seventh year that the Department of Labor has reported program results under the Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA).
Program goals that are key to the accomplishment of Departmental strategic and outcome goals as presented in the FY 2003-2008 Strategic Plan1 were selected for inclusion in the Department’s FY 2006 Performance Budget Overview2.
These performance goals and their indicators provide the basis for assessments of the Department’s effectiveness in this section.
This report includes performance goals from two different reporting periods in that Workforce Investment Act (WIA) programs are “forward-funded,” meaning that their spending and performance goals are tracked on a cycle that lags the Federal Fiscal Year (FY) by nine months.
This period is referred to as a Program Year (PY); such goals being reported on in this document cover July 1, 2004 to June 30, 2005 (PY 2004).
PY 2005 goals will appear in the FY 2006 report.
The Department’s goal structure has three levels.
Strategic goals describe general aims that emerge from the Department’s mission.
Each of these goals in turn has several outcome goals that define general results DOL agencies can influence.
These are long term objectives that in most cases involve more than one DOL agency.
Finally, performance goals that support each outcome goal provide program-level clarity of purpose.
Each performance goal has associated indicators and targets to measure our impact on a continuous basis.
DOL’s four strategic goals – A Prepared Workforce, A Secure Workforce, Quality Workplaces and A Competitive Workforce – express outcomes associated with our mission, vision and theme, and serve to focus Departmental efforts on the links between activities and their higher purpose.
The table below indicates FY 2005 program performance goal achievement by strategic goal.
Of the 25 performance goals on which DOL is reporting in FY 2005, the Department achieved nine, substantially achieved3 six and did not achieve ten.
The percentage achieved or substantially achieved totals 60 percent – comparable to the FY 2004 average of 63 percent (19 of the 30 performance goals supporting DOL strategic goals).
Below is a breakdown, by strategic goal, of FY 2005 achievements and significant developments.
A tally of goals achieved, while providing an indication of whether DOL is on schedule with its plan, does not convey any actual performance information.
To understand what was achieved in terms of benefits to the public, it is necessary to look not just at whether targets were reached but also at whether observed results indicate positive program impacts.
The following summaries focus on significant trends and their implications.
Tables present the goal number, responsible agency, goal statement, and result for each performance goal being reported on in this document.
The first two digits of each goal number indicate the funding year.
In this report, all “04” goals are reporting on the Program Year period defined above.
As indicated in the Program Performance Goal Achievement table above, DOL had nine performance goals under this strategic goal in FY 2005, of which five were achieved or substantially achieved (56 percent) – slightly below the Department wide average.
However, the percentage of goals achieved understates progress, since at the indicator level, 37 of 41 targets were reached (90 percent).
Entered employment, retention, education and earnings change, job training common measures tracked in most of the programs supporting this goal, improved over prior year results in every case.
Although improving economic conditions helped, DOL had a significant role in facilitating more integrated employment and training service delivery by State Workforce Agency partners and encouraging them to focus on high growth occupations and industries in placement and training services.
In addition, Office of Disability Employment Policy pilot programs exceeded expectations for identifying effective practices, and the Bureau of Labor Statistics improved its accuracy over FY 2004 results.
Budget structures for Workforce Investment Act employment and training programs continue to inhibit program performance by duplicating services and necessitating excessive expenditure on administration.
DOL has proposed legislation to consolidate several funding streams.
Another noteworthy challenge is the Job Corps program’s review of asset management practices for its residential training centers, which the Office of Inspector General has suggested could be a source of improved efficiency.
Of six performance goals, DOL achieved or substantially achieved five (83 percent) – well above the Departmental average of 60 percent.
Worker protection targets for processing timeliness, compliance with wage and hour regulations and union report transparency were all reached or substantially reached.
In the worker benefits outcome goal, results were better than they appear.
Unemployment Insurance (UI) system performance was very good, thank in part to improving economic conditions.
The Federal workers’ compensation program results for return to work, reducing program expenses and customer service met expectations, overall.
DOL’s Employee Benefit Security Administration’s (EBSA) enforcement efforts were successful by all measures.
Corporation (PBGC), while improving satisfaction of plan participants, slipped a bit in the judgment of its practitioner (employer) customers.
The most significant concerns in this area are focused on solvency of the large trust funds for unemployment and pension benefits and integrity of payments to millions of beneficiaries annually by the UI system.
To improve UI financial integrity, DOL is establishing processes for improving education of beneficiaries and assessments of their needs for reemployment services and continued eligibility.
To improve defined benefit plan security, DOL included in the President’s FY 2006 Budget to Congress a proposal to strengthen plan funding rules, improve transparency, and reform the premium structure for insurance provided by PBGC.
DOL achieved or substantially achieved three of six performance goals (50 percent), which is below the Departmental average of 60 percent.
Progress was made in workplace safety and health; fatalities were slightly more frequent but overall injury and illness incidence rates continued to fall, in part due to partnerships with employers and employees and better enforcement targeting.
Dramatic, and in some cases record lows, in mine industry injury and fatality rates can be attributed in part to DOL strategies addressing the human factors that impact safety and health decisions of mine operators and miners.
Illegal discrimination by contractors remained very rare, and veterans’ cases were resolved timely despite increased volume and complexity of complaints due to reserve mobilizations connected with the war in Iraq.
Finally, DOL-funded international labor programs continued to demonstrate success by, for example, removing thousands of children from exploitive work and improving work conditions for the vast majority of those targeted for assistance.
A current DOL occupational safety and health challenge is obtaining timely outcome data.
The latest available data on non-mining occupational injuries and illnesses are two years old.
Mine safety challenges include developing strategies to reduce risks associated with the influx of inexperienced workers that accompanies growth in coal production.
Reemployment issues for armed service members continue to emerge with continuation of the war in Iraq.
Beginning in FY 2006, the Veterans’ Employment and Training Service will monitor Guard and Reserve mobilization and demobilization figures to anticipate needs.
Of four performance goals, DOL achieved one and substantially achieved one (50 percent) – below the Departmental average of 60 percent.
Nevertheless, more indicator targets were reached than not reached (14 vs. 4), and significant progress was made in making America’s workforce more competitive by a number of measures.
Workforce Information job listings, resume searches and Occupational Information Network resource quality and traffic all posted impressive increases.
Foreign Labor Certification (FLC) processing improved over FY 2004 and Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) continued to improve participants’ employment, retention and earnings.
Child labor regulations were updated to eliminate confusion, and DOL proposed a rule to allow financial institutions to distribute the assets of abandoned individual pension plans to participants and beneficiaries.
Significant improvement efforts under way include Workforce Information integration of services in programs funded by the Workforce Investment Act and the Wagner-Peyser/VETS-funded employment services; FLC fraud detection/prevention and backlog elimination; and TAA data quality initiatives.
The next table lists Program Year 2005 goals (July 1, 2005 – June 30, 2006) for which results will be reported in the FY 2006 Performance and Accountability Report.
Costs4 devoted toward achieving the Department’s strategic goals (see table below) are dominated by the second goal, A Secure Workforce, for which net costs in FY 2005 amounted to $40.811 billion – 82 percent of the total, $49.912 billion.
Ninety two percent ($37.7 billion) of net costs associated with Strategic Goal 2 were for benefit payments to unemployed workers or workers disabled as a result of work-related injuries or illnesses.
The first goal, A Prepared Workforce, required $6.865 billion (14 percent), mostly grants to States and other organizations for job training and a host of employment-related services.
Approximately $1.062 billion (2 percent) went toward the third goal, Quality Workplaces, to fund direct services (such as salaries of Federal employees) aimed at improving safety and health in the workplace.
The fourth goal, A Competitive Workforce, accounted for $1.163 billion, two percent of the total, which went toward programs aimed at building a demand-driven workforce system.
Charts that display net costs from FY 1999-FY 2005 to illustrate trends are provided in each outcome goal summary; brief explanations of significant changes since FY 2004 are provided, as well.
This is the first year for which DOL has had the capability of reporting costs at the performance goal level – thanks to more sophisticated cost models in our managerial cost accounting system, Cost Analysis Manager (CAM), that describe relationships between resources, activities, outputs and performance goals.
The Performance Section presents, by strategic goal, summaries of performance at each level.
Each strategic goal section is introduced by an overview of the goal, its component outcome goals, results for FY 2005 and near term plans for improvement.
Each outcome goal section similarly begins with a summary of results, adds net cost information and highlights and concludes with a brief discussion of future plans.
Finally, within each outcome goal section are individual performance goal narratives that present results, describe the program and its operating environment, analyze performance and disclose management issues such as data quality and studies of program costeffectiveness.
Appendix 1 contains performance goal histories and Appendix 2 summarizes significant audits and evaluations of DOL programs completed during FY 2005 that have implications for performance goals.
Performance measurement is inherently difficult, especially for a large, diverse organization like DOL that works to accomplish its mission indirectly – in partnership and by assisting others.
The Department seeks continuous improvement in its selection of indicators and in policies and procedures for collecting and reporting program performance data so that managers and other decision makers can rely on them.
However, each program must consider the costs and benefits of gathering and managing such information.
Changes take time to implement and reporting requirements can impose considerable burdens on staff, partners, beneficiaries and regulated entities.
Timeliness is another important consideration in utility of performance data; most programs use real-time, monthly and quarterly reporting systems and estimate/reconcile annual totals or averages.
New indicators often lack data needed to establish targets.
For such indicators, the first year’s target may be to establish a baseline, and thus the Department gives the program a positive rating for gathering the data as planned and establishing targets for the subsequent year.
The Office of Inspector General assesses the internal controls of DOL agencies – systems used to validate, verify and record data submitted by field staff and partners (e.g., grantees).
These systems are identified as Data Sources in Appendix 1 at the bottom of each performance goal history.
Material inadequacies, if any, are disclosed in this report in the Secretary’s Message.
Lack of findings does not imply that data are factual; we can only infer that current practices and data are acceptable given available knowledge and resources.
In other words, unless noted otherwise, performance data in this report should be considered sufficiently accurate and timely.
At the end of FY 2004, the Department received green on the President’s Management Agenda (PMA) scorecard for financial management.
Since then, the Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) under the direction of the Secretary has devoted significant resources to secure its achievement of excellence in financial management in the Federal Government.
Successes include updating the Department’s Cost Accounting Manager (CAM) models for all participating agencies, providing accurate and timely financial statements on a quarterly basis, migrating the Department’s payroll function to the National Finance Center, and beginning the implementation of a new core financial management system.
While working on these key initiatives, the OCFO anticipated the new requirements related to internal controls by preparing and submitting an implementation plan to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB).
As in previous years, the Department’s financial systems remained in substantial compliance with the Federal Financial Management Improvement Act of 1996 (FFMIA), ensuring that the systems support full disclosure of the costs of the Department’s programs and activities.
In addition, the Department continued to comply with the Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act (FMFIA), a sign that the Department’s accounting systems and internal controls were sufficient to safeguard its resources.
Further, no material weaknesses were found in the audit of the Department’s financial statements for the fiscal year ended 2005.
For the ninth consecutive year, the Department received an unqualified opinion on its consolidated financial statements.
During FY 2005, the OCFO provided timely quarterly audited financial statements to OMB, 21 days after the end of each quarter.
The Department successfully implemented CAM, its managerial cost accounting system.
CAM supports decisionmaking by providing program managers with cost of outputs and activities to better understand the cost of programs from an operational perspective.
CAM information will be used to support Departmental initiatives related to Budget and Performance Integration and OMB PART efficiency measures.
The Department continues to work on the implementation of a new core financial management information system that will provide readily available, transparent data to managers and decision-makers for use on a day-to-day basis.
This JFMIP-compliant COTS package will make available timely, accurate, and reliable financial information, and will provide the tools to conduct sophisticated financial analyses to better manage program resources.
This will result in an increased use of integrated financial and performance information that will empower superior decision making through better business intelligence.
When fully implemented, the new system will be a strategic asset for the Department allowing managers to create customized reports online at their desktops to meet their management needs in real time.
The Department’s new core financial management system will be hosted by a Center of Excellence (CoE).
The CoE is scheduled to be selected in FY 2006.
The Department is committed to implementing the requirements outlined in the revised OMB’s Circular A-123, Management’s Responsibility for Internal Control over Financial Reporting.
Strong internal controls already exist in the Department as evidenced by numerous clean audit opinions and no material weaknesses.
OCFO continues to administer a Quarterly Financial Management Certification program, which requires managers at all levels to attest to the adequacy of program controls.
OCFO will continue to work with program agencies to ensure effective management controls over program resources, financial systems and reporting.
The Department has developed an implementation plan to establish an oversight committee consisting of representatives from the financial, administrative and information systems communities.
OCFO will build upon existing processes to meet the requirements of A-123.
The result of these efforts will support the Secretary’s annual FMFIA certification in the Performance and Accountability Report.
Internal controls improve transparency to the public ensuring that resources are being wisely used to bring results that support the Department’s strategic goals – A Prepared Workforce, A Secure Workforce, Quality Workplaces, and A Competitive Workforce.
We are proud to report our ninth consecutive unqualified audit opinion issued by the Department’s Office of Inspector General (OIG).
Annually, we are challenged with improving and maintaining financial management practices and policies.
This independent assessment provides assurance that the money entrusted to the Department’s stewardship is accounted for properly.
The principal financial statements summarize the Department’s financial position, net cost of operations and changes in net position, provide information on budgetary resources and financing, and present the sources and disposition of custodial revenues for FY 2005 and FY 2004.
The Department’s Balance Sheet presents its financial position through the identification of agency assets, liabilities and net position.
Total assets increased from $62.4 billion at the end of FY 2004 to $71.5 billion in FY 2005 primarily due to the increase in unemployment taxes.
Seventy seven percent of assets are invested in U.S. Government securities, compared to 73 percent in FY 2004.
The total net cost of operations in FY 2005 was $50.4 billion, an 11 percent decrease from the prior year.
This decrease in program costs is mainly attributable to a decrease in unemployment claims during the fiscal year.
Income Maintenance programs continue to comprise the major portion of costs.
Employment and training programs comprise the second largest cost.
These programs are designed to help individuals deal with the loss of a job, research new opportunities, find training to acquire different skills, start a new job, or make long-term career plans.
The Statement of Financing reconciles the net cost of operations with the obligation of budgetary resources.
The Department’s operations are funded primarily by Unemployment Insurance (UI) program employer taxes, appropriations received, and investment interest earned from various trust funds.
This statement reports the amount of resources received to effectively carry out the activities of the Department as well as the status of these resources at the end of the fiscal year.
The Department had direct obligations of $51.3 billion in FY 2005, a decrease of $10.3 billion from FY 2004.
As required by the Government Management Reform Act of 1994 (31 U.S.C. 3515 (b)), the principal financial statements report the Department’s financial position and results of operations.
While the statements have been prepared from the Department’s books and records, in accordance with formats prescribed by OMB, the statements differ from the financial reports used to monitor and control budgetary resources, which are prepared from the same books and records.
The statements should be read with the realization that they are a component of the U.S. Government, a sovereign entity, and that liabilities reported in the financial statements cannot be liquidated withou legislation providing resources to do so.
Over the past several years, identifying and reducing improper payments has been a major financial management focus of the Federal Government.
A PMA key component is to improve agency financial performance through reductions in improper payments.
The Improper Payments Information Act of 2002 (IPIA) broadened the original erroneous payment reporting requirements to programs and activities beyond those originally listed in Circular A-11.
IPIA defines improper payments as those payments made to the wrong recipient, in the wrong amount, or used in an improper manner by the recipient.
IPIA requires a Federal agency to identify all of its programs that are risk susceptible to improper payments.
It also requires the agency to implement a corrective action plan that includes improper payment reduction and recovery targets.
The act also requires the agency to report annually on the extent of its improper payments and the actions taken to increase the accuracy of payments.
To coordinate and facilitate the Department’s efforts under IPIA, the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) is the Erroneous Payment Reduction Coordinator for the Department.
OCFO worked with program offices to develop a coordinated strategy to perform annual reviews for all programs and activities susceptible to improper payments.
This cooperative effort included developing actions to reduce improper payments, identifying and conducting ongoing monitoring techniques, and establishing appropriate corrective action initiatives.
Due to the inherent differences in managing and accounting for funds in a benefit versus a grant program, the Department conducted its FY 2005 risk assessment using different methodologies to assess their improper payment risk.
Per OMB guidance, all Section 57 programs are deemed to be high risk irrespective of the determined improper payment error rate.
The Department has two Section 57 benefit programs, Unemployment Insurance (UI) and Federal Employees’ Compensation Act (FECA).
It also has one Section 57 grant program, Workforce Investment Act (WIA).
FY 2005 benefit programs with FY 2004 outlays totaling less than $200 million were deemed to be low risk, unless a known weakness existed in the program management based on reports issued by oversight agencies such as the Department’s Inspector General (IG) and/or the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO).
Hence, these benefit programs were not statistically sampled.
For benefit programs with outlays greater than $200 million, the Department conducted sampling to determine their improper payment rates.
This sampling included FECA, UI, Black Lung Disability Trust Fund, and Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation Fund.
UI was the only program determined to be susceptible to risk9 as a result of this approach.
However, the Department is also reporting on FECA’s improper payment rate since it is a Section 57 designated program.
As mentioned earlier, the Department used a separate methodology to assess the risk of improper payments in grant programs except for Job Corps which was sampled.
The Department analyzed all FY 2003 Single Audit Reports10 to identify questioned costs, which were used as a proxy for improper payments, and to estimate an approximate risk for each of the Department’s grant programs.
All error rates were determined to be well below the 2.5 percent threshold; therefore, no grant programs were determined to be susceptible to risk as a result of this approach.
However, like FECA, the Department is reporting on WIA’s improper payment rate since it is a Section 57 designated program, even though its improper payment rate is well below the 2.5 percent threshold.
Like many other Federal agencies, the Department faces challenges in meeting its improper payment reduction and recovery targets, particularly with programs that are sensitive to the U.S. economy fluctuations, such as the UI program.
Furthermore, meeting improper payment reduction and recovery targets of programs, such as UI and WIA, are contingent upon the cooperation and support of State agencies and other outside stakeholders who are intricately involved in the day-to-day management of these programs’ activities.
In FY 2005, the Department conducted the required risk assessment.
It also established reduction and recovery targets and developed corrective action plans for those programs for which it is required to report.
Furthermore, the Department met its reduction and recovery improper payment targets set in FY 2004.
In addition to implementing its corrective action plans, the Department also conducted pilot programs within the UI and WIA programs in an effort to identify new ways to detect and reduce these programs’ improper payments.
The result of this pilot clearly indicated that a substantial amount of additional overpayments could be detected using NDNH.
As a result of these positive experiences and the overall success of the pilot, many states have expressed interest in implementing the NDNH cross-match.
ETA is already moving ahead with the implementation of the NDNH cross-match with five states (Utah, Virginia, Texas, Connecticut, and Washington).
An additional 24 states have expressed interest in the use of NDNH by the end of FY 2006.
The ultimate goal is for all states to use NDNH to detect and reduce the occurrence of Benefit Year Ending (BYE)13 overpayments.
The WIA pilot entailed gathering and analyzing data using the Department’s single audits for FY 2002 and FY 2003 that identified WIA grant funds.
The results indicate that questioned costs identified in the audits are less than one percent of WIA expenditures.
The analysis also confirmed that the most efficient means to gather data regarding Federal grant programs is to use the existing infrastructure provided by the Single Audit Act.
The Department used the single audits for the first time to estimate error rates for all grant programs except for Job Corps.
The Inspector General Act Amendments of 1988 require Federal agencies to provide the status of their audit resolutions for all audit reports with recommendations open for more than one year.
The Department’s management and auditors agree that some of Labor’s corrective action plans will take several years to complete.
As of September 30, 2005, 183 audit reports have been open for over one year.
The total monetary value of open audit findings is $65.2 million, which covers 936 separate recommendations.
Departmental agencies and the OIG jointly manage and update the audit tracking system where the current status of each open audit finding is maintained.
Final closure of the audit finding is determined solely by the reviewing OIG officials.
Due to the complexity of implementing some of the audit resolutions, many of these decisions take years before being rendered and the audit finding is closed.
The most significant of the non-monetary open audit findings are discussed in this report.
A listing of all open audits is available upon request from the Department’s OCFO.
The Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996 (DCIA) designated the Department of the Treasury as the central agency for collection of Federal debts over 180 days delinquent.
The Department cross services all delinquent debts in accordance with this statute.
Debt management accounts for a relatively small part of our financial management activity.
The majority of debts managed by the Department relate to the assessment of fines and penalties in our enforcement programs.
During FY 2005, the Department referred $67.7 million, which represents 70 percent of al eligible delinquent debt, to Treasury for collection.
The Department continues to monitor and aggressively pursue its debt greater than 180 days old.
In accordance with the Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 (CFO Act) and OMB Circular A-25, department-wide guidance has been developed to establish policies, procedures, and responsibility for implementing and managing user charges within the Department.
The guidance includes the biennial review requirements of the CFO Act.
The Department works effortlessly to meet guidance and regulations outline in the Prompt Payment Act.
The Prompt Payment Act requires Executive agencies to pay commercial obligations within discreet time periods and to pay interest penalties when those time constraints are not met.
In FY 2005, of approximately $1.9 billion in gross payments, $481,430 was paid in interest fees and penalties.
Additionally, during FY 2005, there were over 69,000 payments made to vendors and travelers.
Of this amount, 2,773 invoices were paid late, resulting in only 4% of the total payments incurring interest penalties.
The Department has worked aggressively with its agencies during this fiscal year to increase the number of vendors receiving payments electronically.
As the chart below displays, this cooperative effort resulted in improved results across the board.
The low rates for ESA programs are due to the low EFT participation and the heavy volume within its medical and benefits programs.
Source: DOL DOLAR$ and Payroll System EFT reports.
The table below lists management challenges the Department considers most important in terms of their impact on the accomplishment of goals in this report and their impact on the American workplace and taxpayers, overall.
Management challenges for Goal 1, A Prepared Workforce, pertain to managing employment and training programs, foreign labor certification, and safeguarding real property.
The GAO identified the management of employment and training programs as one of the three major challenges remaining for the Department in 2005.
The Department’s OIG identified the foreign labor certification and the management of real property challenges for this goal.
Management challenges for Goal 2, A Secure Workforce, include reducing overpayments (improper payments) of unemployment insurance and safeguarding funds for Employee Benefit Plan Assets and unemployment insurance and real property.
These challenges are well documented and were identified by the OIG, the GAO, and the Department.
For Goal 3, Quality Workplaces, the GAO identified a challenge to fostering safe workplaces that the Department recognizes as important.
The achievement of all the Department’s goals is influenced by the successful management of its procurement operations, its information technology capabilities, and its data quality.
These challenges have been identified by the Department’s OIG and are included in the table, as well.
Summaries of the issue, actions taken and those remaining are presented for each item.
More information on many of them may be found elsewhere in this report in discussions of program performance or in the Financial Section.
The Department aggressively pursues corrective action for all significant challenges, whether identified by the OIG, the GAO, OCFO or other sources within the Department.
On June 30, 2005, The US Department of Labor became the first Executive Branch department or agency to achieve a green status for all five government-wide President’s Management Agenda (PMA) initiatives.
This achievement is not an end in itself — it represents an ongoing commitment to good management to bring quality services to the American people.
Commenting on this accomplishment, Secretary Elaine L. Chao said, “This is a tremendous achievement by DOL employees who are committed to excellence on behalf of American workers and taxpayers.”
President George W. Bush’s Management Agenda, announced in 2001, is a strategy for improving the management and performance of the Federal government.
Market-based, actively promoting rather than stifling innovation through competition.
Together, initiatives created to achieve these goals are referred to as the President’s Management Agenda (PMA).
The five government wide initiatives are: Strategic Management of Human Capital, Competitive Sourcing, Improved Financial Performance, Expanding Electronic Government, and Budget and Performance Integration.
The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) regularly assesses all Federal agencies’ implementation of the PMA, issuing a quarterly Executive Branch Management Scorecard rating of green, yellow or red for both status and progress on each initiative.
The breakdown by initiative, comparing last year’s ratings with those for FY 2005, is indicated in the table below.
Under the OMB-led Proud to Be campaign, DOL set ambitious goals, demonstrated measurable progress and ultimately achieved green status scores in all five government-wide initiatives.
The Department is now rated highest of all Cabinet agencies in overall implementation of the PMA.
Highlights of achievements associated with each initiative follow the table.
The Department uses a similar scorecard on a semi annual basis to measure individual agency progress on the PMA.
The Human Capital initiative requires Federal agencies and departments to develop and use a comprehensive human capital plan, with the aim of significantly reducing mission-critical skill gaps.
The PMA has provided the impetus for DOL to overhaul the Department’s entire performance management system in order to hold managers and employees accountable for achieving results.
The Department has developed a streamlined rating system for all 17,000 DOL employees.
More importantly, the performance management system reinforces the connection between resources, performance against the Department’s strategic goals, and individuals’ ties to both.
We are pleased to say that 100 percent of missioncritical occupations at the Department are linked to DOL’s strategic goals.
The Department also created performance plans for DOL managers and members of the Senior Executive Service (SES) – the cadre of top civil servant executives in the Federal government – to better link agency mission, goals, and outcomes.
Each SES performance plan now includes four core management skills or competencies – such as leadership, human resource management, and coalition building – as well as four measurable results linked to organizational or Departmental goals.
Critical to DOL’s success in implementing the PMA was having a roadmap of what we wanted to accomplish.
Our roadmap is the Department’s Human Capital Strategic Plan, published in 2003.
The Department’s Human Capital Strategic Plan tracks key activities and metrics to measure results.
The Department’s success in this area is bolstered by the Department’s status as a President’s Quality Award winner in 2004 for its Strategic Management of Human Capital efforts and by the International Personnel Management Association’s Leading Edge Award received in 2003.
Competitive Sourcing is DOL’s most recent PMA initiative to achieve green status.
Competitive Sourcing allows the government to take advantage of market-based competition while simultaneously allowing the existing Federal employees to compete for the work.
Competitive sourcing requires Federal employees to compete against private sector bidders for work that is deemed “commercial activity.”
These skills and competencies, which are not missioncritical, can be performed more effectively and efficiently when subject to the competition of the marketplace.
In the past two years, DOL announced and carried out eight competitions for IT services, invoice payments, administrative services, printing and reprographics, reports disclosure, conference center, statistical systems, and finance and accounting.
Seven of these competitions were won by the in-house workforce and one was decided in favor of an outside contractor, with savings and/or cost avoidance achieved by each of these competitions.
The combined projected savings/cost-avoidance for the eight competitions completed to date is over $12,000,000.
DOL has an ambitious plan to compete designated commercial functions by the end of FY 2007.
In FY 2005, DOL completed eight competitions, involving 125 FTE and announced 4 streamlined competitions and 1 standard competition involving approximately 187 FTE.
These latter competitions are currently in-progress.
The availability of timely, accurate, and useful financial information is essential to any well-managed, effective organization.
The Improved Financial Performance initiative requires Federal agencies to receive clean audit opinions on their annual financial statements, meet accelerated financial reporting deadlines, implement managerial cost accounting practices, improve internal controls, and have financial management systems that are compliant with Federal laws and regulations.
The Department continues to expand the use of integrated financial and performance information in the planning, budgeting, and decision-making activities throughout its agencies.
It also remains focused on improving accountability and transparency for how well tax dollars are spent.
In FY 2005, DOL received its ninth clean audit opinion on our consolidated financial statements, fifth consecutive CEAR award, and has consistently met the accelerated OMB financial reporting deadlines.
To ensure that the Department’s financial operations comply with all Federal financial management laws, regulations, and standard and to quickly identify and address potential financial management problems, Agency Heads attest on a quarterly basis to the adequacy of internal controls in their agencies.
The Expanding Electronic Government (E-government) initiative requires Federal agencies and departments develop secure Information Technology (IT) systems and strictly adhere to IT project cost, schedule, and performance projections.
E-government is really about becoming a better steward of Federal IT investment dollars.
Government IT projects suffer from the same problems as private sector IT projects, namely, scope creep, slipping schedules and cost overruns.
The only way to prevent this is to develop solid plans and to stick with the plans.
The success of our new EVM policy is exemplified by having 96 percent of our IT projects within 10 percent of cost, schedule, and performance in FY 2005.
In FY 2002, only 70 percent of DOL’s IT projects were within 10 percent of cost, schedule, and performance.
Two examples of DOL’s use of E-government to provide citizens better service are GovBenefits.gov and the Safety and Health Information Management System (SHIMS).
Before 2002, government benefits eligibility information was spread across 31 million Web sites.
DOL established and is managing GovBenefits.gov, a web portal that organizes 500 Federal and State benefit programs, where citizens can get personalized benefit information within three easy steps.
GovBenefits.gov offers diverse and extensive benefit program information for veterans, seniors, people with disabilities, disaster victims, job seekers and others.
In April 2005, DOL launched GovLoans.gov en Español, which offers Spanish-speaking communities greater access to available Federal and State loan program information.
DOL developed SHIMS – a Web-based workers compensation and safety filing system – to enable DOL workers and managers to submit Federal workers' compensation claims electronically.
Since its deployment in 2001, DOL has developed hosting capabilities providing the potential for reporting work-related injuries and illnesses and filing of compensations claims throughout the Federal workforce.
The Transportation Security Administration currently uses SHIMS and the Department of Education and the Federal Air Marshal Service will use the electronic system in the near future.
The Budget and Performance Integration initiative requires agencies and departments use performance goals and results as an integral element in program operations and budget formulation.
This initiative allows decision-makers within the Administration, DOL, and Capitol Hill to make connections between budget dollars and what programs produce.
At a more fundamental level, it allows executives within programs to manage toward program performance and make resource decisions accordingly.
In June 2004, DOL was the first of only two Federal agencies to achieve a green status score in budget and performance integration.
DOL had to demonstrate improvement in both performance and efficiency; operate by strategic plans containing a limited number of outcome-oriented goals and measures; appraise employee performance and provide consequences tied to individual’s contribution toward performance of agency mission, goals, and results; and demonstrate the full cost of achieving performance goals.
In addition, DOL is responsible for three of the PMA components found in selected departments: Eliminating Improper Payments, Faith-Based and Community Initiative, and Federal Real Property Asset Management.
DOL’s status for all three of these initiatives is yellow.
DOL’s progress in implementing these initiatives, however, is green.
The Improper Payment Information Act of 2002 defines improper payments as those payments made to the wrong recipient, in the wrong amount, or used in an improper manner by the recipient.
The Eliminating Improper Payments initiative requires a Federal agency to identify all of its programs that are risk susceptible to improper payments.
It also requires the agency to implement a corrective action plan that includes improper payment reduction and recovery targets.
The Department has successfully met all the reporting requirements of the Improper Payment Information Act.
It has developed and implemented corrective action plans that have reduced the amount of its erroneous payments within the FECA and UI programs.
The Faith-Based and Community Initiative strengthens and expands the role of faith-based and community organizations in addressing the nation's social problems.
The Department’s Center for Faith-Based and Communit Initiatives seeks to empower faith-based and community organizations (FBCOs) as these organizations help neighbors enter, succeed and thrive in the workforce.
To accomplish this mission, DOL works to remove administrative and regulatory barriers and develop innovative programs to foster partnerships between DOL-funded programs and FBCOs.
The Department is working with workforce investment boards nationwide to increase partnerships with faith-based and community organizations that help transition hard-to-serve individuals into employment.
DOL extends its outreach to FBCOs well beyond the confines of direct grant programs.
Forty-eight intermediaries have worked with over 300 grassroots organizations since 2001 through DOL’s coordination and funding support.
By linking the administrative and reporting expertise of intermediary organizations to the human and program resources of small FBCOs, we are providing workforce development and other essential human services to populations not previously reached by DOL programs.
The Federal Real Property Asset Management Initiative promotes the efficient and economical use of America's real property assets and assures management accountability for implementing Federal real property management reforms.
In June 2005 — in keeping with the purposes of the real property initiative — DOL Deputy Secretary Steven Law established a Departmental workgroup consisting of senior executives throughout the Department to implement this key President's Management Agenda initiative.
In addition, the Inspector General’s “Top Management Challenges” addressed in this report also highlights the need to improve management of real property assets.
Even in this early phase of implementing this real property initiative, DOL is quickly making progress.
For example, the Job Corps program is implementing new data validation procedures and is continuing to look closely at whether its physica assets (its residential centers) are being utilized as efficiently as possible.
President Bush has stated that “Government likes to begin things – to declare grand new programs and causes. But good beginnings are not the measure of success. What matters in the end is completion. Performance. Results. Not just making promises, but making good on promises.”
At DOL, we are not just making promises; we’re making good on promises.
The Program Assessment Rating Tool (PART) was developed to assess and improve program performance so that the Federal government can achieve better results.
A PART review helps identify a program’s strengths and weaknesses to inform funding and management decisions aimed at making the program more effective.
Through a PART assessment, Federal programs are rated in terms of their purpose and design, strategic and performance planning, management, and results and accountability.
Based on a PART score and the quality its performance measures and performance data, each program receives one of five PART Ratings: Effective, Moderately Effective, Adequate, Ineffective, and Results Not Demonstrated.
To date, 21 DOL programs have been assessed through the PART.
Of DOL’s 21 assessed programs: one is rated Effective, seven are rated Moderately Effective, eight are rated Adequate, four are rated Ineffective, and one is rated Results Not Demonstrated.
Specifically related to performance and accountability, the rating of Results Not Demonstrated is an assessment that a program’s performance goals are not sufficiently outcome (results) oriented and/or the program does not have adequate data to demonstrate its performance results to decision makers and the public.
In FY 2006, DOL wil publish the scores and ratings for seven additional programs in the President’s FY 2007 Budget and will complete all remaining PART assessments, totaling 39 over a five-year period.
In addition to a score and a rating, PART assessments are useful because they include specific recommendations intended to improve accountability and performance.
PART recommendations DOL has recently implemented include: develop efficiency measures, baselines and targets for all programs assessed through the PART; reporting against a uniform set of measures (Federal job training program common measures) for Workforce Investment Act (WIA) programs; establish ambitious performance targets for the majority of programs; and use PART results to justify proposed program terminations and cuts.
America’s engine of prosperity is its skilled workforce.
The maintenance of our strong national economy depends, in part, on developing a steady stream of workers that are qualified job candidates possessing skills that are relevant to the needs of today's employers.
The Department must ensure that every available labor pool is tapped, including job seekers with special needs such as the people with disabilities, veterans, disadvantaged youth, and those who have lost their jobs due to foreign competition.
Addressing the job seekers' needs is further complicated by the changing workplace.
New technologies, increased competition, and changing labor markets have prompted employers to downsize, change employment patterns, and seek alternative labor sources.
Furthermore, the nature of work itself is changing, and the Department must support the need of our workforce for lifelong learning and skills upgrades.
The Department has a leadership responsibility to support the needs of the changing workforce and position the U.S. for continued economic development and growth.
This aspect of our mission is captured by the first strategic goal – A Prepared Workforce.
Agencies with programs supporting this goal are the Employment and Training Administration (ETA), Veterans’ Employment and Training Service (VETS), the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), and the Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP).
The Department’s performance in achieving this goal is determined by accomplishments organized at the outcome goal level and measured at the performance goal level.
Three broad objectives – Outcome Goals 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3 – support Strategic Goal 1, and they contain nine performance goals (see table below).
In FY 2005, the Department achieved or substantially achieved four of its goals for A Prepared Workforce – a record that understates actual accomplishments, since most targets were reached even in goals falling into the “not achieved” category.
Entered employment, retention, education and earnings change improved over prior year results in every instance, largely due to DOL’s strategic integration of service delivery and targeting of services.
The following charts illustrate DOL’s strategic goal net costs in FY 2005, with A Prepared Workforce shares set apart.
The first allocates total Departmental costs of $49.912 billion; the second allocates an adjusted net cost of $12.222 billion that excludes major non-discretionary items associated with Strategic Goal 2.15 Net costs of this goal in FY 2004 were $8.654 billion.
The outcome goals and programs listed above, along with their results, costs, and future challenges are discussed in more detail on the following pages.
The Department assists workers and employers with valuable information and specific training to help them take full advantage of the constantly changing demands and resources in the labor market.
Central to this effort is a nationwide network of approximately 2000 One-Stop Career Centers which assist communities to match adults to work and skill enhancement opportunities.
This comprehensive workforce investment system also helps businesses meet their ongoing recruitment and human services needs.
Through a national business services model, the Department helps national employers understand and use the full resources of the One-Stop system to better access trained workers.
For individuals with disabilities, the One-Stop Centers have improved access to their facilities and services by installing assistive technologies.
DOL is also making a special effort to help our nation's military service members adjust to and re-enter the civilian workforce by providing priority services at all One-Stop Centers pursuant to the Jobs for Veterans Act of 2002.
The Employment and Training Administration (ETA), the Veterans’ Employment and Training Service (VETS) and the Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP), with support from the Women’s Bureau and the Center for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives, operate a number of programs and projects that provide information, assistance, skill-building opportunities, and effective strategies for providing the programs and services that lead to increased employment and earnings.
In the first column of the table below are the numbers, agencies, reporting periods , goal statements, achievement, and a summary of results at the performance indicator level for DOL performance goals associated with this outcome goal.
Of the six performance goals listed, DOL achieved four and did not achieve two.
As illustrated, primary outcomes of participant employment and retention improved over the prior year for every program.
Results were also positive for the two programs with targets for increasing participants’ earnings – WIA Adults and Dislocated Workers.
Performance for most of DOL’s employment and training programs is measured by entered employment – the percentage of participants who obtain jobs subsequent to receipt of services – and by retention – the percentage of those who obtained jobs who are still employed six months later.
Earnings are important, too; no chart is provided because the two programs that have data used different indicators.
This will be resolved over time as Federal job training program common measures are implemented.
Baseline efficiency data exist for a few programs but offer little useful information at this point.
These charts show, for each program in this outcome goal that tracks employment and retention rates, the result for the previous year, the target for the reporting period and the result.
There are significant differences in entry and retention rates between programs; this can be explained by the types of services offered and the populations they serve.
Increases across the board are partially attributable to improving overall economic growth and employment.
Key DOL contributions were facilitating more integrated service delivery by State Workforce Agency partners and encouraging them to focus on high growth occupations and industries in placement and training services.
The only surprise in employment and retention results was a pleasant one.
Outcomes for job seekers using One-Stop employment services exceeded expectations for the second consecutive year.
Accordingly, PY 2005 targets for rates are being raised by several pemployment and retention ercentage points.
Coletta lost all her belongings and her job due to Hurricane Katrina.
A hurricane survivor from New Orleans, Coletta attended a job fair sponsored by the North Central Texas WorkForce Board (NCTWFB) and found a position with The Reel Thing, a catfish restaurant.
She began work immediately and expressed her appreciation to the entire community for other support, including shelter, clothes, and hot meals.
The job fair, held at space donated by the Comfort Suites in McKinney, featured more than 16 employers.
Our goal is to provide each person arriving in our area with an opportunity to work. Texas, and especially the North Central Texas area, is eager to aid those surviving Hurricane Katrina and help them get back on their feet. We do not plan to stop with this one job fair. We will continue to work tirelessly toward our goal,” said Linda Davis, executive director of the NCTWFB.
DOL also played a crucial role in our Nation’s response to Hurricane Katrina.
Within days of Katrina’s landfall, DOL awarded up to $191 million to affected States, including those States hosting evacuees.
The funds, from the National Emergency Grant program, helped to create temporary jobs.
These jobs put displaced people to work k.performing crucial jobs, such as providing shelter, food, and clothing, and performing clean-up and restoration wor These jobs also provide short-term training for vocational skills, which create new career pathways to help evacuees return to jobs in their community or where they choose to settle.
The TAA performance goal was moved again in FY 2005, along with several smaller ETA programs, to Strategic Goal 4 – accounting for roughly $1 billion of the decrease shown here.
The additional decrease is primarily the result of reductions in the Dislocated Worker and Welfare-to-Work programs.
Separate funding streams for the Wagner-Peyser Act funded employment services and the WIA Adult and Dislocated Worker programs continue to present challenges to program performance as services are duplicated and additional funds are spent on administrative support.
With WIA Reauthorization, DOL proposes to combine these funding streams with WIA Youth into one consolidated program.
DOL, in collaboration with the Rehabilitative Services Administration and the Social Security Administration, is developing a strategic plan to address the matter.
To mencourage States’ cooperation, Apprenticeship has been expanding its Registered Apprenticeship Information Syste (RAIS) electronic registration project.
Increase the employment, retention, and earnings of individuals registered under the Workforce Investment Act Adult program.
The Workforce Investment Act (WIA) Adult program is designed to help adult workers (employed and unemployed) acquire the skills and jobs they need to compete in a global economy.
WIA Adult program funds are provided by formula to States and local communities that operate statewide networks of One-Stop Career Centers.
The Centers provide a continuum of seamlessly-integrated services (including services under the Wagner-Peyser Act and the WIA Dislocated Worker program) which offer comprehensive assistance to workers and employers.
States also use the WIA Adult program to leverage additional, non-Federal resources to increase the quality and variety of assistance.
The Department uses four indicators to evaluate the success and cost effectiveness of WIA employment and training services for adults: entered employment, retention, earnings change, and cost per participant.
A high entered employment rate indicates that participants have improved financial security.
A high retention rate indicates stability of participants’ new positions.
Higher earnings change reflects effective assistance, especially of training services.
The cost per participant gauges program efficiency.
Successful leveraging of non-Federal funds can lower the cost per participant by allowing the program to increase the number of people served.
As a single father, Kenneth had experienced a great deal of adversity in his life.
While incarcerated due to his dependence on drugs and alcohol, Kenneth realized he needed to find a better path.
With encouragement from family, friends and his parole officer, Kenneth obtained a job at a local restaurant earning $12,000 a year after his release from prison.
While he remained drug-free for three years, Kenneth looked for employment that provided a more stable and higher income.
He visited Ozark Action, Inc. in Missouri, and enrolled in the WIA Adult program.
Kenneth completed his C-1 Truck Driver training with the assistance of the program and began driving for the trucking company.
He bought his own truck and currently makes nearly $40,000 per year!
He is clearly traveling down a far brighter path.
National labor market conditions strongly influence the WIA Adult program outcomes.
In recent years, during recovery from the economic downturn of 2000 and 2001, the program outcomes continuously improved as the unemployment rate decreased.
Throughout this period, DOL continued to improve its integrated One-Stop delivery system and raise its performance standards accordingly.
Over the past four years, targets for entered employment and retention increased a total of six and seven percentage points respectively.
DOL adjusted the earnings change target to more accurately reflect current economic conditions.
The Department achieved its performance goal for the WIA Adult program.
The entered employment rate, employment retention rate and earnings change results exceeded targets, and efficiency was only slightly off the target.
As illustrated below, performance is trending upward for all three outcome indicators.
Entered employment and retention have remained above the targets, while earnings increase rose significantly from $3,260 in Program Year (PY) 2003 to $3,746 in PY 2004.
This is the first year for which efficiency data have been reported.
The broad economic indicators were positive over the past twelve months and provided a boost to the performance outcomes for the Adult program.
During this period, the economy added about 2.2 million jobs, unemployment fell from 5.4 percent to 4.9 percent; and interest rates remained low.
Productivity was up and average weekly earnings increased by 2.7 percent as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
To continuously improve outcomes for WIA participants, the Department is focusing on integrated service delivery and new approaches to workforce investment designed to ensure workers have the right skills to get and retain good jobs with good wages.
State Workforce Agencies (SWAs) used handbooks, user guides, and so (developed by DOL) to validate outcomes reported in PY 2003 and PY 2004.
DOL will revise the data validation materials and software to support accurate and reliable data reporting.
Separate funding streams for the Wagner-Peyser Act funded employment services and the WIA Adult and Dislocated Worker programs continue to present challenges to program performance, as services are duplicated and additional funds are spent on administrative support.
DOL took steps to consolidate the reporting on all programs and is conducting a feasibility study in several State agencies.
With WIA Reauthorization, DOL proposes to combine these funding streams together with WIA Youth funding into one consolidated program.
The Government Accountability Office (GAO) issued its report in December 2004, Labor Has Taken Several Actions to Facilitate Access to One-Stops for Persons with Disabilities, but These Efforts May Not Be Sufficient (Study 2 in Appendix 2).
DOL instituted a workgroup – including the Rehabilitative Services Administration and Social Security Administration, as well as DOL’s Civil Rights Center, Office of Disability Employment Policy and Veterans’ Employment and Training Service – that has met consistently since January 2005.
In collaboration with the workgroup, DOL has begun to develop a comprehensive, long-term strategic plan to address the One-Stop system’s provision of services to people with disabilities.
This workgroup’s mission is to develop an inter-agency work plan that will promote service delivery excellence for people with disabilities in the One-Stop Career Center system.
The approved policies and strategies will be translated into a work plan.
The GAO issued its February 2005 report, Employers Are Aware of, Using, and Satisfied with One-Stop Services, but More Data Could Help Labor Better Address Employers’ Needs (Study 3 in Appendix 2).
Prior to the issuance of this report, DOL proposed a comprehensive, streamlined reporting system for 12 different programs – EMILE (ETA Management Information and Longitudinal Evaluation), and is currently conducting a feasibility study.
Also, DOL revised its planning guidance to require States to describe how they will actively engage businesses and inform demand-driven service delivery approaches for all customers.
A GAO report issued in May 2005, Labor Should Consider Alternative Approaches to Implement New Performance and Reporting Requirements (Study 4 in Appendix 2), examined EMILE.
Pending completion of the aforementioned study, DOL revised reporting requirements, effective July 1, 2005, to facilitate common performance measures reporting across DOL’s employment and training programs.
A June 2005 GAO report, Substantial Funds Are Used for Training, but Little Is Known Nationally about Training Outcomes (Study 1 in Appendix 2), raised concern about how WIA funds are being used and how much is being spent on training.
In response, DOL is standardizing the definition of ‘participant exit’ for purposes of assessing program performance.
States began implementing these changes on July 1, 2005.
Through the newly revised Workforce Investment Act Standardized Record Data system, DOL will be able to capture information on all participants who receive training in each program year.
Improve outcomes for job seekers and employers who receive One-Stop employment and workforce information services.
A fundamental underpinning of the nation’s One-Stop Career Centers is the delivery of employment and workforce information services to a universal population of both businesses and job seekers.
Funded principally through WIA, the Wagner-Peyser Act, and the Jobs for Veterans Act administered by the Veterans’ Employment and Training Service (VETS), One-Stop employment and workforce information services are designed to help workers (employed and unemployed) obtain jobs and give employers access to the skilled workers they need to compete in the global economy.
Providing effective services responsive to unique local/regional labor market conditions and the needs of workers is key to achieving successful outcomes for both workers and employers.
Such services are provided in collaboration with a wide array of One-Stop partners and are fully integrated for seamless service delivery to customers.
One-Stop employment and workforce information services are a continuum of core, intensive, and training services available through One-Stop Centers.
Core services include skill assessment, job counseling, and labor market information and are available to everyone.
Intensive services have a limited eligibility, based on need and include employability skills and case management.
Training services are available to those needing more than core and intensive services.
One-Stop employment services are provided universally to customers at no charge, with special emphasis on services for Unemployment Insurance (UI) claimants, migrant and seasonal farmworkers, veterans17, and businesses.
Services include a wide array of workforce and labor market information, career guidance products and tools, assessments, job matching and referral, reemployment services for UI claimants, targeted services for veterans and more.
DOL uses three key indicators to evaluate the success and effectiveness of One-Stop employment and workforce information services: entered employment, employment retention, and average cost per participant.
A high entered employment rate indicates that participants have improved financial security.
A high retention rate indicates stability of participants’ new positions.
With the implementation of common performance measures for Federal job trainings in PY 2005, DOL will add earnings change, which indicates the impact of services on post-program participation earnings potential.
See performance goal 04-4.1A Electronic Tools for further detail about the Workforce Information System.)
Both the entered employment rate and the employment retention rates exceeded targets and increased from PY 2003.
The cost per participant (efficiency) measure was new in PY 2004; results fell short of the target.
Consequently, the overall performance goal was not achieved.
In PY 2005, ETA will implement Federal job training program common measures.
States will be required to report on One-Stop customers who receive workforce information services and their outcomes, and their two-year strategic plans will include a discussion of workforce information as a tool in serving job seekers and employers.
The Employment Connection in Ohio demonstrates how the workforce system and employers can work together to meet their needs.
In February 2005, the Employment Connection coordinated with Home Depot to conduct a mass recruitment session in 20 different locations.
Approximately 350 applicants attended and more than 70 applicants were hired through the recruitment session.
Stan, a 54 year old veteran who served in the U.S. Navy during the Vietnam era, was one of the applicants who was hired at the session.
After his service in the Navy, he worked on computer repairs for 25 years.
However, after losing his job due to an economic downturn, Stan accessed services through Employment Connection.
They have a lot to offer and provide a very supportive environment,” he said.
Separate funding streams that fund One-Stop employment services, particularly the WIA Adult and Dislocated Worker funding and the Wagner-Peyser Act funding, continue to present challenges to program performance.
DOL took steps to consolidate the reporting on all programs and is conducting a feasibility study for consolidated reporting in several State agencies.
With WIA Reauthorization, DOL proposes to combine these funding streams and WIA Youth into one consolidated program to minimize duplication of services and administrative support funds.
In PY 2004, ETA actively participated in a pilot study with VETS to research statistical models for goal setting purposes (Study 11 in Appendix 2).
The efficiency component of the study has focused on how to determine unit costs for the general population of job seekers and veterans who receive One-Stop employment and workforce information services.
The study pointed to several variables that will impact program cost per participant including the unemployment rate, cost of labor and facilities, population density, relative number of job seekers and veterans, and unexpected major corporate layoffs, among others.
The earnings gain component of the study relied on a small sample of state data (three states) so the results may not be statistically relevant across all states.
Nevertheless, average earnings gains among participating states equaled zero for all job seekers, and generally greater than zero for veterans.
As part of an on-going response to concerns raised by the Office of Inspector General regarding the accuracy of data reported by States for performance, DOL developed and implemented a data validation methodology for WIA programs, including One-Stop employment services.
State workforce agencies used handbooks, user guides, and software (developed by DOL) to validate outcomes reported in PY 2003 and PY 2004.
In PY 2005, SWAs will implement common performance measures (for Federal job training programs).
DOL will revise the data validation materials and software to support accurate and reliable data reporting.
In 2004, One-Stop employment and workforce information services were assessed through the PART.
The program was rated Adequate.
The PART assessment found that accountability for performance results by grantees was insufficient given the delay in implementing long term performance measures.
In response, DOL fully implemented the common measures for job training programs on July 1, 2005.
ETA will collect baseline data on these measures during PY 2005 and grantees will negotiate levels of performance in PY 2006.
Increase the employment, retention, and earnings replacement of individuals registered under the Workforce Investment Act Dislocated Worker Program.
The Workforce Investment Act (WIA) Dislocated Worker program aims to quickly reemploy laid off workers and preferably to enhance their employability and earnings by increasing occupational skills.
The Department allocates 80 percent of the WIA Dislocated Worker funds by formula to the States.
The Secretary may use the remaining 20 percent for discretionary activities specified in the Workforce Investment Act, including assistance to localities that suffer plant closings, mass layoffs or job losses due to natural disasters and military base realignment and closures.
The Dislocated Worker program is part of a continuum of seamlessly-integrated services (including services under the Wagner-Peyser Act and the WIA Adult program) which reflect comprehensive assistance to workers and employers.
States also use the WIA Dislocated Worker program to leverage additional, non-Federal resources in order to increase the quality and variety of assistance they are able to offer.
Four key indicators are used to assess the program’s success.
The entered employment rate indicates how quickly participants’ incomes (hence family security) are restored and whether they maintain continuous attachment to the labor force with minimal disruption.
The average cost per participant measure gauges program efficiency.
Successful leveraging of non-Federal funds lowers the unit cost by allowing the program to increase the number of people served.
The Department did not achieve its performance goal for the WIA Dislocated Worker program.
Although entered employment, employment retention and earnings replacement rates all reached or exceeded targets, efficiency (cost per participant) was off target because PY 2004 was the first year of measurement for this indicator.
Broad economic indicators were positive over the past 12 months and provided a boost to outcomes.
During this period, the economy added about 2.2 million jobs, unemployment fell from 5.4 percent to 4.9 percent, and interest rates remained low.
Productivity was up and average weekly earnings increased by 2.7 percent as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for the reporting period.
In PY 2005, the Department continues implementing demand-driven workforce investment strategies that promote the successful transition of dislocated workers to good jobs and new careers.
In addition, the Department is pro-actively developing transition strategies to position workers in declining industries (thus likely to be dislocated) to obtain the skills they need to transition more quickly.
As part of an on-going response to concerns raised by the Office of Inspector General regarding accuracy of data reported by States for WIA performance, in PY 2004 DOL developed and implemented a data validation methodology for WIA programs.
State Workforce Agencies (SWAs) used handbooks, user guides, and software (developed by DOL) to validate outcomes reported in PY 2003 and PY 2004.
In PY 2005, SWAs will implement common performance measures (for Federal job training programs).
DOL will revise the data validation materials and software to support accurate and reliable data reporting.
Separate funding streams for the Wagner-Peyser Act funded employment services and the WIA Adult and Dislocated Worker programs continue to present challenges to program performance as services are duplicated and additional funds are spent on administrative support.
DOL took steps to consolidate the reporting on all programs and is conducting a feasibility study in several State agencies.
With WIA Reauthorization, DOL proposes to combine these funding streams into one consolidated program.
The Government Accountability Office (GAO) issued its February 2005 report, Employers Are Aware of, Using, and Satisfied with One-Stop Services, but More Data Could Help Labor Better Address Employers’ Needs (Study 3 in Appendix 2).
Also, DOL revised its planning guidance to require States to describe how they wil actively engage businesses and inform demand-driven service delivery approaches for all customers.
A GAO report issued in May 2005, Labor Should Consider Alternative Approaches to Implement New Performance and Reporting Requirements (Study 4 in Appendix 2), examined EMILE.
Pending completion of the aforementioned study, DOL revised reporting requirements, effective July 1, 2005, to facilitate the reporting of common performance measures across DOL’s employment and training programs.
A June 2005 GAO report, Substantial Funds Are Used for Training, but Little Is Known Nationally about Training Outcomes (Study 1 in Appendix 2), raised concern about how WIA funds are being used and how much is being spent on training.
In response, DOL is standardizing the definition of ‘participant exit’ for purposes of assessing program performance, and States began implementing these changes on July 1, 2005.
Through the newly revised Workforce Investment Act Standardized Record Data, DOL will be able to capture information on all participants who receive training in each program year.
The Department is currently conducting a study in which seven State workforce agencies are co-enrolling all of their Trade Adjustment Act (TAA) participants into the Dislocated Worker program to examine how co-enrollment affects the performance outcomes of both populations.
Results are expected in 2008.
In response to the PART review conducted in 2002 in which the program was rated Adequate, DOL implemented common performance measures for job training programs.
DOL is also integrating its training programs to eliminate duplication of services and provide flexibility to States.
Improve employment outcomes for veterans who receive One-Stop and homeless veterans’ services.
VETS delivers One-Stop employment and workforce information services to veterans through grants to State Workforce Agencies (SWAs), so that unemployed and underemployed veterans receive the assistance needed to obtain suitable employment.
These grants fund positions for Disabled Veterans’ Outreach Program (DVOP) specialists and Local Veterans’ Employment Representatives (LVER), who are assigned to One-Stop Career Centers nationwide and focus on veterans’ specific employment needs.
Through the Homeless Veterans Reintegration Program (HVRP), VETS delivers targeted employment services to homeless veterans by making competitive grant awards, predominantly to community and faith-based organizations.
HVRP grantees provide services such as career counseling and job search assistance, and establish collaborative linkages with local rehabilitation agencies for substance abuse treatment.
These services often are provided in concert with local service providers funded by the Departments of Housing and Urban Development, Health and Human Services, and Veterans Affairs.
As a component of One-Stop employment and workforce information services, the DVOP/LVER program enables SWAs to deploy veterans’ program specialists where the needs for intensive services to veterans and transitioning service members are greatest.
A “two-tiered” approach to service delivery allows job-ready veterans to be served by other SWA staff, while veterans with employability barriers are served by DVOP/LVER staff.
This strategy leverages resources so that a maximum number of veterans are served even as resources are concentrated on those veterans with the greatest needs.
VETS regards entry to employment and retention in employment as the key outcomes of its programs and is implementing Federal job training program common measures.
Since these measures substantially revise the definitions for employment and retention, VETS will establish new baseline values for these measures during PY 2005.
Monitoring these outcomes will enhance the measurement of the program's impact and allow for comparisons across similar programs.
The most recent special survey of the employment situation of veterans by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (July 2004) shows that veterans in general fare well compared to their non-veteran counterparts, with an average unemployment rate of 4.5 percent compared to 5.9 percent.
However, major segments of the veteran labor force have decidedly higher unemployment rates than non-veterans, particularly young, recently separated veterans, older veterans (45 to 54), and disabled veterans.
This goal was achieved.
Targets for Entered Employment Rate and Employment Retention were reached, as 60 percent of veteran job seekers were employed in the first or second quarter following registration and 81 percent of veteran job seekers continue to be employed after initial entry into employment with a new employer (retained in employment).
For disabled veterans the corresponding achievements were 56 percent Entered Employment Rate and 79 percent being retained in employment.
Homeless veterans achieved a 65 percent Entered Employment Rate.
Broad national economic indicators for unemployment, interest rates and productivity were positive over the past twelve months and provided a boost to the performance outcomes for the veterans program.
Positive results are also attributed in part to continued efforts by VETS to facilitate communication between VETS State offices and State Workforce Agencies on strategies to maximize services to veterans.
3) VETS guidance and technical assistance to SWAs on skill quality, credentials, job development, employer relations and intensive services as a means of ensuring retention and progress for veterans placed in jobs.
For HVRP, sharing of best practices among grantees has paid dividends.
While performance targets have been reached, other trends cause concern and require close monitoring by VETS and SWAs.
Registrations of veterans seeking services have declined in the past year.
The percentage of veterans receiving staff assisted services (an indicator of veterans with employment barriers) has also showed a recent trend downward.
VETS will collaborate with its SWA partners in the analysis of this information in order to come to a clearer understanding of the factors responsible for these shifts in order to determine if new strategies need to be developed.
Based on data for the first two quarters of the performance period, the retention rate for HVRP participants is 57 percent.
These results reflect the outcomes experienced by about 62 percent of those enrolled during the four quarters of the performance period.
This preliminary retention rate indicates that members of the homeless veteran target group continue to struggle somewhat in their efforts to maintain stable attachment to the workforce following receipt of HVRP services.
VETS, with its grantee network, is actively examining approaches for improving grantee tracking procedures, grantee follow-up services, and homeless veteran retention rates.
In spite of a promising start, Michael’s life changed drastically a few years after completing his Air Force service.
With increasing family challenges, Michael began to drink heavily and use drugs.
He gave up his hobbies and sold his belongings to support an ill relative.
He changed jobs frequently, his marriage failed, and he lost his truck and apartment.
He had nowhere to live and didn’t care about anyone or anything.
Through a program at the West Haven VA Hospital, he completed detox and was recommended for transitional living at Homes for the Brave, a residential program for homeless veterans.
The Vocational Specialists on staff helped him conduct a job search.
Through programs at CTWorks, he learned basic computer skills and applied for WIA funding to help him get back into driving rigs.
He was offered a better paying truck-driver position, and was able to save money and eventually moved on.
During FY 2005, SRA International assisted VETS and the Employment and Training Administration with research on developing baseline data for efficiency and earnings change measures for veteran jobseekers.
These veteran job seekers receive One-Stop employment and workforce information services.
The project, Developing Efficiency and Earnings Gain Measures (Study 11 in Appendix 2) found that there were many factors that influenced a State’s costs of service delivery, such as its unemployment rate, cost of labor and facilities, population density, relative number of veterans, and unexpected major corporate layoffs.
Analysis also indicated slight earnings gain by participants in three States; this result contrasted with the findings from a prior study, which reflected a decline in earnings.
VETS is considering additional efficiency measures such as cost per veterans who receive staff-assisted services that reflect the diversity of local conditions.
The information helps to refine how earnings data are best applied and serves to reinforce VETS’ caution in establishing earnings targets.
The Government Accountability Office (GAO) report Preliminary Observations on Changes to Veterans’ Employment Programs, issued in May 2005, found that more work needs to be done to implement a minimum standard for veterans entering employment that all States will be expected to meet (see Study 8 in Appendix 2).
VETS will conduct a nationwide study of its DVOP/LVER programs to develop initiatives for better integration into one-stop career centers.
GAO also issued Job Retention Goal Under Development for DOL’s Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program in May 2005 (see Study 9 in Appendix 2).
The report recommended that DOL develop a realistic performance goal for employment retention of homeless veterans in order to better assess the success of HVRP.
DOL is currently collecting retention data and will establish a baseline for setting and measuring performance targets.
A third May 2005 GAO report, Enhanced Services Could Improve Transition Assistance for Reserves and National Guard, recommended that DOL and the Departments of Defense (DOD)and Veterans Affairs determine what demobilizing Reserve and National Guard members need to make a smooth transition and explore options on ways to enhance their participation (see Study 10 in Appendix 2).
DOL is actively participating in a DOD led effort to determine needs, and the best ways to provide them.
Feasibility Assessment of a Web-Based Career Guidance Tool for Transitioning Military Service Members, completed in June 2005, determined that no existing web-based tool meets the needs of transitioning service members and veterans (see Study 7 in Appendix 2).
Contingent upon the availability of funding, DOL plans to develop with the DOD a customized tool that will include career tips, a search function and details on civilian occupations.
Strengthen the registered apprenticeship system to meet the training needs of business and workers in the 21st Century.
The National Apprenticeship Act of 1937 established the foundation for developing and expanding the nation’s skilled workforce through apprenticeship programs and establishing standards for safeguarding the welfare of apprentices.
The National Registered Apprenticeship System is responsible for the accreditation, registration, certification, and is the nationally recognized credentialing system for skilled, craft, and technical trade training programs throughout the U.S. Voluntary cooperation with State agencies, businesses, program sponsors, industry leaders, employers, employer associations and educational institutions support the Apprenticeship System.
The top priority is to provide opportunities for jobseekers to find jobs with career paths, earn competitive wages, and offer the opportunity to obtain nationally-recognized industry credentials.
As the Department continues to support the President’s High Growth Job Training Initiative (HGJTI), the Apprenticeship System strives to expand its system by targeting the identified high-growth industries: health care, information technology, biotechnology, geospatial technology, automotive, retail, advanced manufacturing (including aerospace), transportation, hospitality, financial services, and energy.
The Apprenticeship System plays a vital role in the HGJTI by providing apprentices with industry-recognized credentials that are sanctioned by DOL, thereby helping to supply U.S. employers with the skilled workers they need to stay competitive and keep the economy growing.
During FY 2005, there were 541 programs and 8130 apprentices registered with more than 6100 active programs and more than 24,300 active apprentices in high-growth industries.
Fiscal Year 2005 was a transitional year for evaluating performance in the Apprenticeship program.
To tell a broader story of employment outcomes for registered apprentices, the Apprenticeship program moved toward common performance measures, by collecting baseline information on employment retention rate, earnings gain and efficiency measures.
These common measures reflect individual apprentice outcomes and allow comparison with other ETA programs.
The established baseline results of the common measures show that during the first quarter of FY 2005, 78 percent of over 18,000 newly registered apprentices were still employed nine months after the month of registration, and their average hourly wage gain was $1.26 (from $11.92 to $13.18).
An important strategy of the apprenticeship program is targeting high-growth industry demand-driven career training.
Apprentices are compensated for improved skills through wage increases that also lead to a higher employment retention rate.
During FY 2005, the average cost per registered apprentice was $109, efficient for Federal employment programs.
By leveraging large investment from the private sector, Apprenticeship demonstrates a low cost, market driven approach to training America’s workers.
The apprenticeship model functions as a self-sustaining system, with employers covering most training expenses such as wages, classroom training, supervision, and mentoring for the duration of the program, which can be several years.
The apprenticeship system graduated 119,363 apprentices in the last four years, all of whom were employed, earned credentials verifying technical competencies, and increased their earnings in the process.
The Women in the Trades Construction Apprenticeship Preparation Program was developed and piloted in Fairbanks, Alaska, in 2004.
The four-week curriculum includes physical conditioning, health and safety training, construction math, job readiness skills, guest speakers, and skills training at seven different apprenticeship schools.
Participants received hands-on experience in the sheet metal, electrical, plumbing and pipefitting, ironworker, carpenter, and pile driver trades.
This preparation program is designed to expose the women to different trades, to understand the commitments and requirements of the construction industry, and to prepare them for successful entrance into various apprenticeship programs.
Gwendolyn, a program participant, said, “To have a marketable skill is an incredible privilege. We have chosen to devote ourselves to perfecting our trade.”
Efforts are underway to tdetermine whether and how Unemployment Insurance wage records may be used to capture information consisten twith the common measures.
Access to and disclosure of State unemployment insurance wage records is being sough in consultation with the National Association of State Workforce Agencies and efforts are continuing to allow DOL to pilot the common measures using State UI wage records.
It allows program sponsors to registerA apprentices electronically, provides the source data for documenting pay rates, general employer workforce and demographics information, and completion credentials.
Moreover, RAIS has reduced the application processing time, made the system more cost-effective, and improved the program’s ability to track data.
August 2005, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) issued a report, Registered Apprenticeship Programs:In Labor Can Better Use Data to Target Oversight, that identified several areas for improvement (Study 5 in Appendix 2).
DOL will follow up on GAO’s recommendations by better utilizing information in the existing data sources and data mining tool; encouraging State Apprenticeship Agency (SAA) States to participate in RAIS; and providing technical assistance on issues identified in final reports of the 14 SAA reviews conducted in FY 2005.
Provide national leadership to increase access and employment opportunities for youth and adults with disabilities receiving employment, training, and employment support services by developing, testing, and disseminating effective practices.
The Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP) provides national leadership on disability employment policy to the Department of Labor and other Federal agencies.
ODEP develops and influences the implementation of evidence-based disability employment policies and practices throughout the workforce development system, including employers.
The implementation of these effective policies and practices will result in an increase in employment opportunities, and the recruitment, retention and promotion of people with disabilities.
ODEP also supports the implementation of the employment-related goals of President Bush's New Freedom Initiative.
ODEP’s response to low employment rates among people with disabilities is comprehensive and aggressive, and includes securing the active involvement and cooperation among a number of Federal, State, and local agencies as well as private sector organizations.
ODEP strategically invests in policy development and research activities that identify policy options and validate evidence-based practices.
The results of these activities are reflected in the indicators and targets used to measure ODEP’s performance.
Major external factors that influence performance outcomes include several workforce trends.
These trends include projected workforce shortages, turn-over and retirement, and the trend of working beyond the traditional retirement age.
Many of these workers may experience disabling conditions, increasing pressure on the employer to keep workers on the job and to have employees who are temporarily disabled return to work quickly.
Finally, small businesses will continue to be the backbone of the U.S. economy.
They employ half of all private sector employees and have generated 60 to 80 percent of new jobs annually over the last decade.
Small employers face unique challenges in hiring and retaining disabled workers.
ODEP develops policies and practices that empower employers to rethink their strategies for employee recruitment, development and transition with the goal of retaining long-term, high-quality, high-contributing employees.
Additionally, ODEP develops policies and practices that enhance coordination of the support needed to keep workers on the job and return employees to work quickly following an injury or illness.
This support includes access to healthcare, housing, and reliable transportation.
ODEP achieved its goal.
In FY 2005, ODEP continued collecting data from pilot projects and research activities: the number served; entered employment rate; retention rates (at three and six months); and the number of effective practices identified.
Based on available data through the end of the third quarter of FY 2005, 9768 people with disabilities received employment related services, exceeding the target of 6718.
The entered employment rate is 24.1 percent, 0.1 percent above the target of 24 percent.
The three-month and six-month retention rates are 46.7 percent and 39.0 percent, exceeding the targets of 22 percent and 17 percent, respectively.
Nineteen effective practices were identified through pilot projects and research initiatives, again exceeding the set target of eleven by eight.
In FY 2006, ODEP will continue its performance improvement efforts by aligning its strategies and activities to reflect a stronger reliance on its own internal staff to concentrate on policy development, analysis and applied research initiatives as opposed to using externally-funded public and private organizations.
Activities will focus on ODEP's core mission to develop and influence the implementation of policies and practices that will increase employment opportunities, recruitment, retention, and promotion of adults and youth with disabilities.
Accordingly, in FY 2006, ODEP’s Performance Goal will be modified to ensure its activities are measured in terms of their impact on the workforce development system and its partners.
Joey is a 21 year old student with a disability who recently left the Montgomery County, Maryland Public School system without any job prospects.
Under an Office of Disability Employment Policy grant, the Montgomery Local Workforce Investment Board was able to get Joey the customized employment services he needed to become successfully employed.
The local grant staff worked with Joey, his family, the school, and related community employment service providers to coordinate Joey's customized employment plan.
The grant staff met with a variety of businesses near Joey's home.
After meeting with a local retail clothing store, the grant staff discussed Joey's skills and interests while explaining the concept of customized employment.
The store’s manager loved the idea and said that she needed to create a new position as a “markdown attendant”; which exactly matched Joey’s interests and skills.
Joey got the job.
This new job creation allows other staff to focus on customer-service, while Joey fulfills another essential business need.
Joey works 25 hours per week, and earns $7.00 per hour.
He takes public transportation to and from work.
ODEP conducts pilot projects to determine the effectiveness of disability employment strategies for dissemination throughout the workforce development system and partners.
Pilot project data is collected and assessed internally and externally.
Oversight includes quarterly project reports, staff visits to project sites and regular conference calls with project staff.
ODEP also contracts with an external evaluator to independently verify data collected in pilot project reports, review project documents and activities, and visit project sites.
ODEP’s multi-year external evaluation of pilot projects assesses the nature and extent of systems change to determine the effectiveness of strategies employed for increasing the capacity of the workforce development system to respond to the needs of people with disabilities.
4) governmental agencies are now working together to share information and leverage resources to better serve people with disabilities.
DOL is conducting a follow-up case study of 12 Workforce Investment Act (WIA)-assisted sites to provide information that will enable practice to inform policy and improve performance results of WIA-assisted programs that serve people with disabilities (see Case Study Research: How People with Disabilities are Served through the Workforce Development System – Study 6 in Appendix 2).
Since States' initial implementation of WIA, One-Stop Career Centers and youth services have been addressing the challenges of serving all customers, including those with disabilities.
The case study focuses on assessing impact and customer satisfaction.
Even though the median age of the workforce is rising, the percentage of workers between the ages of 16 and 24 is expected to grow more rapidly than the overall labor force for the first time in 25 years.
The majority of jobs will continue to require workers who have acquired knowledge and skills via two-year colleges, vocational training, moderate to long-term on-the-job training and real work experience.
High school drop-outs are three to four times more likely to be unemployed than college graduates.
These statistics help to explain why an important part of DOL’s mission is to help disadvantaged youth prepare for competition in a 21 century work environment.
DOL administers two programs designed specifically to serve youth: the WIA Youth formula grant program, which provides comprehensive services through local workforce investment areas, and Job Corps, an intensive, largely residential academic and employment training program.
Services to in-school youth help them remain in and complete secondary school, move into post-secondary education or advanced training, and ultimately transition into successful careers.
Out-of-school youth receive services that provide them with the necessary skills to attain educational credentials (i.e., high school diploma or general equivalency diploma), participate in vocational and postsecondary training opportunities, and transition into gainful employment or a career.
Through these programs, our Nation makes the type of meaningful investment in at-risk teenagers and young adults that is necessary to help them become productive and self-sufficient members of the nation’s workforce.
Neither of the goals was achieved because – as with several adult employment and training programs in Outcome Goal 1.1 – efficiency measure (cost per participant) targets were overly ambitious in this (baseline) year.
Outcomes, however, were positive.
Educational attainment reached or exceeded targets for both programs.
Job Corps participants’ literacy and numeracy gains exceeded targets.
The WIA Youth program exceeded its placement target, but Job Corps fell just short of its graduates’ placement target.
WIA Youth also reached its retention target.
For the WIA Youth program, this year’s performance continues an upward trend in all three outcome indicators stretching back several years.
For Job Corps, this year was the first for which new Federal youth job training program common measures data were collected, so comparison to prior years is not possible.
Although national economic conditions improved in this reporting period versus preceding “recovery” years, the boost this provided to performance was offset by increasing the WIA Youth program’s focus on out-of-school youth.
Out-of-school youth are traditionally harder to serve.
Continued improvement in overall performance was achieved by providing State Workforce Agencies with technical assistance, especially on collaboration with other social service organizations, and by strategic use of incentives for targeting at-risk youth and promising occupations.
Job Corps’ education efforts (diploma and literacy/numeracy) appear to be paying off.
This is encouraging because academic and career success are highly correlated and expected to become even more so as the knowledge economy further evolves.
Students with the Chinese American Service League, a comprehensive social service agency dedicated to serving the needs of the Chinese community in Chicago, participated in Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) training as part of the Women’s Bureau Group E-Mentoring in Nursing (GEM-Nursing) project.
The two CPR training sessions included hands-on skills training to teach students how to respond to breathing and cardiac emergencies.
The GEM-Nursing project is an innovative on-line program designed to encourage young people to explore career opportunities in nursing.
Students communicate on-line with nurses around the country who represent a wide range of nursing careers.
Participants also attend events and training to broaden their exposure to nursing and healthcare-related careers.
FY 2005 program costs of $2.455 billion supported ETA programs providing employment and training assistance to youth through formula grants to States, and Job Corps.
Decreased costs resulted from reductions in the WIA Youth program and from the phase-out of Youth Opportunity Grants and the School-to-Work initiative.
For the WIA Youth program, continued emphasis on serving youth who have left school will make it difficult to improve measured overall education and employment performance.
So far, existing strategies appear to be working well.
In addition, implementation of a new data reporting system has been difficult and may require a new approach.
Job Corps’ large operation, though fundamentally sound, poses many management challenges.
In fact, Job Corps controls roughly 95 percent of the DOL real property portfolio that is not leased through GSA.
To that end, in keeping with the principles of Executive Order 13327, Federal Real Property Asset Management, which President Bush issued in February 2004 “to promote the efficient and economical use of America's real property assets … " Deputy Secretary Steven J. Law established a Departmental workgroup designed to address the management challenges related to real property – while working to more fully implement this key President’s Management Agenda initiative.
In addition, the Inspector General’s Top Management Challenges addressed in this report also highlights the need to improve management of real property assets.
In the near future, the Job Corps program is implementing new data validation procedures and is continuing to look closely at whether its physical assets (the residential training centers) are being utilized as efficiently as possible.
Increase placements and educational attainments of youth.
The WIA youth program is an important component of an integrated workforce system.
WIA authorizes services to low-income youth (ages 14-21) with barriers to employment.
Eligible youth are deficient in basic skills or are homeless, are a runaway, are pregnant or parenting, are offenders, school dropouts, or foster children.
The program serves both in- and out-of-school youth, including youth with disabilities and other youth who may require specialized assistance to complete an educational program or to secure and hold employment.
Service providers prepare youth for employment and post-secondary education by stressing linkages between academic and occupational learning.
They also assist youth by providing tutoring, alternative schools, summer employment, occupational training, work experience, supportive services, leadership development, mentoring, counseling, and follow-up services.
In July of 2004, DOL published guidance outlining its new strategic vision for the delivery of youth services under WIA.
This vision emphasizes that “out-of-school youth and those most at risk of dropping out are an important part of the new workforce ’supply pipeline’ needed by businesses to fill job vacancies in the knowledge economy. WIAfunded youth programs will provide leadership by serving as a catalyst to connect these youth with quality secondary and post-secondary educational opportunities and high-growth and other employment opportunities.”
Efforts are now focused on four major areas: alternative education, demand-driven strategies for providing youth with the skills businesses need, serving the neediest youth, and improving performance.
PY 2004, progress was tracked against four performance indicators.
For the older youth population, entrance into and retention in employment are the most appropriate indicators of success because the program’s services are focused on preparation for and success in the workforce.
For the younger youth population, where services are geared toward academic achievement as a means of career preparation, achievement of a diploma or its equivalent is the most meaningful indicator of future success in the workforce.
The cost per participant measure gauges the efficient use of Federal dollars.
In recent years, the program has made steady progress by all measures (see chart).
Cost for participants, a new indicator as of PY 2004, is expected to increase, at least in the short term, due to targeting a harder to serve out-ofschool youth population as well as general increases observed for the cost of education and training programs nationwide.
Results for PY 2004 continue an upward trend that began with WIA implementation in 1998.
All three outcome indicators increased from PY 2003 and exceeded performance targets.
Most important is the continued increase in high school diploma attainment, given the strong statistical correlation between educational attainment and success in the labor market.
Average cost per participant was slightly higher than expected – $2822 vs. a target of $2663.
However, consistent with ETA’s vision for youth services, the program has served a higher proportion of out-of-school youth.
Out-of-school youth are a more expensive population to serve, with a cost of $3724 per participant, therefore the overall cost per participant increased over prior years.
At the time the cost per participant target was estimated, DOL did not anticipate the full extent of increased expenditures on out-of-school youth.
During PY 2004, DOL held a series of Regional Forums that convened State education agencies along with workforce development, juvenile justice and child welfare agencies from 45 States to identify opportunities for improving programs across agency lines.
DOL has provided States with a Federal/State benchmarking tool to provide States with broad principles to assist them in gauging the effectiveness of their collaborative efforts.
In the fall of 2004, DOL awarded Foster Youth Demonstration grants to five States aimed at assisting foster youth who have or will be transitioning out of foster care to access employment and training opportunities.
In the summer of 2005, DOL awarded 16 demonstration grants to State and local agencies and community-based organizations to help prepare youth offenders to enter high growth and high demand industries.
For PY 2005, targets will increase to 69 percent for the entered employment rate, 80 percent for the employment retention rate and remain at 53 percent for the diploma attainment rate.
The target is not increasing for the diploma attainment rate due to an increased emphasis on services to the neediest youth, especially out-of-school youth, who traditionally have low rates of diploma attainment.
Performance data for the WIA youth program are both complete and reliable.
DOL continues to implement the recommendations made in a February 2004 Government Accountability Office (GAO) report entitled Labor Actions Can Help States Improve Quality of Performance Outcome Data and Delivery of Youth Services that recommended coordination with the U.S. Department of Education to connect school dropouts to local WIA youth programs and to establish standard monitoring procedures.
GAO issued a report in May 2005 entitled Labor Should Consider Alternative Approaches to New Performance and Reporting Requirements (Study 4 in Appendix 2).
The report recommended that DOL consider alternative approaches to implementing its new reporting system, including ongoing consultation with stakeholders, phased implementation, and pilot testing.
DOL will continue to consult with representatives of the State and local workforce system.
The WIA Youth program received a rating of Ineffective in the PART review conducted in FY 2002.
Since that time the program has made significant progress in addressing recommendations to adopt common performance measures for Federal job training programs and conduct an impact evaluation of the WIA Youth program.
States will begin reporting on the new measures in their first quarterly report due in November 2005.
The impact evaluation will be commissioned upon WIA reauthorization, as knowledge of the program’s new direction will be critical to the design of any meaningful study.
Improve educational achievements of Job Corps students and increase participation of Job Corps graduates in employment and education.
Job Corps is an intensive academic and vocational training program (primarily residential) for economically disadvantaged youth ages 16 through 24 who often face multiple barriers to gainful employment.
This program provides occupational skills, academic training, social education, and other support services, such as housing, transportation and family support resources, to more than 60,000 individuals at 122 centers nationwide.
Job Corps centers, ranging in size from 200 to 2,000 students, are located in both urban and rural communities.
Most Job Corps centers are operated by large and small companies under performance-based contracts.
Other Job Corps centers are operated by Federal departments.
Job Corps centers provide services tailored to each student’s needs to help them achieve the skills and credentials required to be successful, productive citizens and to obtain work opportunities that lead to long-term employment.
In PY 2004, DOL began reporting Job Corps performance according to the job training common measures for youth programs: placement in employment or education, attainment of a degree or certificate, literacy and numeracy gains, and average cost per participant.
The first three measures are indicators of student achievement in terms of placement in employment and in enhancing their employability; the efficiency measure assists program management in controlling costs.
As with other employment and training programs, Job Corps’ performance can be impacted by external factors such as local labor market conditions and national economic trends.
In recent years, an increasingly knowledge-based labor market has challenged Job Corps to redirect both academic and technical career training approaches.
In addition, adjustment to federally standardized job training program common measures has provided program management challenges.
During PY 2004, Job Corps continued to improve educational achievements of its students, as indicated by meeting the target of 64 percent of students earning a high school diploma, GED or vocational certificate while enrolled in Job Corps.
In addition, in the first year of measuring literacy and numeracy gains, Job Corps exceeded the target by improving these outcomes for 47 percent of all students who were basic skills deficient at entry.
The entered employment/education measure, which until this year included program graduates only, now includes former enrollees and will ultimately include all students.
While placement of graduates increased from 90 percent to 91 percent, former enrollees’ results had more impact than expected; the overall rate just missed the target of 85 percent.
This does indicate that the target was ambitious, and Job Corps will focus on reaching that placement rate in PY 2005 by encouraging Career Transition Services (CTS) providers to focus their energies and services on recent graduates.
Job Corps utilizes performance-based contracting for center operators and CTS providers; center operators’ and contractors’ revenues are linked to performance on specific measures of student success.
Such provisions, particularly incentive fees for contractors, have led to improved student outcomes.
Regional offices conduct assessments and annual contract reviews of outreach and admissions contractors, center operators and CTS providers that include compliance measures for operations and performance measures related to student outcomes.
In addition to improving student outcomes, Job Corps maintains safe and healthy environments at all Job Corps centers by cooperatively working with other DOL agencies to conduct safety and health inspections annually.
Collbran Job Corps Civilian Conservation Center celebrated their Eagle Corps team’s second place finish in the Colorado regional For Inspiration and Recognition of Science and Technology Robotics competition that is sponsored by NASA.
This year, 38 teams participated and had six weeks to build their robot for the competition.
Volunteer mentors from local engineering firms, as well as a retired mechanical engineer, assisted the 22-member Eagle Corps team in programming, engineering and electronic wiring for its robot’s construction.
While preparing for the competition, the team not only designed and built the robot, but also created a competition Web site (www.eaglecorps.ws), researched the partnering companies, produced a button to trade with other teams, and designed a team jersey.
The drawing of the team’s robot was created by a participant who taught herself the AutoCAD program.
Robotics is a once-ina-lifetime experience,” said Tim, a 17-year-old team member.
Job Corps is committed to maintaining a comprehensive data collection and reporting system that meets the highest integrity expectations, and has established multiple methods to continuously assess the validity of the system.
Given the scope of operations, however, there have been challenges to maintaining uniform quality.
Recently, the Office of Inspector General (OIG) identified several areas of concern related to Job Corps’ data validation procedures in Job Corps Performance Measurement Outcomes Report (Study 13 in Appendix 2) and Performance Audit of Job Corps Center Operating Costs (Study 12 in Appendix 2).
To ensure system-wide data integrity, Job Corps is implementing requirements for regional offices to review individual student data using a stringent targeted sampling methodology, and is taking steps to recover overpayments if irregularities are identified.
Job Corps controls roughly 95 percent of the DOL real property portfolio that is not leased through the General Services Administration.
In keeping with the principles of Executive Order 13327, Federal Real Property Asset Management, which President Bush issued in February 2004 “to promote the efficient and economical use of America's real property assets," Deputy Secretary Law established a Departmental workgroup designed to address the management challenges related to real property – while working to more fully implement this key President’s Management Agenda initiative.
In addition, the Inspector General’s Top Management Challenges addressed in this report also highlights the need to improve management of real property assets.
Job Corps is investigating whether its physical assets (the residential training centers) are being utilized as efficiently as possible.
In 2004, the Job Corps program was assessed through the PART, and was rated as Moderately Effective.
Piloted a project to utilize Unemployment Insurance wage records in an aggregate format in order to proceed with full implementation of common measures by PY 2006.
Maintaining competitiveness in the 21st Century requires Americans to be knowledgeable about trends in the global, national, and local economies.
Private citizens, business owners, and public officials need to have access to up-todate, high-quality information and statistics to assist them in making better informed decisions.
The Department’s Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), which produces some of the Nation’s most sensitive and important economic indicators, looks for opportunities for innovation to improve the usefulness of its products and services to our customers.
For example, in FY 2005, the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) program released a new on-line tool for labor market analysis.
The Location Quotient Calculator is designed to aid economic development professionals in accurately identifying industries that attract jobs and income, and sell goods and services outside their community.
This innovative use of the QCEW data allows the customer to conduct a focused, detailed industry study at the desired geographic level.
DOL reports performance for this goal using such indicators as timeliness, accuracy, relevancy, efficiency, and customer satisfaction with statistical products and services because these represent critical aspects of a statistical program's performance.
The results presented here reflect continuous efforts to improve statistical products and services available to decision makers.
BLS improved the Diary – a collection instrument used to obtain information for the Consumer Expenditure Survey – to make it more user-friendly.
For example, the respondent now uses check boxes instead of writing out responses when providing information on meals away from home.
BLS improved the timeliness of the Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries (CFOI) annual data release.
Data were made available in August – one month earlier than in recent years.
The Current Employment Statistics (CES) program began in March publishing Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) using the new OMB definitions.
Concurrent with this release, CES also expanded its coverage to include all MSAs for the first time ever; previously, about three-quarters of the MSAs had been published.
Following several decades of population decline and job losses, Philadelphia has worked relentlessly to bolster economic growth and improve its competitiveness nationally, with notable success in recent years.
Mr. Stephen Camp-Landis, City of Philadelphia Budget Office analyst, cites BLS employment and wage data as useful to formulating public policy decisions and addressing citizen needs.
According to Mr. Camp-Landis, the City uses CES and QCEW data to help project tax revenues.
The resulting improvements in the quality of those projections have allowed Philadelphia to effectively manage an annual wage and business tax reduction program for eleven years.
FY 2005 program costs of $536 million support BLS programs to produce and disseminate timely, accurate, and relevant information on the economy.
The Bureau's budget and costs trended upward from 1999 to 2005.
This trend is attributed primarily to mandatory cost increases; the creation of new programs, such as the American Time Use Survey; and important improvements to survey programs, such as the Consumer Price Index, Producer Price Index, and Employment Cost Index.
In FY 2006, BLS will begin publishing a new data series that will allow workers and employers to compare wages and salaries among metropolitan areas.
In an increasingly mobile society, workers need data to help them evaluate job offers from firms located in a variety of locations, and employers need data to compare labor costs when deciding where to establish or expand operations.
Produced by the National Compensation Survey, the inter-area pay relatives will present this information in an easy-to-use format free from the effect of differences in survey timing, occupational staffing patterns, and industry mix.
In FY 2005, BLS started a multi-year effort to improve informational materials included in data collection efforts.
BLS systematically collected information on how respondents view BLS and its programs from interviewers who regularly interact with respondents.
Based on the information learned, in FY 2006, BLS plans to conduct a test of the impact of including an informational brochure in the survey packages of the Occupational Employment Statistics program.
In FY 2006, BLS will improve users’ ability to find information through the release of a new search engine for the Web site.
This technology will improve the search engine results to coincide with user expectations, identify common misspellings and provide alternative choices, and display links to related materials.
Improve information available to decision-makers on labor market conditions, and price and productivity changes.
BLS reports performance for this goal by producing timely and accurate data that meet customer needs.
Improvements to the data are measured through increases in the relevancy, coverage, and response rates.
The indicators presented here represent the various dimensions of BLS products and services that are important to our customers.
The targets chosen balance respondent burden and data user needs, while supporting continuous improvement of our programs and products.
To continue improving its products and services, BLS analyzes and evaluates new economic and statistical methodologies, new technologies, and new survey design, collection, and dissemination approaches.
Keeping abreast of improvements and using these improvements to deliver data in a more timely and useful manner, while still maintaining cost effectiveness, are essential ingredients to meeting our goals and providing the quality of service our customers expect.
For example, after a multi-year improvement project, the Local Area Unemployment Statistics program began using in FY 2005 redesigned estimating models for States.
Focusing resources on improving these estimates, which are a key component of labor market analysis, will lead to an improvement in local area information available to decision-makers, a reduction in the annual revision in monthly State estimates by approximately 20 percent, and the achievement of the BLS data accuracy target.
The goal was substantially achieved.
Targets were exceeded, reached, or substantially reached for seven of the eight performance indicators.
BLS reached its target for converting one data series from the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) system to the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) in FY 2005.
The Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses data were converted to NAICS in December 2004 as planned.
Targets were exceeded for improving data coverage in the PPI and in labor productivity measures as BLS continued to improve the accuracy of its data.
While the PPI measures average changes in selling prices received by domestic producers for their output, labor productivity is the ratio of the output of goods and services to the labor hours devoted to the production of that output.
BLS improved data coverage for calculating the PPI by increasing the percent of service industries from 38.8 percent (1997 baseline) to 76.3 percent in FY 2005.
BLS increased data coverage in labor productivity measures to 59.2 percent, up from 58 percent in FY 2004 (baseline).
BLS did not reach its target, 40 percent, for completing components of the new PPI repricing system as only 37 percent of the components were completed.
As part of the continuing effort to modernize the computing system for monthly processing of the PPI, this new system will be based on a more secure, stable, and expandable computing platform.
The BLS Occupational Outlook Handbook (OOH) Web site is the Bureau’s nationally recognized source of career information.
Using the American Customer Satisfaction Index survey, the OOH Web site substantially reached its target, a score of 75, in the third quarter of 2005.
The BLS score was 74; the aggregated Federal government score for this time period was 73.5.
BLS exceeded its target for decreasing the cost per transaction of its Internet Data Collection Facility, which is used by survey respondents to report data.
Providing a single, manageable, and secure architecture for Bureau surveys to use in collecting information over the Internet, the cost per transaction in FY 2005 was $2.44.
The cost per transaction decreased significantly from $6.13 in FY 2004, and surpassed the stretch target of $3.32.
The 2005 result will be lower than outyear targets because, due to periodic replacement cycles, fewer costs were incurred.
BLS met the timeliness indicator for all of its 108 scheduled releases.
Additionally, BLS met the established accuracy target for all 17 of its statistical program measures.
To further integrate budget and performance, one of the President Management Agenda priorities, BLS will revise its FY 2006 performance goal framework to more closely link costs and results at the performance indicator level.
Teuila, a high school senior, has always liked animals and thought about becoming a veterinarian.
Her guidance counselor at Kahuku High and Intermediate School, Mr. Matthew Mumma, suggested that she look up veterinarian in the Occupational Outlook Handbook (OOH) on the BLS Web site.
The OOH describes the nature of the work, working conditions, training and education needed, earnings, and expected job prospects for seven out of every eight jobs found in the U.S. Upon learning about the number of advanced science courses involved, Teuila realized that her academic strengths laid elsewhere.
She reviewed the requirements for a veterinary technician, but found that occupation may not provide the salary she desired.
After further research, Teuila has decided to pursue a career in elementary education.
Teuila cites the information found on the OOH Web site as being instrumental in helping her to make a good career choice.
The OOH can be found on the BLS Web site at http://www.bls.gov/oco/home.htm.
BLS is confident that the performance data collected and reported are complete, accurate, and reliable.
BLS programs are evaluated both internally and externally to ensure that they provide taxpayer value.
During FY 2005, BLS responded to the Office of Inspector General (OIG) Federal Information Security Management Act Audit of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) System.
Of the 18 security control areas evaluated, 17 areas were adequately established, implemented, and operating effectively in compliance with FISMA.
The one area needing improvement was related to the CPI contingency planning control area, where BLS has since made progress by purchasing and placing the necessary equipment to support the plan in the recovery facility.
Also, the CPI Continuity of Operation Plan testing under their current technical testing plan has been completed.
The review is described in an OIG’s report, Federal Information Security Management Act Audit of the Consumer Price Index System (Study 14 in Appendix 2).
Additionally, the OIG is conducting a review of the Employment Cost Index, which will be completed in FY 2006.
The OIG also plans to start a review of the Producer Price Indexes in FY 2006.
Using the Program Assessment Rating Tool in FY 2005, OMB rated BLS as Effective, the highest rating category.
In its findings, OMB recommended that BLS maintain program-monitoring and operational successes; complete efforts to show aspects of program performance more clearly to the general user; and complete efficiency measures to cover more of the Bureau’s programs.
In response, BLS has improved the precision of some of our performance targets and revised measures to focus more on outcome.
In FY 2006, BLS will continue to work collaboratively with the Department to explore ways to increase transparency of its performance goals and indicators.
Enforcing legal standards for workers’ wages and working conditions, providing unemployment compensation and other benefits when workers are unable to work, and protecting retirement and health benefit security are central to the DOL mission.
Agencies supporting this strategic goal are the Employment and Training Administration (ETA), the Employment Standards Administration (ESA), the Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA), and the Pension Benefits Guaranty Corporation (PBGC).
Outcome goals 2.1 and 2.2 contain six performance goals, of which two were achieved, three were substantially achieved and one not achieved in FY 2005.
The Department continued to improve worker protection and security, as measured by union compliance, employee benefit plan enforcement and administration of unemployment benefit and workers’ compensation programs.
The following charts illustrate DOL’s strategic goal net costs in FY 2005, with A Secure Workforce shares set apart.
Net costs of this goal in FY 2004 (less Income Maintenance) were $1.383 billion.
The outcome goals and programs listed above, along with their results, costs, and future challenges are discussed in more detail on the following pages.
The Employment Standard Administration’s (ESA) primary challenge is to ensure that protections for workers keep pace with the changes occurring in the American workforce, such as virtual workplaces, demographic shifts, immigration, organized labor, the growth of small businesses, and the shift from manufacturing to services.
Under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act, the Family and Medical Leave Act, the Davis-Bacon Act (DBA) and the Service Contract Act, ESA’s Wage and Hour Division (WHD) administers standards for wages and working conditions such as the minimum wage and overtime; child labor protections; field sanitation standards in the agriculture industry; and prevailing wage requirements on government contracts.
The key to ensuring worker protections is to focus on industries and employers with the most persistent and serious violations; to quickly resolve employee complaints; and to ensure accuracy in established wage rates.
ESA's Office of Labor-Management Standards (OLMS) ensures union transparency, financial integrity, and democracy by administering and enforcing the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA).
OLMS responsibilities under the Act include compliance assistance; civil and criminal investigations and enforcement; union compliance audits; and reports/public disclosure administration.
WHD decreased the average number of days to conclude a violation complaint and increased compliance of FLSA prior violators.
The DBA wage determination program improved wage determination processing efficiency but experienced a slip from the FY 2004 level of performance with respect to survey-based determinations.
DOL did, however, reach its target of issuing 81 percent of survey-based determinations within 60 days.
OLMS established a baseline efficiency of union dollars protected per staff day and the percentage of union reports meeting standards of acceptability increased to 94 percent.
Better union public disclosure reports resulted from agency compliance assistance efforts and increasing use of electronic reporting formats.
The Wage and Hour Division’s PIECE Plan initiative in Kansas City (Protecting Immigrant Employees with Compliance and Education) provides immigrant workers who work as day laborers with information about their rights under Federal labor standards laws.
A key component of this low-wage initiative is active community participation.
One such organization is the Westside Community Action Network (CAN), a community policing and neighborhood organization that provides a drop-in center for day laborers.
Each month, an investigator from the Wage and Hour Kansas City district office visits the Westside CAN to provide day laborers with basic information on wage and hour protections.
Between 20 to 40 day laborers at each visit learn how to maintain records of the hours they work and how much they were paid.
The workers also learn how to identify their employer so that appropriate remedies can be pursued when employers fail to pay.
FY 2005 program costs of $277 million supported ESA's WHD and OLMS programs.
As indicated by the chart, net costs for these programs have been stable for the last few years.
The drop from FY 2002 to FY 2003 occurred because the Employee Benefits Security Administration’s performance goal was moved to Outcome Goal 2.2.
For Wage and Hour programs, the global economy ensures rapid change in ways that make enforcement more difficult.
Effective targeting of investigative resources requires close monitoring of growth patterns.
Increased immigration means greater potential for violations because that population is most vulnerable.
Finally, competitive pressures limit employers’ ability to cover the costs of compliance because they have little influence on market prices.
OLMS’ continuing concern is securing timely filed reports for unions’ public disclosure.
To address this challenge, DOL supports amendment to the LMRDA to authorize civil monetary penalties for late filing.
American workplaces legally employ and compensate workers.
ESA’s Wage and Hour Division (WHD) enforces laws establishing minimum standards for wages and working conditions.
These include the minimum wage, overtime, youth employment provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act; the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act; and the Family and Medical Leave Act.
WHD is also responsible for enforcing field sanitation standards in agriculture and the government contracts prevailing wage statutes, and administering the wage determination provisions of the Davis-Bacon Act and the McNamara-O’Hara Service Contract Act.
WHD’s allocation of resources and performance indicators reflect the keys to ensuring worker protections – focusing on industries and employers with the most persistent and serious violations; resolving employee complaints expeditiously and effectively; and ensuring that established wage rates are accurate.
By directing resources to compliance efforts in low-wage industries, such as agriculture, construction and garment manufacturing, WHD seeks to protect those low-wage workers most likely to be paid less than legally required or to be employed in unsafe, illegal situations.
WHD’s efforts in this regard have led to demonstrated successes over the years with increasing compliance rates in industries like health care, garment manufacturing and quick service restaurants.
By reducing repeat violations, WHD can achieve lasting compliance on behalf of many employees.
WHD ensures responsiveness by reducing the time it takes to resolve employee complaints and ensuring that the resolution of violations promotes future compliance.
Timely and accurate prevailing wage determinations encourage efficiency and help ensure government contract workers receive the wages to which they are entitled.
A number of external factors influence WHD’s program outcomes.
As the supply of and demand for vulnerable immigrant workers increases, the potential for violations increases.
Compliance levels in many low-wage industries are also heavily influenced by competitive pressures and by subcontracting arrangements in which smaller companies have little opportunity to influence market prices.
WHD established a FY 2005 target to reduce the number of days to resolve a violation complaint and was successful in meeting that target.
WHD will continue to follow streamlined procedures to ensure early contact with complainants and development of case facts to promote timely resolution of investigations.
In FY 2005, WHD completed its third statistically valid investigation-based compliance survey of prior FLSA violators finding 72 percent of prior violators in compliance.
The results improve on the FY 2004 measure of 71 percent.
WHD is seeing the impact of recently employed strategies such as investigation accountability standards, strategic use of penalties, and effective publicity.
WHD’s traditional measurements of compliance in low-wage industries have been in garment manufacturing, health care and agriculture.
In FY 2005, WHD saw the percent of New York City garment workers employed in compliance increase from 62 to 76 percent.
In Southern California, the percent of garment workers employed in compliance fell from 63 to 54 percent.
The balance of three strategies – compliance assistance; partnerships and collaborative efforts; and enforcement promote long-term compliance in these low-wage industries.
In FY 2006, WHD will undertake its first investigation-based compliance survey in a broad cross section of lowwage industries.
The survey will provide WHD with a baseline measure of the percent of low-wage workers employed in compliance with the FLSA.
Future performance targets and measures of improvements in the percent of low-wage employees employed in compliance will be determined from the survey results.
The results will lead to strategies for addressing “off-the-clock” violations and will enhance WHD’s Overtime Security Enforcement Task Force efforts.
WHD continues to work on upgrades in information technology to see performance success in the wage determination program.
Data used to report performance against goals are derived largely from the WHD Investigative Support and Reporting Database (WHISARD).
A FY2004 independent analysis by the University of Tennessee found 90 percent or greater consistency between WHISARD data and case file information on 25 of 33 data elements used for performance reporting.
Another source of performance data is Wage Hour’s statistically valid and independently reviewed investigation-based compliance surveys.
Wage determination measures are derived from Automated Survey Data and Wage Determination Generation Systems, manually and through the www.dol.gov Web site.
WHD is monitoring legislative proposals that would expand the use of compensatory time to the private sector and create a new temporary worker program.
If successful, both will impact WHD’s employee complaint and low-wage compliance goals.
WHD completed three program evaluations in FY 2005 focusing on the agency’s budget and performance integration and its compliance assistance efforts.
The first, Findings from Employers Pocket Guide on Youth Employment: YouthRules!
Telephone Survey, conducted by the private research firm Westat (Study 15 in Appendix 2), found that while the publication was deemed useful by readers, it was not relevant to many of the employers in the census, as they do not employ young workers.
In response, DOL is encouraging WHD field offices to target employers with young workers.
A second evaluation, The Fair Labor Standards Act: Executive, Administrative, and Professional Exemptions Seminar Evaluation, also conducted by Westat (Study 16 in Appendix 2), found the seminar to be both informative and prompted attendees to perform additional research on overtime security laws.
Budget and Performance Integration Model Evaluation, conducted by the private research firm ICF Consulting (Study 17 in Appendix 2), found that WHD is well on its way to successfully integrating budget and performance.
The evaluation also recommended that the integration will improve upon further use of spreadsheet technology and all currently available data.
WHD continues to evaluate performance measures in low-wage industries, focusing on developing models for common compliance strategies across low-wage industries.
A second evaluation of the agency’s compliance assistance web information is ongoing.
In 2003 a Program Assessment Rating Tool assessment of WHD’s Davis Bacon wage determination program found it did not demonstrate results and recommended that WHD launch an external review; convene a work group to develop indicators and targets; modify the wage survey or outreach strategies; and work with stakeholders to identify appropriate regulatory, administrative, or statutory reforms.
In response, WHD developed goals and specific numeric targets to ensure program performance improvements and contracted with a contractor to evaluate the Davis-Bacon wage determination process.
OLMS ensures union transparency, financial integrity, and democracy by administering and enforcing the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA).
The Act requires public disclosure reporting by unions and others; establishes standards for union officer elections; and imposes criminal sanctions for embezzlement of union funds.
To implement the LMRDA protections, OLMS conducts criminal and civil investigations, audits unions, and administers the Act’s reporting and public disclosure program.
Union transparency underpins the union democracy and financial integrity objectives of the LMRDA and is a critical component of the OLMS program.
Therefore, a primary performance objective is to secure complete and accurate union financial reports for public disclosure.
Approximately 25 percent of OLMS resources support the agency’s Internet public disclosure system and a wide range of compliance assistance, liaison, enforcement, and regulatory activities to increase union transparency and LMRDA reporting compliance.
Enforcement of LMRDA union financial integrity protections is another critical OLMS responsibility.
A primary performance objective is to reduce union fraud.
Union audits and embezzlement investigations are key strategies aligned with that effort.
OLMS dedicates more than 50 percent of appropriated resources annually to support a program of audits and criminal investigations to protect the millions of dollars in dues paid by labor union members.
OLMS seeks efficiency and program impact in using audit resources to protect union financial integrity.
Therefore, the goal to increase union receipts protected relative to staff resources expended on audits supplements the broader union financial integrity goal to reduce union fraud.
OLMS met its target to establish an efficiency measure baseline.
Union audits are an essential tool in discovering criminal, as well as civil, violations of the LMRDA, and OLMS is dedicating resources to support the conduct of an effective audit program.
At the same time, OLMS seeks efficiency in the use of union audit resources.
In FY 2005, OLMS established a baseline measurement of union receipts protected per staff day dedicated to union audits: $136,617.
In the future, OLMS will seek to increase the union receipts protected per staff day to ensure effective use of resources and program impact.
OLMS also seeks to reduce the percentage of unions with indicators of fraud to 7.5 percent in FY 2006.
A visible union audit presence and a strong criminal enforcement program are principal strategies in reducing union fraud.
An audit study to re-measure the union fraud level is planned for FY 2006.
For the study, an audit finding of a criminal LMRDA violation, predominantly union funds embezzlement, will count as an indicator of fraud.
OLMS substantially reached its union transparency target.
Union transparency is critical to promoting union democracy and financial integrity.
Union reports meeting standards of acceptability increased to 94 percent in FY 2005.
Increased use of electronic reporting formats is expected to continue.
OLMS routinely responds to telephone and written inquiries from union officers, employees, and members as well as the general public about the rights of unionized American workers.
But OLMS also makes staff members available for in-person discussions.
On May 17, 2005, the United Food and Commercial Workers Union (UFCW) Local 555 sponsored an informational meeting in Tigard, Oregon about compliance assistance.
The program included presentations and discussions about OLMS and the LMRDA, union officer elections, financial recordkeeping, and locating compliance assistance publications on the OLMS Web site.
Twenty-eight members from 13 local unions attended the sessions.
The session demonstrated ESA’s commitment to a dynamic compliance assistance program.
OLMS will continue its outreach to help ensure basic standards of democracy and fiscal responsibility within American labor organizations.
In this photo, UFCW member Sandy (left) discusses a compliance assistance handout with OLMS representative Daphne.
Performance information for this goal is derived from two agency data systems.
The Case Data System includes comprehensive information about OLMS investigations, audits, findings, and subsequent enforcement actions.
The labor organization report system (e.LORS) includes information about the timeliness and sufficiency of union reports filed under the LMRDA.
To report performance against DOL’s union financial integrity goal, OLMS measures indicators of union fraud.
A baseline study in FY 2004 indicated a 9 percent incidence of fraud in unions.
Although the level of fraud was not remeasured in FY 2005, annual performance targets are in place and measurement is again planned for FY 2006-2009.
Maintaining effective union outreach, a visible audit presence, and a strong criminal enforcement program are essential to increasing union financial integrity.
Timely, accurate union financial reports are also essential.
The completeness and accuracy of union reports are markedly increasing as a result of compliance assistance efforts and the increasing use of electronic report formats.
Additionally, beginning in September 2005 the largest reporting unions will begin to submit the required LMRDA annual financial report on the recently revised LM-2 report form.
The new LM-2 form will significantly increase union transparency and promote union financial integrity and democracy.
In spite of comprehensive program efforts, securing timely filed reports for public disclosure remains a continuing challenge.
To address this challenge, DOL supports amending the LMRDA to authorize civil monetary penalties for late LMRDA filing.
DOL increases the economic security of America's working families by protecting the benefits earned and promised to workers.
Three DOL agencies and one government corporation chaired by the Secretary of Labor – the Employment and Training Administration (ETA), the Employment Standards Administration (ESA), the Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA), and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) – administer payment of temporary benefits for the unemployed; protect Federal workers from the economic effects of workrelated injuries and illness; protect employee benefits plans against fraud and abuse; and insure pension payments.
ETA temporarily replaces the wages of the unemployed through the Unemployment Insurance (UI) program, which provides grants to State-operated programs and manages the Unemployment Trust Fund.
ETA ensures that States’ programs are administered efficiently according to Federal standards and requirements, and manages the trust fund to provide a buffer to volatile cycles in tax revenues and benefit claims.
ESA protects Federal and certain other workers from the economic effects of work-related injuries and illnesses through the Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs’ (OWCP) four disability compensation programs.
OWCP provides wage replacement and cash benefits, medical treatment, vocational rehabilitation, and other benefits to covered workers, their dependents and survivors.
EBSA protects private employee pension plans, health plans and other benefits plans against fraud and abuse by enforcing Title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended (ERISA); through compliance assistance, and through education.
Where there has been malfeasance, EBSA restores benefits and assets by bringing civil and criminal cases.
PBGC protects the pension benefits of participants in defined benefit plans that have been terminated, usually due to the sponsoring employer’s bankruptcy, by serving as both insurer and administrator.
As an insurer, PBGC collects insurance premiums from employers that sponsor insured pension plans.
As an administrator, PBGC pays monthly retirement benefits to the participants in terminated plans.
FY 2005 results were very good; 16 of 18 targets in this outcome goal were reached or substantially reached.
ESA/OWCP’s Energy Program Part B Final Decisions processing timeliness was 96 percent vs. a target of 80 percent.
EBSA’s civil corrected to closed case ratio was 76 percent vs. a 66 percent target.
EBSA received 10,325 applications for its Voluntary Compliance programs against a target of 8340.
PBGC’s customer service score for practitioner callers was 68, compared to a target of 72.
While the PBGC practitioner score is one point lower than in FY 2004 and four points below the target, it is worth oint lower than in FY 2004 and four points below the target, it is worth noting that PBGC scored higher than other Federal agencies that collect payments.
PBGC is considering whether to adjust the target in future years.
FY 2005 program costs of $40.534 billion supported ETA's unemployment insurance programs, ESA programs to reduce the consequences of work-related injuries and EBSA efforts to ensure that individuals receive promised benefits.
PBGC is not included in the Consolidated Statement of Net Costs, hence the cost of its programs is not reflected here.
FY 2005 program costs decreased by approximately $6 billion, or 13 percent, from FY 2004.
Unemployment Insurance program costs, which account for $34.243 billion (84 percent) of FY 2005 costs for this outcome goal, dropped due to a decrease in benefits paid – from $41.424 billion in FY 2004 to an estimated $31.761 billion in FY 2005.
UI Program costs are largely driven by average weekly insured unemployment (AWIU) − the average number of people filing claims for continuing UI benefits each week.
The AWIU figure decreased from 3.167 million in FY 2004 to an estimated 2.722 million in FY 2005.
Workers’ compensation costs, which account for most of the remaining costs of this goal ($6.131 billion, or 15 percent), rose from FY 2004 because DOL assumed Part E of the Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation program from the Department of Energy in FY 2005.
With this responsibility came a one-time increase in actuarial liability of $3.5 billion.
To improve financial integrity of the (very large) UI system, DOL is concentrating resources on reduction of overpayments and reemployment of claimants via additional Reemployment and Eligibility Assessments (REA) grants to assess UI beneficiaries’ need for reemployment services and their continued eligibility for benefits, and to assure that beneficiaries understand that they must stop claiming benefits upon their return to work.
PBGC is concerned about adequate funding of existing pension plans, and DOL included in the President’s FY 2006 Budget to Congress a proposal to strengthen plan funding rules, improve transparency, and reform the premium structure for defined benefit plans.
Make timely and accurate benefit payments to unemployed workers, facilitate the reemployment of Unemployment Insurance (UI) claimants, and set up unemployment tax accounts promptly for new employers.
The Federal-State Unemployment Insurance (UI) system ameliorates personal financial hardship due to unemployment by temporarily replacing part of lost wages.
UI also stabilizes the economy during economic downturns.
For both workers and employers, the program’s success depends upon: timely payment of benefits, prevention or prompt detection of erroneous payments, quickly establishing new employers’ tax accounts to ensure workers’ wages are reported and tax payments to fund benefits are made, and promoting and facilitating benefit recipients’ return to suitable work.
States operate their own programs under State laws which must conform to Federal law.
As the Federal partner, DOL provides program leadership, allocates administrative funds, provides technical assistance, exercises performance oversight, and ensures that States meet requirements of Federal UI laws and regulations.
Measuring efficiency and effectiveness of States’ administrative operations is an important aspect of program management.
Economic conditions and the resulting program workloads affect many aspects of UI performance.
On the other hand, slower creation of new businesses reduces the number of new employer tax accounts, and the timeliness of tax liability determinations generally goes up.
In addition, external factors such as natural disasters could have a negative affect on UI performance.
Performance targets are based on the Administration’s current economic assumptions.
The UI system performed extremely well, aided by improving economic conditions.
Over the year, the number of beneficiaries declined by about 10 percent to 7.9 million.
The effects of the Florida hurricanes in early FY 2004 are estimated to have reduced aggregate first payment timeliness by 0.2 percentage points.
DOL continues to improve UI payment integrity by providing funds for States to implement data exchanges with the Social Security Administration (SSA) to identify false and stolen numbers; access data from other State agencies to verify personally identifying information; and gain access to the National Directory of New Hires, an additional too for swiftly detecting and preventing payments to claimants who have returned to work.
For FY 2006, targets for all indicators will be raised.
The UI Program continues to demonstrate improved efficiency as evidenced by the result exceeding the FY 2005 target.
The Department promoted efficiency through competitive grants for automation and remote systems (e.g., telephone and Internet claims-taking).
To date, lack of data has precluded measuring the extent that the UI system is meeting the goal of facilitating UI claimants’ reemployment.
In 2006, States will begin gathering data for a UI reemployment indicator and a performance target will be set.
Texas Workforce Commission (TWC) toughened work verification of its Unemployment Insurance (UI) claimants.
Texas is a national leader in UI work search requirements, insisting on a minimum of three work search contacts per week.
Since February 2004, TWC has required 1,000 randomly selected claimants per week to submit their work search logs for the commission's verification.
UI-funded employees throughout the agency, including the TWC Executive Director, make weekly calls to employers to verify claimants' work search activity.
In addition, TWC's Division of Program Integrity conducts investigations and provides local law enforcement agencies with information to prosecute fraudulent claims.
TWC also works with the Texas Office of Attorney General comparing data from its New Hire Cross-match system to identify claimants who have returned to work.
These initiatives have significantly reduced UI overpayments in Texas.
The Office of Inspector General (OIG) expressed concern that the UI overpayment data collected by the Benefit Accuracy Measurement (BAM) unit reflected little improvement in the UI overpayment rates over the past several years.
In FY 2004, the OIG listed reducing improper payments and improving the integrity and solvency of the UI program among DOL’s top management challenges.
In addition to funding identity theft prevention activities and New Hires crossmatches, the Department has promulgated a State-level detection of overpayments core measure with a performance criterion, giving States an added incentive to prevent and detect overpayments.
One roadblock to the effectiveness of these tools is the lack of trained State staff to investigate all potential overpayments.
The 2006 budget contains a legislative proposal – the Integrity Act – designed to give States the means to obtain funding for integrity activities, including staff, to enhance recovery and prevent overpayments.
To reduce overpayments and facilitate reemployment, DOL awarded Reemployment and Eligibility Assessments (REA) grants to 21 States during FY 2005.
The grants have been used to conduct in-person claimant interviews in One-Stop Career Centers to assess UI beneficiaries’ need for reemployment services and their continued eligibility for benefits, and to ensure that beneficiaries understand that they must stop claiming benefits upon their return to work.
The FY 2006 budget request includes funding to continue this effort and to combat identity theft.
In recent years, UI trust fund solvency has been another major management challenge.
Borrowing from the UI trust fund by States has declined since last year, and significant portions of previously borrowed amounts have been repaid.
Due in part to improved economic conditions, most States’ trust fund accounts had a positive cash flow over the last 12 months, and overall, the funds are more solvent than last year.
DOL requested that the OIG review Internal Revenue Service administration charges because of past overcharges.
The Government Accountability Office (GAO) released Better Data Needed to Assess Reemployment Services to Claimants in June 2005 (Study 18 in Appendix 2).
The report recommended that DOL collect more comprehensive information on reemployment services used by UI claimants and their outcomes.
DOL will be collecting additional data that, combined with currently collected data, provide adequate information to guide policies promoting the reemployment of UI beneficiaries.
The GAO issued another report, Unemployment Insurance Information on Benefit Receipt (Study 19 in Appendix 2), in March 2005.
GAO analyzed the data and information on UI benefits and UI recipients in the past two decades, bu offered no recommendations.
The Program Assessment Rating Tool review of the UI program rated it Moderately Effective.
Recommendations, which included simplifying performance measures, funding New Hire crossmatch and focusing resources on reemployment through REA’s, have been implemented.
Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation (EEOIC) for nuclear weapons employees of the Department of Energy or its contractors.
The Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs (OWCP) adjudicates claims; mediates disputes; makes benefit payments; helps with injury recovery and return to work; controls costs; and offers technical and customer services.
Program results are influenced by how effectively resources are deployed to these activities.
Ten indicators reflect the outcome objectives of OWCP’s key mission strategies.
Communications goals seek to improve customer access to program information and raise service responsiveness and quality levels.
Ensuring claims processing efficiency is central to the objectives of the EEOIC program.
Effective mediation of disputes and improved decision quality are measured in the Black Lung and Longshore programs.
Financial integrity of the FECA Compensation Fund is the objective of beneficiary roll reviews and medical benefit cost control.
OWCP program goals are impacted by several external factors.
FECA and EEOIC are continually challenged by large numbers of cases.
Economic and workplace trends change the nature of new injuries and job availability for workers ready to return to duty.
For the Longshore program, the potential for greater security threats on American facilities and an increasing volume of War Hazard Act claims require additional planning and resource investment.
Medical costs continue to push higher as technology expands and the use of medicines and treatment procedures increase.
While business practices become increasingly automated and customer demands for information and assistance grow more sophisticated and accelerated, OWCP capabilities remain limited, and communications are costly.
Fulfilling DOL’s commitment to injured workers is measured by the ten indicators.
The results discussion is organized into three categories: Return-to-Work, Reducing Program Expenses and Customer Service.
Return-to-work outcomes are expressed as reductions in average Lost Production Days.
The FY 2005 results for the USPS and All Other Government LPD rates show significant reductions due primarily to fewer FECA wage-loss disability days paid this year.
Overall new FECA cases created were down by nearly 8 percent, which is consistent with a reduction in wage-loss paid.
However, the results may also reflect the implementation of FECA’s new automated claims system (beginning January 2005) that temporarily slowed receipt and processing of wage-loss claims and may have depressed the number of lost production days counted for these measures.
A major strategy supporting DOL’s LPD goals continued to be Quality Case Management in the FECA program which has saved approximately $50,000,000 in compensation costs annually.
DOL also continued its leadership of the OWCP/OSHA Safety, Health and Return-to-Employment (SHARE) initiative, in its second of three years in FY 2005.
Under SHARE, Federal agencies have set individual goals to reduce on-the-job injury rates, speed notification of injuries to DOL, and reduce lost production day rates.
The initiative challenges DOL to assist the agencies in those efforts.
DOL workers’ compensation outcomes can also be measured in financial terms, as these outcomes reflect the efficiency and quality of our benefit payment activities, the impact of case management and benefit services, and the utilization of administrative resources to produce those outcomes.
Periodic Roll Management (PRM) generates benefit cost savings through careful review of cases to determine if continued disability status is warranted, and to determine the reemployment potential of those currently receiving compensation.
Through PRM, DOL has saved over $1 billion since FY 1999, and DOL intends to continue this goal into the future.
DOL reached its target by producing $21 million in savings in FY 2005.
In the past year, the rate of increase in average FECA medical benefit payments rose by only 2.8 percent − well below the national average as reported by Milliman for this year and all recent years.
In the long term, the rate of growth in average FECA medical case costs has consistently remained below the growth rate in nationwide costs as measured by the Milliman USA, Health Cost Index.
Against that index, FECA has saved nearly $40 million annually in medical treatment costs since FY 2000.
OWCP met its Communications goal by reaching three of the five sub-targets, including increased use of electronic services, reducing average caller wait times, and meeting call handling quality standards.
OWCP did not reach its target to reduce the time required to resolve disputed issues in Longshore and Harbor Workers’ Program contested cases.
Disputed issues were resolved, on average, in 254 days against a target of 245 days.
There are several reasons for this.
First, a higher proportion of disputed cases required referral to the Office of Administrative Law Judges for formal hearings, which increases overall processing time.
Second, a correction of coding inconsistencies in some district offices resulted in a slight increase in the average days to resolve disputes at the district office level.
In FY 2006, DOL will re-baseline this indicator, add two new disputed case categories (attorney fees and successive employer liability), and revise the target level, while continuing to emphasize swift resolution of Longshore case disputes.
OWCP reached its target to reduce requests for further action following Black Lung benefit eligibility decisions (for claims subject to revised regulations).
Performance for this indicator was 80.6 percent, against a target 76.5 percent.
The revised regulations for Black Lung benefit claims were designed to produce faster and fairer final benefit determinations without changing eligibility requirements.
The result has been an increase in the number of stakeholders who accept the district director’s initial decision and decide not to pursue the claim further.
Out-year workload projections for the next ten years are also being reviewed in a program evaluation recommended during Black Lung’s PART assessment.
In addition, the Program is completing a two-year review of all Part B Claims; the first systematic review these claims have received since initial approval by Social Security Administration.
DOL reached its targets for processing timeliness in the Energy Part B program.
This program processed 80 percent of initial claims and 94.7 percent of final decisions within standard time frames, against targets of 80 percent for both indicators.
DOL also exceeded its target to make 1,200 payments under the new Part E program during FY 2005.
In FY 2006, DOL plans to incorporate the processing of new Part E claims in the timeliness indicators and to add a new indicator to significantly reduce the unadjudicated inventory of claims transferred from the DOE under Part E.
Roxann’s career as a correctional officer for a Colorado Federal prison came to a violent end in 1999 when she was attacked by an inmate.
But her working life didn’t end there.
With the help of an Office of Worker Compensation Programs’ rehabilitation counselor, regular contacts with a rehabilitation specialist and the oversight of a claims examiner, Roxann eventually earned an associate’s degree in graphic design and a 3.9 grade point to go with it.
She even won a competition sponsored by the Pueblo Colorado Housing Authority, which adopted her graphic design as its official logo.
OWCP next helped Roxann identify potential employers and coached her on interview skills.
Their teamwork paid off.
Through an OWCP reemployment initiative which reimburses new employers 50 percent of rehabilitated workers’ initial wages, Roxann found a place to hang her diploma at an area sign shop, where she continues working today.
Performance data are extracted from OWCP’s automated case management and benefit payment systems, internal managerial audits or other reviews.
OWCP maintains strict oversight of data entry, with regular on-site review by district directors and periodic reviews that assess data quality.
Fund indebtedness as a major management challenge for the Department, and DOL is seeking Congressional sponsorship of a legislative proposal to eliminate the debt.
In addition, DOL has developed a legislative proposal which would build return-to-work incentives into the Federal Employees’ Compensation Act.
OWCP and OSHA are in the second year of the SHARE initiative, directed at improving Federal agency performance in returning their injured employees to work.