This report, prepared in accordance with the Reports Consolidation Act of 2000, presents the results of the Department of Labor’s (DOL) program and financial performance for FY 2006.
The Secretary’s Message is a letter from the chief executive that identifies the Department’s “bottom line” at the mission level.
It includes highlights of achievements for the year and communicates direction and priorities.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) introduces the Department’s mission, vision and organization, summarizes program and financial performance, and addresses major management challenges.
The MD&A also reports on President’s Management Agenda implementation and Program Assessment Rating Tool reviews.
The Financial Section demonstrates our commitment to effective stewardship over the funds DOL receives to carry out the mission of the Department, including compliance with relevant financial management legislation.
It includes the Independent Auditors’ Report – an independent opinion on the Financial Statements; Top Management Challenges Facing the Department of Labor – a report by the Office of Inspector General (OIG) on the Department’s most serious management and performance challenges; and the Annual Financial Statements.
In addition, five Appendices supplement the performance and financial sections by providing detailed performance information, summaries of significant audits and evaluations, additional information on improper payments reduction, a list of acronyms and a list of Web sites featuring labor programs and issues.
The diagram below illustrates the theoretical foundation of performance planning and evaluation structures, processes and results covered in this section of the Performance and Accountability Report.
The outer circle represents the scope of the organization’s resources and influence.
At the core is its mission.
Everything in between is in continuous motion, clockwise and counter-clockwise.
Quadrants represent the planning elements that are tied to periodic budget documents.
Spokes incorporate the actual processes that follow resource allocation decisions and translate theory into practice.
These elements are managed on a real-time basis; emergent cost and results information ultimately closes the feedback loop via reporting documents and the next period’s budget.
A more detailed description of planning and evaluation processes follows the diagram.
Starting with the upper left quadrant and moving clockwise, budget formulation begins with definition and prioritization of desired outcomes, which are translated from mere notions into realistic program goals.
Goals drive data collection needs (to determine success) through performance indicators.
Performance indicators identify results of activities, inducing strategies.
Cost estimates associated with pursuit of these strategies inform budget requests.
Starting with the same quadrant but this time moving counter-clockwise, the budget defines fiscal parameters for execution of strategies constrained by program authorization legislation.
Strategies materialize as activities, the results of which are assessed using performance indicators.
Data from the performance indicators demonstrate whether goals are achieved.
Outcomes – in generic terms, demonstrated effectiveness at achieving goals – justify further budget requests.
Fiscal Year (FY) 2006 marks the eighth year that the Department of Labor has reported program results under the Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA).
This report includes performance goals from two different reporting periods in that Workforce Investment Act (WIA) programs are “forward-funded,” meaning that their spending and performance goals are tracked on a cycle that lags the Federal fiscal year by nine months.
This period is referred to as a Program Year (PY); such goals being reported on in this document cover July 1, 2005 to June 30, 2006 (PY 2005).
PY 2006 goals will appear in the FY 2007 report.
The Department’s goal structure has three levels.
Strategic goals describe general aims that emerge from the Department’s mission.
Each of these goals in turn has several outcome goals that define general results DOL agencies can influence.
These are long term objectives that in most cases involve more than one DOL agency.
Finally, performance goals that support each outcome goal provide program-level clarity of purpose.
Each performance goal has associated indicators and targets to measure our impact on a continuous basis.
DOL’s four strategic goals – A Prepared Workforce, A Secure Workforce, Quality Workplaces and A Competitive Workforce – express outcomes associated with our mission, vision and theme, and serve to focus Departmental efforts on the links between activities and their higher purpose.
The table below indicates FY 2006 program performance goal achievement by strategic goal.
The Department of Labor measures goal achievement by a rule requiring that all indicator targets are reached to qualify as Achieved.
TOf the 28 performance goals on which DOL is reporting in FY 2006, the Department achieved 14 and did not achieve 14.
The percentage achieved or substantially achieved totals 50 percent – somewhat lower than the 60 percent total for FY 2005.
A swing of three goals would account for this.
Strategic Goal 2 accounts for two of them.
Five of its six performance goals were achieved or substantially achieved last year but just three were this time.
The other change occurred in Strategic Goal 3, where the goal count increased from six to eight but the count of goals achieved remained at three.
Below is a breakdown, by strategic goal, of FY 2006 goal achievement.
Tables present the goal number, responsible agency, goal statement, and result for each performance goal being reported on in this document.
The first two digits of each goal number indicate the funding year.
In this report, all “05” goals are reporting on the Program Year period defined above.
A tally of goals achieved, while providing an indication of whether DOL is on schedule with its plan, does not convey any actual performance information.
Summaries at the strategic goal level and separate performance goal narratives discuss significant trends and their implications.
As indicated in the Program Performance Goal Achievement table below, DOL had six performance goals under this strategic goal in FY 2006, of which four were achieved or substantially achieved (67 percent) – above the Department wide average.
The WIA Youth program achieved its goal of collecting baseline data for its two new common youth and lifelong learning performance measures for Federal employment and training programs.
The Job Corps program, which uses the same two measures for placement and credentials, plus a third common measure for literacy/numeracy, did not achieve its goal.
VETS’ goal was achieved; all six targets were reached.
The goal for Apprenticeship was achieved; retention and earnings results improved over FY 2005.
ODEP achieved its goal by establishing baselines for policy-related documents and formal agreements and reaching its target for identifying effective practices.
BLS’ goal was not achieved, but four of its six targets were reached.
Of six performance goals, DOL achieved or substantially achieved three – matching the Departmental average of 50 percent.
ESA’s Wage and Hour Division achieved its goal by reaching all five targets, but the Office of Labor-Management Standards missed one of its three targets, preventing it from achieving the goal.
The Unemployment Insurance system also missed one target and therefore did not achieve the goal.
The goal of improving outcomes for injured workers covered by ESA’s Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs was achieved; all ten indicator targets for Return to Work, Reducing Program Expenses, and Customer Service categories were reached.
DOL achieved its pension and health benefit security goal by reaching all four targets.
The pension insurance services (PBGC) goal was not achieved because neither of its customer satisfaction targets was reached.
DOL achieved or substantially achieved three of eight performance goals (38 percent), which is below the Departmental average of 50 percent.
MSHA did not achieve its fatality and injury reduction goal.
The fatality rate rose and the injury rate declined, but not enough to reach the target.
MSHA also failed to meet its health goal, despite reaching three of four targets.
The all-industry occupational fatality rate decreased in FY 2006 but did not reach OSHA’s target.
The safety and health goal (days away from work) was achieved.
Both Federal contractor equal employment opportunity targets were reached, thus ESA's Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs performance goal was achieved.
The Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act goal was not achieved, despite improvement in the comprehensive Progress Index.
The Bureau of International Labor Affairs, or ILAB, achieved its child labor goal by exceeding its target for removing or preventing children from exploitive work and increasing targeted countries’ capacity to address the issue.
The goal to improve living standards and working conditions internationally was not achieved.
Of eight performance goals, DOL achieved or substantially achieved four, equaling the Departmental average of 50 percent.
The WIA Adult and One Stop employment services goals were achieved.
In each case, all three targets were reached.
However, entered employment and retention rates were slightly below PY 2004 results.
The WIA Dislocated Worker (DW) and Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) goals were not achieved.
For DW, entered employment reached the target, but retention dipped below the target and was three percentage points below the prior year’s performance.
The TAA program achieved targeted levels for retention and earnings but fell just shy of the target for entered employment.
The Senior Community Service Employment Program (SCSEP) did not achieve its performance goal.
None of its targets were reached – entered employment and retention due to unrealistic targets, and average earnings because baseline data were not collected.
The Department achieved its performance goal for electronic tools, exceeding the target for increased dissemination of O*NET data and setting baselines for Career Voyages and America’s Career InfoNet Web site page views.
The Foreign Labor Certification goal was not achieved, but three of four targets were reached.
The Department’s regulatory flexibility and benefits and flexible workplace goal was achieved.
In the course of promulgating revised regulations, DOL agencies conducted cost benefit analyses to increase regulations’ net benefits.
They also updated obsolete, non-substantive references in the Code of Federal Regulations.
The Women's Bureau’s Flex-Options for Women project participation grew to six of ten Regional Offices and had its most successful year to date, with 23 companies implementing new, exemplary workplace policies and procedures.
The next table lists Program Year 2006 goals (July 1, 2006 – June 30, 2007) for which results will be reported in the FY 2007 Performance and Accountability Report.
Due to restructuring of the Department’s goals in the FY 2006- 2011 Strategic Plan, identifying numbers have changed.
The goals are listed according to their original nomenclature; the new labels are provided also, in bold type.
Total Net Cost4T of DOL activities for FY 2006 was $45.328 billion.
As reflected in the table below, which provides an allocation based on the Department’s goal structure, the second strategic goal, A Secure Workforce, is dominant – accounting for $35.920 billion, or 79 percent of the total.
This figure consists in large part ($33.227 billion, or 93 percent) of mandatory benefit payments to unemployed workers or workers disabled as a result of work-related injuries or illnesses.
The first goal, A Prepared Workforce, required $3.395 billion (7 percent) for employment related services.
Approximately $1.114 billion (2 percent) went toward the third goal, Quality Workplaces, to fund direct services (such as salaries of Federal employees) aimed at improving safety and health in the workplace.
DOL’s FY 2005 Performance and Accountability Report marked a milestone in accountability by featuring a statement of full costs at the performance goal level.
This year’s statement adds another level of detail – performance indicators – which is significant because only by linking cost to units of measurement is it possible to analyze efficiency and cost-effectiveness.
For a variety of reasons, this was not possible in all cases; therefore, the statement includes a row for each performance goal labeled “Dollars not associated with indicators.”
Some of the difficulties will be resolved over time and lead to more complete allocations in future statements.
Others, such as for job training program common measures,5 cannot be resolved without dropping indicators – a choice that may reduce the overall value of performance information.
As indicated in the preceding paragraph, several programs make mandatory benefit payments that account for the majority of their costs.
Because performance indicators and the Department’s managerial cost accounting system that generates this information are designed to inform analysis and decision-making related to discretionary budgets and program management, such payments are shown separately and not included in allocation cost models.
Charts that display net costs from FY 1999-FY 2006 to illustrate trends are provided in each outcome goal summary; brief explanations of significant changes since FY 2005 are provided, as well.
The Performance Section of this report presents, by strategic goal, summaries of performance at each level.
Each strategic goal section is introduced by an overview of the goal and a summary of results, net cost and future plans for its component outcome goals.
Within each strategic goal section are individual performance goal narratives that present results, describe the program and its operating environment, analyze performance and briefly address relevant audits and evaluations, data quality and major management challenges.
Appendix 1 contains performance goal histories and Appendix 2 summarizes significant audits and evaluations of DOL programs completed during FY 2006 that have implications for performance goals.
Performance measurement is inherently difficult, especially for a large, diverse organization like DOL that works to accomplish its mission indirectly – in partnership and by assisting others.
The Department seeks continuous improvement in its selection of indicators and in policies and procedures for collecting and reporting program performance data so that managers and other decision makers can rely on them.
However, each program must consider the costs and benefits of gathering and managing such information.
Changes take time to implement and reporting requirements can impose considerable burdens on staff, partners, beneficiaries and regulated entities.
This report is published just six weeks after the end of the fiscal year.
Because the Department receives a wide variety of performance data via diverse systems and agreements in cooperation with State agencies and grant recipients, it is not possible in all cases to report complete data for the reporting period.
The Department requires each agency responsible for performance goals in this report to submit a Data Estimation Plan in February that identifies, for each indicator, whether complete data are expected by the deadline for clearance and final review of the report in early October.
If the data will not be available by then, they must submit an acceptable plan to estimate results for the remainder of the year.
Methodologies developed by agencies’ program analysts are reviewed by the Department’s Center for Program Planning and Results and Office of Inspector General.
The most common methods are substitution or extrapolation of two or three quarters of data and – for data with significant seasonal variation – use of the missing period’s results from the previous year.
Estimates are clearly identified wherever they are used.
With very few exceptions, final (actual) data are available by the end of the calendar year; these data will be reported in the FY 2007 Performance and Accountability Report.
New indicators often lack data needed to establish targets.
For such indicators, the first year’s target may be to establish a baseline, and thus the Department gives the program a positive rating for gathering the data as planned and establishing targets for the subsequent year.
The Office of Inspector General assesses the internal controls of DOL agencies – systems used to validate, verify and record data submitted by field staff and partners (e.g., grantees).
These systems are identified as Data Sources in Appendix 1 at the bottom of each performance goal history.
Lack of findings does not imply that data are factual.
Material inadequacies, if any, are disclosed in the Secretary’s Message, which includes a statement on the adequacy of program performance data that is supported by signed attestations of each agency head responsible for a performance goal in this report.
OMB Circular A-11defines a material inadequacy as a condition that significantly impedes the use of program performance data by agency managers and government decision makers.
For Departmental management, this threshold is established at the performance goal level as data that are insufficient to permit determination of goal achievement.
This is an unlikely occurrence for a goal with several indicators and historical data that allow reasonable estimation of results for most of them.
Generally, if agency or program level managers do not trust their own data, they are not reported, because problems created by skewed targets and trends are much worse than a gap in the data.
The Department of Labor aspires to standards beyond adequacy, and to that end has created a new Data Assessment process that will help improve the quality of performance information that is being used more than ever for decision making and accountability.
The Data Quality and Major Management Challenges section of each performance goal narrative includes an overall rating of indicator data completeness and reliability (Excellent, Very Good, Good, Fair, or Unsatisfactory).
Discussions summarize the rationale and, where applicable, improvement plans.
If data do not satisfy the standards for both of these criteria, the rating is Data Quality Not Determined.
This reflects the DOL policy that further assessments of quality are irrelevant if the information is not reasonably correct and worthwhile.
As FY 2007/PY 2006 indicators and targets are finalized and data collection for the new fiscal year gets under way, program managers will prioritize data quality issues and consider feasible policies and practices that would have significant and positive impact on the criteria.
The FY 2007 report will include a follow-up assessment and a more robust discussion of how the Department intends to make progress in this area.
In September 2006, the Department published its Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2006 through 2011.
The strategic plan serves as a roadmap for programs to define priorities, refine strategies, and measure performance.
In the 2007 Performance and Accountability report, DOL will report its progress against four updated strategic goals: A Prepared Workforce provides training and services to new and incumbent workers and supplies high-quality information on the economy and labor market; A Competitive Workforce enhances the effectiveness and efficiency of the workforce development and regulatory systems that assist workers and employers in meeting the challenges of worldwide competition; Safe and Secure Workplaces ensures that workplaces are safe, healthful, and fair; provides workers with the wages due them; provides equal opportunity; and protects veterans’ employment and reemployment rights; and Strengthened Economic Protections protects and strengthens economic security; ensures union transparency; and secures pension and health benefits.
Over the past fiscal year, the Department has also worked on enhancing its managerial cost accounting system, Cost Analysis Manager (CAM).
The Department’s success in implementing a Department-wide managerial cost accounting system was highlighted in the Government Accountability Office’s (GAO) Survey of Managerial Cost Accounting Practices at Large Federal Agencies.
In addition, the Department was praised for its efforts in making managerial cost accounting information readily available at a hearing before the U.S. House of Representatives on September 21, 2005.
CAM is an indispensable tool for improving program performance.
It improves accountability and transparency for how well tax dollars are spent.
In FY 2005, the Department reported in its Performance and Accountability Report the cost of its Department-wide performance goals.
This year, it is providing cost information on more than half of its Department-wide performance indicators.
The Department continues to work on the implementation of a new core financial management system, known as Labor Executive Accountability Program (LEAP).
LEAP will provide readily available, transparent data to managers and decision-makers for use on a day-to-day basis.
This Financial Systems Integration Office (FSIO)-compliant COTS package will make available timely, accurate, and reliable financial information, and will provide the tools to conduct sophisticated financial analyses to better manage program resources.
This will result in an increased use of integrated financial and performance information that will empower superior decision-making through better business intelligence.
When fully implemented, the new system will be a strategic asset for the Department allowing, managers to create customized reports online at their desktops to meet their management needs in real time.
LEAP is currently being hosted by a Shared Service Provider (SSP).
This SSP was selected in Q2 FY 2006, and the SSP hosting of LEAP started in Q4 FY 2006.
For Q1 FY 2007, LEAP is scheduled to complete the configuration of the Oracle Federal Administrator (Budget Execution) module for internal reporting and evaluation purposes.
The Department is the first Federal agency to deploy an-end-to end web based electronic travel management system, which was completed on September 30, 2006.
Now, DOL employees have the advantage of being able to assess their travel system 24-hours a day/7 days a week to enter travel authorizations, book travel reservations, and complete their travel vouchers.
The system is accessible from the office, home, or while on the road.
E-Gov Travel is totally paperless and affords DOL employees the ease of taking advantage of the latest technology while providing cost savings.
The Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996 (DCIA) designated the Department of the Treasury as the central agency for collection of Federal debts over 180 days delinquent.
The Department cross-services all delinquent debts in accordance with this statute.
Debt management accounts for a relatively small part of our financial management activity.
The majority of debts managed by the Department relate to the assessment of fines and penalties in our enforcement programs.
During FY 2006, the Department referred $84.2 million, which represents 79 percent of all eligible delinquent debt, to Treasury for collection.
The Department continues to monitor and aggressively pursue its debt greater than 180 days old.
The Department continues to make improvements in its efforts to meet guidance and regulations outlined in the Prompt Payment Act.
The Prompt Payment Act requires Executive agencies to pay commercial obligations within discreet time periods and to pay interest penalties when those time constraints are not met.
Additionally, during FY 2005, there were over 73,000 payments made to vendors and travelers.
Of this amount, 2,476 invoices were paid late, resulting in only 3% of the total payments incurring interest penalties.
These results represent significant improvements from the prior year.
The Department continues to work aggressively with its agencies to increase the number of vendors receiving payments through electronic fund transfer (EFT).
The percentage of vendors receiving EFT payments increased by 7% to 95%.
ESA benefit and medical programs, although increasing in EFT payments, continue to remain low.
The principal financial statements summarize the Department’s financial position, net cost of operations, and changes in net position, provide information on budgetary resources and financing, and present the sources and disposition of custodial revenues for FY 2006 and FY 2005.
Highlights of the financial information presented in the principal financial statements are shown below.
The Department’s Balance Sheet presents its financial position through the identification of agency assets, liabilities, and net position.
The Department’s total assets increased from $71.5 billion in FY 2005 to $83.5 billion in FY 2006.
The increase in total assets primarily was account for in the Department’s investments.
The Department invests in non-marketable, special issue Treasury securities balances held in the Unemployment Trust Fund.
The Department did not experience major changes in liabilities during FY 2006.
Liabilities totaled $20 billion at the end of both FY 2006 and 2005.
Beginning in FY 2006, agencies were required to report earmarked non-exchange revenue and other financing sources, including appropriations.
The Department was also required to report the portions of cumulative results of operations and unexpended appropriations on the face of the Balance Sheet.
The Department’s total net cost of operations in FY 2006 was $44.8 billion, a decrease of $9.6 billion from the prior year.
Income Maintenance programs continue to comprise the major portion of costs.
These programs include costs such as unemployment benefits paid to individuals who are laid off or out of work and seeking employment as well as payments to individuals who qualify for disability benefits due to injury or illness suffered on the job.
Employment and Training programs comprise the second largest cost.
These programs are designed to help individuals deal with the loss of a job, research new opportunities, find training to acquire different skills, start a new job, or make long-term career plans.
This statement reports the budgetary resources available to DOL during FY 2006 and FY 2005 to effectively carry out the activities of the Department as well as the status of these resources at the end of each fiscal year.
The Department had direct obligations of $50.3 billion in FY 2006, a decrease of $1 billion from FY 2005.
As required by the Government Management Reform Act of 1994 (31 U.S.C. 3515 (b)), the principal financial statements report the Department’s financial position and results of operations.
While the statements have been prepared from the Department’s books and records, in accordance with formats prescribed by OMB, the statements differ from the financial reports used to monitor and control budgetary resources, which are prepared from the same books and records.
The statements should be read with the realization that they are a component of the U.S. Government, a sovereign entity, and that liabilities reported in the financial statements cannot be liquidated without legislation providing resources to do so.
The Department committed significant resources in implementing the requirements outlined in the revised OMB Circular A-123, Management’s Responsibility for Internal Controls.
The Department’s implementation leveraged and improved upon existing successes in financial management, including the Quarterly Financial Management Certification program, which requires managers at all levels to attest to the adequacy of effective management controls over program resources, financial systems, and financial reporting.
The Department’s approach to the A-123 requirement is compliance at managed cost, sustainability by reducing compliance mindset and reliance on outside parties to discover errors and problems, and improvement in effectiveness and efficiency of agency programs.
The Department of Labor's management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective internal control and financial management systems that meet the objectives of the Federal Managers' Financial Integrity Act (FMFIA).
DOL is able to provide a qualified statement of assurance that the internal controls and financial management systems meet the objectives of FMFIA, with the exception of 7 significant deficiencies in 2 non-financial systems in complying with the Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA) which are required to be reported as material weaknesses.
The details of the exceptions are provided below.
DOL conducted its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over the effectiveness and efficiency of operations and compliance with applicable laws and regulations in accordance with OMB Circular A-123 Management's Responsibility for Internal Control.
Based on the results of this evaluation, DOL identified 7 significant deficiencies in 2 non-financial systems which are required to be reported as material weaknesses in its internal control over the effectiveness and efficiency of operations and compliance with applicable laws and regulations as of September 30, 2006.
Other than the exceptions noted below, the internal controls were operating effectively and no other material weaknesses were found in the design or operation of the internal controls.
DOL is also in conformance with Section 4 of FMFIA.
In addition, the DOL conducted its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, which includes safeguarding of assets and compliance with applicable laws and regulations, in accordance with the requirements of Appendix A of OMB Circular A-123.
Based on the results of this evaluation, DOL can provide reasonable assurance that its internal control over financial reporting as of June 30, 2006 was operating effectively and no material weaknesses were found in the design or operation of the internal control over financial reporting.
The Federal Financial Management Improvement Act of 1996 (FFMIA) requires agencies to implement and maintain financial management systems that are substantially in compliance with Federal financial management systems requirements, Federal accounting standards, and the United States Government Standard General Ledger at the transaction level.
The Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA) requires the Department of Labor (DOL), Office of Inspector General (OIG), to perform annual independent evaluations of the DOL information security program and practices based upon audits of a subset of DOL’s identified major information systems.
The objective of the audits is to determine if security controls over the systems were in compliance with FISMA requirements.
Implementing incident response procedures and training.
Security incidents are handled in accordance with applicable requirements and personnel with incident handling responsibilities are trained.
In its response to the audit reports, DOL generally concurred with the findings and recommendations and has already taken corrective actions to address several of the recommendations associated with these deficiencies and is in the process of taking corrective actions to address the remaining recommendations.
Improved financial performance through the reduction of improper payments continues to be a key financial management focus of the Federal government.
At Labor, developing strategies and the means to reduce improper payments is a matter of good stewardship.
Accurate payments lower program costs.
This is particularly important as budgets have become increasingly tight.
Over the past several years, identifying and reducing improper payments has been a major financial management focus of the Federal Government.
A PMA key component is to improve agency financial performance through reductions in improper payments.
The Improper Payments Information Act of 2002 (IPIA) broadened the original erroneous payment reporting requirements to programs and activities beyond those originally listed in Circular A-11.
IPIA defines improper payments as those payments made to the wrong recipient, in the wrong amount, or used in an improper manner by the recipient.
It also requires the agency to implement a corrective action plan that includes improper payment reduction and recovery targets.
The act also requires the agency to report annually on the extent of its improper payments and the actions taken to increase the accuracy of payments.
To coordinate and facilitate the Department’s efforts under IPIA, the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) is the Erroneous Payment Reduction Coordinator for the Department.
OCFO works with program offices to develop a coordinated strategy to perform annual reviews for all programs and activities susceptible to improper payments.
This cooperative effort includes developing actions to reduce improper payments, identifying and conducting ongoing monitoring techniques, and establishing appropriate corrective action initiatives.
Due to the inherent differences in managing and accounting for funds in a benefit versus a grant program, the Department conducted its FY 2006 risk assessment using different methodologies to assess their improper payment risk.
Per OMB guidance, Unemployment Insurance (UI), Federal Employees’ Compensation Act (FECA), and the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) programs are deemed to be high risk irrespective of the determined improper payment error rate.
This determination is based on the fact that the financial payments for each of these programs exceed $2 billion.
UI and FECA are benefit programs.
WIA is a grant program.
FY 2006 benefit programs with FY 2005 outlays totaling less than $200 million were deemed to be low risk, unless a known weakness existed in the program management based on reports issued by oversight agencies such as the Department’s Inspector General (IG) and/or the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO).
Hence, these benefit programs were not statistically sampled.
For benefit programs with outlays greater than $200 million, the Department conducted sampling to determine their improper payment rates.
This sampling included FECA, UI, Black Lung Disability Trust Fund, and Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation Fund.
UI was the only program determined to be susceptible to risk13 as a result of this approach.
However, the Department is also reporting on FECA’s improper payment rate since it is required per OMB guidance.
As mentioned earlier, the Department used a separate methodology to assess the risk of improper payments in grant programs except for Job Corps which was sampled.
The Department analyzed all FY 2004 Single Audit Reports14 to identify questioned costs, which were used as a proxy for improper payments, and to estimate an approximate risk for each of the Department’s grant programs.
All error rates were determined to be well below the 2.5 percent threshold; therefore, no grant programs were determined to be susceptible to risk as a result of this approach.
However, like FECA, the Department is reporting on WIA’s improper payment rate since it is required per OMB guidance, even though its improper payment rate is well below the 2.5 percent threshold.
Like many other Federal agencies, the Department faces challenges in meeting its improper payment reduction and recovery targets, particularly with programs that are sensitive to the U.S. economy fluctuations or natural disasters, such as the UI program.
Despite implementing new initiatives that will reduce its improper payments, the UI program’s estimated improper payment error rate increased to 10.0%.
The underpayment rate—the percentage of dollars paid made that was smaller than they should have been—was 0.67%, a rate that has remained steady for several years.
Several major hurricanes in 2005 had a devastating impact on Louisiana and Mississippi, and less severe impacts on Alabama, Florida, and Texas.
Overpayments in these states increased significantly during the year, largely because of confusion about reinstated eligibility requirements that had been temporarily suspended due to disruption of the economy.
We estimate that the increases in the Gulf States raised the aggregate Annual Report rate by a third of a percentage point and the operational rate by 0.13 percentage points.
The Department has obtained authority to require states to use the NDNH to improve their BAM estimates of overpayments due to workers who return to work but continue claiming benefits.
When this NDNH crossmatch requirement becomes mandatory in January 2008, we estimate that it will raise the measured BAM annual report and operational rates by 0.5 to 0.75 percentage points.
Without the effects of these two elements, we estimate that the Annual Report rate would have been about 9.5% instead of 10.0%, and the operational rate 5.3% instead of 5.6%.
Because both estimates are sample-based, they are subject to the usual sampling variation.
The 95% confidence intervals are 10.0% +/- 0.54 percentage points for the Annual Report rate and 5.63% +/- 0.44 percentage points for the operational rate.
Furthermore, meeting improper payment reduction and recovery targets of programs such as UI and WIA are contingent upon the cooperation and support of State agencies and other outside stakeholders who are intricately involved in the day-to-day management of these programs’ activities.
Despite the increase in UI’s estimated improper payment error rate, the Department did meet its reduction targets for FECA and WIA.
Their estimated improper payment error rates were 0.03% and 0.17% respectively.
The Department’s analytical studies indicate that earlier detection of recoverable overpayments is the most costeffective way to address improper payments.
Early detection allows agencies to stop payments before a claimant who has returned to work can exhaust benefits and to recover these overpayments more readily.
The Department estimates that the forty-five states that crossmatch UI beneficiaries with the SNDH or the NDNH instead of UI wage records prevented approximately $75 million of overpayments in each of the past two fiscal years.
Last year, three states participated in a pilot study initiated by the Office of the Chief Financial Officer and the UI program to determine whether a cross-match using the NDNH is more effective than the SDNH in identifying individuals no longer eligible to receive UI benefits.
The results of this pilot showed that because the NDNH includes records for out-of-state employers, Federal agencies, and multi-state employers that report all of their new hires to a single state, it detects improper payments more effectively than the SDNH.
The Department has provided states with funds to implement these NDNH cross-matches; as of 10/30/06, twenty-two states have implemented the NDNH crossmatch, twelve states have signed the computer-matching agreement with HHS that is the prelude to connecting with the NDNH, and seventeen are in the planning process.
Seven States were awarded special FY 2006 supplemental funds to implement NDNH.
In FY 2005, the Department began providing States funds to conduct Reemployment and Eligibility Assessment (REAs) with UI beneficiaries.
These assessments reduce improper payments both by speeding claimants’ return to work and by detecting and preventing eligibility violations.
Twenty states received funds to continue REAs during FY 2006; these REAs are estimated to return about $66 million to the UI trust fund.
An impact evaluation of nine states’ REA programs is scheduled for March 2007.
In recognition of your outstanding efforts preparing DOL's Performance and Accountability Report for the fiscal year ended Šeptember 30, 2005.
The table below lists management challenges the Department considers most important in terms of their impact on the accomplishment of goals in this report and their impact on the American workplace and taxpayers, overall.
The achievement of all the Department’s goals is influenced by the successful management of its performance and financial data, its procurement integrity, and its ability to develop and secure information technology systems.
The management challenge for Goal 1, A Prepared Workforce, pertains to ensuring the effectiveness of the Job Corps program.
Management challenges for Goal 2, A Secure Workforce, include safeguarding unemployment insurance, improving the Federal Employees’ Compensation Act (FECA) program, and improving the security of employee benefit plan assets.
For Goal 3, Quality Workplaces, the OIG identified challenges to ensuring the safety and health of miners that the Department recognizes as important.
For Goal 4, A Competitive Workforce, the GAO, OIG, and others identified challenges for the Foreign Labor Certification Program.
II.
IV.
VI.
IX.
XI.
Many of these challenges are continued from last year.
Summaries of the issue, actions taken and actions remaining are presented for each challenge.
More information on many of them may be found elsewhere in this report in discussions of program performance or in the Financial Section.
At the end of the table are challenges X and XI from 2005 which are included to show their current status.
The Department aggressively pursues corrective action for all significant challenges, whether identified by the OIG, GAO, OCFO or other sources within the Department.
On June 30, 2005, the U.S. Department of Labor became the first Executive Branch department or agency to achieve green status scores for all five government-wide President’s Management Agenda (PMA) initiatives.
This achievement is not an end in itself – but it represents an ongoing commitment to good management to bring quality services to the American people.
In FY 2006, DOL maintained green status scores in all five government-wide initiatives and achieved two additional green status scores in agency-specific initiatives (see table below).
President George W. Bush’s Management Agenda, announced in 2001, is a strategy for improving the management and performance of the Federal government.
Market-based, actively promoting rather than stifling innovation through competition.
Together, initiatives created to achieve these goals are referred to as the PMA.
The five government-wide initiatives are Strategic Management of Human Capital, Competitive Sourcing, Improved Financial Performance, Expanded Electronic Government, and Budget and Performance Integration.
DOL also participates in three additional initiatives referred to as agency-specific initiatives that apply to selected agencies: Eliminating Improper Payments, Faith-Based and Community Initiative, and Federal Real Property Asset Management.
The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) regularly assesses all Federal agencies’ implementation of the PMA, issuing a quarterly Executive Branch Management Scorecard rating of green, yellow or red for both status and progress on each initiative.
The breakdown by initiative, comparing last year’s ratings with those for FY 2006, is indicated in the table below.
Now into the OMB-led Proud to Be IV campaign – which runs through June 30, 2007, DOL has set ambitious goals and continues to demonstrate measurable results in all five government-wide initiatives.
The Department continues to be rated highest of all Cabinet agencies in overall implementation of the PMA.
Highlights of achievements associated with each initiative follow the table.
The Department uses a similar scorecard on a semi-annual basis to measure individual agency progress on the PMA.
The Human Capital initiative requires Federal agencies and departments to develop and use a comprehensive human capital plan, with the aim of significantly reducing mission-critical skill gaps.
The PMA has provided the impetus for DOL to overhaul the Department’s entire performance management system in order to hold executives, managers and employees accountable for achieving results.
At DOL, 100 percent of mission-critical occupations at the Department are linked to DOL’s strategic goals – and in January 2006, the Office of Personnel Management and Office of Management and Budget determined that DOL’s Senior Executive Service appraisal system met the criteria for full certification for the 2006-2007 calendar years.
DOL is the first Cabinet Department to receive full certification – which is premised on making clear distinctions in pay and performance recognition and on having an effective oversight system in place.
Electronic government solutions like eOPF continue to bolster our Strategic Management of Human Capital efforts.
Launched in 2006, eOPF – or the electronic Official Personnel Folder – allows employees to securely access their personnel folder from any DOL network computer connected to the Internet or from home.
The eOPF provides employees with timely access to view and print their personnel documents – and employees are notified by e-mail when personnel actions are added to their file, reducing the need to contact Human Resources Offices for information.
DOL won the 2005 President’s Quality Award for its Competitive Sourcing program under the PMA and also achieved a green status score and has maintained a score of green for 6 consecutive quarters.
Competitive Sourcing allows the government to take advantage of market-based competition while simultaneously allowing the existing Federal employees to compete for the work.
Competitive sourcing requires Federal employees to compete against private sector bidders for work that is deemed commercial activity.
The skills and competencies that are not required to be performed by government personnel can often be performed more effectively and efficiently when subject to the competition of the marketplace.
The competitive sourcing process includes the development of a Most Efficient Organization (MEO), which is designed by affected employees, DOL managers and union representatives to make the function more competitive.
Notably, of the 28 competitions undertaken to date, 21 have been completed and seven are in progress.
Of the 21 completed competitions, the Department’s employees have won 19 (90 percent).
The competitions completed to date yielded efficiencies totaling $40.6 million over multiple performance periods, which included savings of about $29.4 million and cost avoidance of approximately $11.2 million.
The availability of timely, accurate, and useful information is essential to any well-managed, effective organization.
The Improved Financial Performance initiative requires Federal agencies to receive clean audit opinions on their annual financial statements, meet accelerated financial reporting deadlines, implement managerial cost accounting practices, improve internal controls, and have financial management systems that are compliant with Federal laws and regulations.
The Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) has devoted significant resources to secure the Department’s achievement of excellence in financial management in the Federal Government.
In FY 2006, the Department received its tenth unqualified audit opinion and its sixth Certificate of Excellence in Accountability Reporting (CEAR) Program Award from the Association of Government Accountants.
Improving financial performance is a continuous journey of gaining experience rather than a race to the finish line.
The Department also continues to expand the use of integrated financial and performance information in the planning, budgeting, and decision-making activities throughout its agencies.
It also remains focused on improving accountability and transparency for how well tax dollars are spent.
The Expanding Electronic Government (E-government) initiative requires Federal agencies and departments to develop secure Information Technology (IT) systems and strictly adhere to IT project cost, schedule, and performance projections.
The Department of Labor’s Enterprise Architecture (EA) Program aligns all DOL IT investments with the objectives set forth in the President’s Management Agenda (PMA).
Unified DOL Technology Infrastructure (UDTI) is a unified, end-to-end, IT service management initiative that consolidates the technology infrastructure acquired, deployed, and maintained at DOL.
The Departmental Budget Center is using EA to identify redundant budget systems across all agencies – with a projected Return-On-Investment for the Departmental Electronic Budget System (DEBS) of 110% and an anticipated payback period of 3.8 years (Budget and Performance Integration).
On March 31, 2006, the Office of Management and Budget completed evaluating 29 Federal agency consolidated Enterprise Architectures for how EA is used to guide and inform IT investments to achieve strategic objectives.
Evaluations included scoring agency EAs in three assessment areas – Completion, Use, and Results.
Out of all the agencies assessed, the Department of Labor ranked second in terms of EA maturity and met all the criteria to receive a green score under the PMA.
Budget and Performance Integration (BPI) seeks to ensure that performance is routinely considered in funding and management decisions – and that agency programs achieve expected results while working toward continual improvement.
At DOL, BPI has helped exact a gradual cultural shift that fosters a closer dialogue among program, performance, budget, and finance staff.
In support of DOL’s BPI efforts, DOL launched the pilot of the DEBS – an electronic government initiative designed to automate the budget formulation process.
DEBS provides budget analysts the ability to more easily, accurately, and electronically merge budget data.
Having completed the successful pilot project, DEBS was used in 2006 in selected agencies to build DOL’s FY 2008 budget.
The expectation is that all DOL agencies will access the tool in time for the next budget cycle: 2009.
BPI efforts have also continued to be bolstered through the Program Assessment Rating Tool (PART).
Over the last five years, almost 800 Federal programs – including 32 at DOL – have been assessed through the PART.
The PART consists of 25 questions about a program’s performance, design and management.
Once assessments are completed, programs develop improvement plans to address PART findings.
DOL’s overall efforts are being folded into a BPI green plan – which will be in effect in December 2006 and will capture our ongoing efforts to improve agency performance and efficiency.
In addition, DOL is responsible for three of the PMA components found in selected departments: Eliminating Improper Payments, Faith-Based and Community Initiative, and Federal Real Property Asset Management.
DOL’s status scores for Eliminating Improper Payments and Faith-Based and Community Initiative are green – with a yellow status score for Federal Real Property Asset Management.
DOL’s progress score for implementing each initiative is green.
In September 2005, DOL achieved a green status score in Eliminating Improper Payments.
The Improper Payments Act of 2002 defines improper payments as payments made to the wrong recipient; in the wrong amount; or used in an improper manner by the recipient.
Better detecting and preventing improper payments to ensure taxpayer dollars are wisely and efficiently spent is the goal of the Eliminating Improper Payments initiative.
At DOL, developing strategies and the means to reduce improper payments is good stewardship – and good business.
Accurate payments lower program costs, thus maximizing our resources.
The Department has three programs classified as high-risk for improper payments.
Employment Standards Administration – and the third is an ETA grant program administered under the Workforce Investment Act.
While Eliminating Improper Payments is still a fairly new PMA initiative, we are making progress and achieving results.
Last year, the Department’s Office of the Chief Financial Officer and ETA launched a UI pilot program in three states to determine how a cross-match between the National Directory of New Hires data and State UI claimant data could help identify individuals no longer eligible to receive UI benefits.
In June 2006, DOL achieved a green status score in the Faith-Based and Community Initiative, which is designed to strengthen and expand the role of faith-based and community organizations in addressing the Nation's social problems.
Through this five-year march to green, DOL has significantly expanded opportunities for partnerships with faith-based and community non-profit organizations (FBCOs) to better serve Americans in need.
Critical to this effort is removal of any unnecessary barriers to the participation of small and faith-based and community organizations in DOL grants and programs, thus establishing a level playing field for all.
The Department has also employed a wide range of grants, technical assistance and other tools to draw upon the unique strengths of FBCOs in efforts such as serving the unemployed and underemployed, aiding homeless and incarcerated veterans, helping exoffenders transition from prison to work and reducing exploitative child labor abroad.
A significant priority for DOL in the coming year is to build on its record of national achievement in strengthening partnerships between faith-based and community organizations and the workforce investment system at the state and local levels.
In 2006, DOL’s Center for Faith-Based and Community Initiative worked with the Employment and Training Administration to triple the funding of Grassroots grants, which feature simplified application and reporting requirements.
This allows DOL to draw upon the strengths of smaller organizations with significant potential to augment the workforce system.
The Grassroots solicitation in 2006 drew a record 556 applications.
Better managing the Department’s properties is at the core the Federal Real Property Asset Management effort.
This PMA initiative is intended to eliminate surplus assets; better manage the cost of inventory, and improve the condition of critical assets.
The Department’s ongoing efforts in real property management have yielded important benefits.
In the last year, DOL closed ten offices, releasing more than 10,000 square feet of space and saving more than $300,000 annually.
DOL also implemented an on-line Space Management System – with data imported from GSA’s database – to monitor space utilization and identify targets for improvement through consolidation and co-location.
DOL has enhanced its internal budget guidance beginning with FY 2008 to require that agency budget submissions address the real property management improvement goals of mission dependency, utilization, condition, and cost containment through prioritizing planned capital initiatives, disposing of assets, identifying opportunities for operating cost efficiencies and cost reduction, and reviewing leasing agreements.
President Bush has stated that “Government likes to begin things – to declare grand new programs and causes. But good beginnings are not the measure of success. What matters in the end is completion. Performance. Results. Not just making promises, but making good on promises.”
In 2006 – with two upgrades to green in Eliminating Improper Payments and Faith-based and Community Initiative – DOL continued to make good on promises.
The Program Assessment Rating Tool (PART) was developed to assess and improve programs’ positive impact on outcomes that matter to the public.
A PART review helps identify a program’s strengths and weaknesses to inform funding and management decisions aimed at making the program more effective.
Federal programs are scored on their purpose and design, strategic and performance planning, management, and results and accountability.
Total scores determine ratings: Effective, Moderately Effective, Adequate, Ineffective, or Results Not Demonstrated (RND).
The final category can apply to a program with any score if performance goals and measures are not sufficiently outcome (results) oriented and/or the program does not have adequate data.
Summaries of each program’s assessment and improvement plan are published on ExpectMore.gov, a site created earlier this year to make meaningful information about Federal program performance more accessible to the public.
To date, 28 DOL programs have been assessed through the PART.
One is rated Effective, eight Moderately Effective, twelve Adequate, four Ineffective, and three Results Not Demonstrated.
The table below lists the programs as they are identified in ExpectMore.gov.
For cross-referencing with the performance section of this report, where Departmental performance goal(s) apply, goal number(s) are provided.
The list is sorted first by the calendar year in which the review was conducted, then by total score.
DOL will publish the scores and ratings for four additional programs reviewed for the President’s FY 2008 Budget – the Homeless Veterans' Reintegration Program, Office of Disability Employment Policy, Wage-Hour Programs, and Office of the Solicitor – completing the first five-year cycle of assessments.
PART assessments are useful because they lead to improvement plans intended to improve accountability and performance.
Improvements DOL has recently implemented include: Development of new, outcome-oriented performance measures for two DOL programs currently rated Results Not Demonstrated: Job Training Apprenticeship and the Women’s Bureau; development and implementation of efficiency measures for each of the DOL programs assessed through the PART; and development and implementation of a union democracy measure and annual reporting of union fraud activity by the Office of Labor Management Standards.
America’s engine of prosperity is its skilled workforce.
The maintenance of our strong national economy depends, in part, on developing a steady stream of workers that are qualified job candidates possessing skills relevant to the needs of today's employers.
The Department must ensure that every available labor pool is tapped, including job seekers with disabilities, veterans, and disadvantaged youth.
DOL agencies and offices supporting this goal are the Employment and Training Administration (ETA), the Office of Job Corps (JC), Veterans’ Employment and Training Service (VETS), the Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP), the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), the Women’s Bureau and the Center for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives.
The net cost dedicated to Strategic Goal 1 in FY 2006 was $3.395 billion.
The first chart below is based on total Departmental costs of $45.328 billion; the second is based on an adjusted net cost of $12.101 billion that excludes the major non-discretionary program costs associated with Strategic Goal 2.16 Net cost dedicated to Strategic Goal 1 in FY 2005 (restated to reflect current goal structure) was $3.250 billion.
The Department recognizes that some members of the workforce face unique challenges.
These groups include atrisk and out-of-school youth, veterans returning from service to their country, women making a significant work-life transition, and people with disabilities.
Just as initial entry to the workforce requires education and training, re-entry may also require updating skills to match the needs of employers.
The Department is working to prepare new and returning workers to take advantage of the growing job opportunities, which means making sure that no group is left behind.
Through targeted training and outreach programs, partnerships that include faith-based and community organizations, and performance-based approaches, DOL provides comprehensive services that enable individuals belonging to these groups to achieve their employment goals.
The table below provides identifying information, goal statements, and achievement for DOL performance goals associated with this outcome goal.
Those with labels that begin with “05” operate on a Program Year (PY) and are reporting on the period from July 1, 2005 to June 30, 2006 due to the forward funding mechanism of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998.
The WIA Youth program achieved its goal of collecting baseline data for its two new common measures for youth and lifelong learning performance in Federal employment and training programs.
The Job Corps program, which uses the two common measures for placement and credentials, plus a third common measure for literacy/numeracy, did not achieve its goal.
Job Corps established baselines for all three indicators in PY 2004 and set targets for PY 2005.
Literacy/numeracy scores easily exceeded expectations, but results for placement and credentials were several percentage points below their targets.
Both shortfalls are attributed to changes in data definitions or methods that will not apply in PY 2006.
VETS’ goal was achieved; all six targets were reached.
Veterans’ employment rate improved as the retention rate was unchanged.
Disabled veterans’ employment rate stayed the same while retention improved over PY 2004.
The employment and retention rates for homeless veterans both rose, too.
This positive trend in outcomes is accompanied by reversal of a recent decline in service levels.
Veterans’ participation in One-Stop services increased approximately 5 percent over PY 2004; staff-assisted services increased approximately 10 percent.
The goal for Apprenticeship was achieved; retention and earnings results improved over FY 2005.
In addition, efficiency, or average cost per registered apprentice, also improved to just under $100.
Federal cost of the National Registered Apprenticeship System is low because training is provided by employers.
ODEP achieved its goal by establishing baselines for the number of policy-related documents disseminated and formal agreements initiated and reaching its target for identifying effective practices.
These three indicators reflect ODEP’s mission.
The latter indicator has been in place since FY 2004; the new indicators emphasize a strategic shift from a reliance on grant-making to a greater focus on internally generated policy analysis and development initiatives.
After years of intermittent homelessness marked by episodes in shelters and hospitals, Isaac joined the HomeWork Project, an ODEP funded collaboration of housing, homeless assistance, mental health and One Stop career centers led by the Boston Private Industry Council.
HomeWork staff helped him find an apartment subsidized by HUD and search for employment.
Through the assistance of Job Net and the One Stop center, Isaac found work at a local behavioral health agency as a Clerk, starting at $10 per hour.
At first, his limited English proficiency, computer skills and familiarity with telephone switchboards were cause for concern.
However, his employer was able and willing to assign Isaac a supervisor who could communicate with him in his native language, Spanish, and to redefine specific duties to fit his skills.
Isaac later asked for and received assistance to learn the skills in the original Clerk’s job description.
I would recommend this project to anyone without a home or a job. I am grateful that HomeWork is able to work with my treatment and language needs. This project has given me the opportunity I was looking for.”
The FY 2006 program costs of $2.822 billion supported ETA’s registered apprenticeship and Workforce Investment Act Youth programs; Job Corps; Veterans’ Employment and Training Service jobs programs; Office of Disability Employment Policy efforts to improve the workforce development system’s services to job seekers with disabilities; Center for Faith Based and Community Initiatives contracting outreach; and Women's Bureau efforts to increase job opportunities for women.
The $2 billion increase in costs from FY 2003 to 2004 resulted almost entirely from moving the Dislocated Worker Program and Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) performance goals from Strategic Goal 2 (Outcome Goal 2.3 in the DOL FY 2003 Performance and Accountability Report).
The TAA performance goal was moved again in FY 2005, along with several smaller ETA programs, to Outcome Goal 4.1 – accounting for roughly $1 billion of the decrease.
In FY 2006, WIA Youth and Job Corps programs (combined cost of $2.419 billion) were added to this goal, and the WIA Adult, One-Stop, and Dislocated Worker programs (combined cost of $3.246 billion) moved to Outcome Goal 4.1.
The total shown for FY 2005 has been restated to reflect these changes and facilitate comparison to FY 2006.
The Department’s FY 2006-2011 Strategic Plan – which was effective on September 29, 2006 – outlines a new vision for the delivery of youth services that emphasizes the potential of out-of-school and at-risk youth to help supply skilled workers for a globally competitive economy.
Efforts are now focused on four major areas: alternative education, demand-driven strategies for serving youth that provide them with the skills businesses need, serving the neediest youth, and improved performance.
Residential facilities will also be managed to ensure maximum utilization and support the program’s mission.
To improve employment outcomes for veterans, DOL is developing and implementing State Workforce Agency performance standards.
VETS is also expanding the Recovery and Employment Assistance Lifelines program and its crosscutting efforts with the Departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs to provide individualized job training, counseling and re-employment services to seriously injured or wounded veterans of Operation Iraqi Freedom, Operation Enduring Freedom and other recent conflicts.
Apprenticeship program strategies include a re-examination of the Federal role, which may lead to proposed restructuring of the system.
To strengthen program outcomes, DOL will more closely link apprenticeship programs with other workforce development and educational systems and enhance responsiveness to labor market demands through outreach to industry.
DOL will expand credentialing in occupations and industries to increase options for career development.
The Department will also promote recruitment, training, employment and retention of women in apprenticeship and nontraditional occupations.
The Department will continue to: develop national disability employment policy; foster implementation of effective policies and practices to increase employment among people with disabilities within state and local workforce development systems and with employers; conduct research that validates effective strategies for providing disability-employment related services and supports; and, provide technical assistance for implementing effective systems-change strategies to both the demand and supply side of the labor market.
Maintaining competitiveness in the 21st Century requires Americans to be knowledgeable about trends in the global, national, regional and local economies.
Private citizens, business owners, and public officials need to have access to up-to-date, high-quality information and data to assist them in making better informed decisions.
The Department’s Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), which produces some of the Nation’s most sensitive and important economic indicators, continuously seeks opportunities for innovation to improve the quality and usefulness of data products and services to customers.
The goal was not achieved.
However, BLS reached four of its six performance indicator targets, which include quality measures for its four categories of statistical surveys, an efficiency measure and a customer satisfaction index.
Cost per transaction of the Internet Data Collection Facility, the agency’s efficiency measure, improved over FY 2005 and came in below the target.
Customer satisfaction also improved to 79 percent.
All output, timeliness, accuracy, and long-term improvement targets were reached for prices and living condition surveys and for productivity and technology surveys.
For labor force statistics and compensation and working conditions surveys, however, achievement fell short of the targeted 85 percent performance levels.
The labor force result reflects lowerthan-expected response rates for four surveys, below-target expected coverage for two others, and one missed publication deadline.
Compensation and working conditions surveys also experienced lower than anticipated response rates for two surveys and slight delays to several publications.
For high school sophomores, the Morris Business and Professional Women operate a "Reality Store," which shows them the standard-of-living they can expect to achieve based on their career choices.
Data from the Occupational Employment Statistics program helps the students determine how much "income" they may earn.
Data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey sets the costs for various necessities and luxury goods available for "purchase" in stores set up at school.
The Reality Store gives students a realistic look at the quality of life they can expect to attain from their chosen occupations, motivating them to take more seriously their remaining years in high school and possibly continuing on to higher education.
Sara, of Minooka Community High School, said she had "heard the numbers before, but this really helped me realize what some things cost – groceries and kids are both expensive.
FY 2006 program costs of $573 million support BLS programs to produce and disseminate timely, accurate, and relevant information on the economy.
Costs trended upward from 1999 to 2006, primarily due to built-in cost increases; the creation of new programs, such as the American Time Use Survey; and important improvements to increase the accuracy of survey programs, such as the Consumer Price Index (CPI), Producer Price Index (PPI), and Employment Cost Index (ECI).
Several strategies support the goal of producing economic statistics that are relevant, timely, and accurate.
The Department will better inform the public by increasing customer awareness and appropriate use of existing data products and will use feedback gathered from data users to determine how the data or dissemination media could be changed to better serve the American public.
DOL will build value through innovation by analyzing and evaluating new economic survey methods, new technologies, and new survey design and collection approaches; and sponsoring research and evaluations by known experts to determine how best to improve BLS data.
To reduce duplication of effort, the Department will collaborate with other statistical agencies to perform work more efficiently by improving communication and coordinating processes and methodologies.
Increase placements and educational attainments for youth served through the WIA youth program.
The Workforce Investment Act (WIA) authorizes services to low-income youth (age 14-21) with barriers to employment.
Eligible youth are deficient in basic skills or are homeless, are a runaway, are pregnant or parenting, are offenders, school dropouts, or foster youth.
The program serves both in- and out-of-school youth, including youth with disabilities and other youth who may require specialized assistance to complete an educational program or to secure and hold employment.
Service providers prepare youth for employment and post-secondary education by stressing linkages between academic and occupational learning.
They also assist youth by providing tutoring, alternative schools, summer employment, occupational training, work experience, supportive services, leadership development, mentoring, counseling, and follow-up services.
For Program Year (PY) 2005, DOL collected data for two performance indicators, both of which are part of the common measures for youth and lifelong learning aspects of Federal employment and training programs.
The first measures whether youth entered employment, advanced training or education after leaving the program.
This indicates whether DOL is transitioning youth into the workforce or post-secondary education, which is a key to successful careers.
The second indicator, which measures whether participants earned educational credentials, is a proxy for preparedness of participants to compete in the 21st century knowledge-based economy.
Costs associated with this program increased by approximately seven percent from PY 2004 and PY 2005.
States have two years to expend obligated funds, and some fluctuation from year to year is to be expected.
In addition, Congress and the Administration have encouraged States and other grantees to spend funds more quickly.
The goal of collecting baseline data for the placement in employment or education and attainment of a degree or certificate indicators was achieved.
During PY 2005, DOL continued to implement strategies that emphasize that out-of-school and at-risk youth are an important part of the new workforce “supply pipeline” needed by businesses to fill job vacancies in the knowledge economy.
WIA-funded youth programs connect these youth with quality secondary and post-secondary educational opportunities and high-growth and other employment opportunities.
DOL works with the Departments of Health and Human Services, Education, Justice, Housing and Urban Development, plus the Social Security Administration and the Corporation for National and Community Service to assist States in coordinating resources and program delivery strategies to secure positive outcomes for the neediest youth.
In addition, DOL is working specifically with the Department of Education to identify and replicate effective approaches to increasing graduation rates for disconnected and out-of-school youth.
For PY 2006, DOL has set targets of 60 percent for placement in employment or education and 40 percent for degree or certificate attainment.
In addition, DOL will collect baseline data during PY 2006 for literacy/numeracy gains, another common performance measure for youth and lifelong learning programs.
However, as the participant population stabilizes and programs become more effective in serving out-ofschool youth, results should subsequently improve.
Brittany was married at 17.
Focused on getting a job in the medical field, she dropped out of high school in 2003 and soon began Certified Nurse’s Assistant classes.
However, Brittany was also pregnant and soon found herself unable to complete her coursework.
It looked like Brittany was going to have to scrap her plans of working in a health career altogether.
In 2005, after giving birth to her son, Brittany realized the importance of her education and its place in her future success.
She began working with JobWorks in September 2005, obtained her GED in October, and passed the CNA exam in November.
Brittany is now not only a proud mother, but also a CNA employed at a local nursing home and researching classes to become an Obstetrics Technician.
The program received a rating of Ineffective in the 2003 PART review.
The program improvement plan included recommendations to adopt common performance measures for Federal job training programs and conduct an impact evaluation of the WIA Youth program.
For PY 2005, ETA issued revised reporting instructions to States that required reporting outcomes using the common measures, and the baseline results above represent DOL’s progress in completing this recommendation.
An impact evaluation will be commissioned upon WIA reauthorization, as knowledge of the program’s new direction will be critical to the design of any meaningful study.
In response to allegations regarding expenditure of funds granted to Arkansas, the OIG recommended that ETA strengthen its guidance to States on proper use of WIA funds (see Insufficient Federal Guidance Could Result in Misuse of Incumbent Worker Training Program Funds – Study 1 in Appendix 2).
At issue was Arkansas’ award of WIA incumbent worker funds to attract business.
ETA subsequently determined that all of the questioned costs were indeed allowable under WIA law and regulations.
However, ETA agreed that additional policy guidance is needed to address incumbent worker training generally and specific economic development and employer assistance activities prohibited by WIA.
In March 2006, ETA issued Training and Employment Guidance Letter No. 18-05, which clarifies appropriate use of WIA funds granted for incumbent worker training.
In December 2005, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) examined those data quality issues that have affected States’ efforts to collect and report WIA performance data in Workforce Investment Act: Labor and States Have Taken Actions to Improve Data Quality, but Additional Steps Are Needed (Study 2 in Appendix 2).
GAO found that DOL does not effectively hold States accountable for complying with its validation requirements; guidance on implementing common performance measures issued July 1, 2005 does not address all the issues; and the Department lacks a standard monitoring guide to address data quality.
DOL has already conducted its own review of WIA participant files, has been working with States on data validation requirements, and has developed a standard monitoring tool for WIA performance data.
DOL also plans to modify the current data validation software to allow Federal staff the opportunity to pull a sample of the validation records at the State level for review, and is in the process of designing the development and layout of the monitoring guide.
Data quality for this performance goal was rated Very Good.
Strengths of the data included its relevance, reliability, and routine verification.
While verification remains an area for improvement, extensive effort has been directed toward improving data quality through the use of ETA’s data validation system and monitoring at both the national and regional levels.
Per the PART improvement plan, the Youth program has now implemented two of the common performance measures.
Data are reported quarterly, and there are no gaps.
As mentioned in the preceding paragraph, further improvements are expected to result from planned enhancements to the current validation software and the monitoring guide.
DOL is working to ensure data quality in response to the GAO study detailed above.
Job Corps is an intensive educational and vocational training program (primarily residential) for economically disadvantaged youth ages 16 through 24 who often face multiple barriers to gainful employment.
This program provides career counseling, technical skills and academic training, social education, and other support services, such as housing, transportation and family support resources to more than 60,000 individuals at 122 centers nationwide.
Job Corps centers, ranging in size from 200 to 2000 students, are located in both urban and rural communities, and are operated by large and small companies under performance-based contracts.
Job Corps centers provide individually tailored services to help students achieve the skills and credentials required to be successful, productive citizens and to obtain work opportunities that lead to long-term employment.
As with other employment and training programs, Job Corps’ performance can be influenced by external factors such as local labor market conditions and national economic trends.
In recent years, an increasingly knowledge-based labor market has challenged Job Corps to redirect both academic and technical career training approaches.
In Program Year (PY) 2005, Job Corps was presented with, and responded to, significant challenges as a result of Hurricane Katrina.
Physical damage to Job Corps centers necessitated relocating students, moving staff and closing both the New Orleans and Gulfport centers until repairs to the infrastructure and full operations can be restored.
Performance of the Job Corps program is assessed using the Federal job training common measures for youth and lifelong learning programs.
These three measures – placement in employment or education, attainment of a degree or certificate, and literacy or numeracy gains – are indicators of student achievement in enhancing their long-term employability.
Between PY 2004 and PY 2005, Job Corps’ cost rose by seven percent.
The increase was due to escalating utility and health care rates and full funding of new centers.
In PY 2005, the second year of measuring learning gains, Job Corps continued to exceed its target, increasing literacy or numeracy scores by one Adult Basic Education (ABE) level for 58 percent of all students who were deficient in basic skills at entry.
However, certificate attainment – students achieving a high school diploma (HSD), GED or vocational certificate while enrolled in Job Corps – fell below the target of 64 percent.
The pool of students included in employment/education outcome reporting (the first indicator in the table above) has grown over the past few years due to the addition of former enrollees who did not complete their programs, but were enrolled in Job Corps for more than 60 days.
This lowered overall success rates because outcomes for most of these people are unknown.
PY 2004 was the first year that former enrollees were included, producing a modest impact on the results.
In PY 2005, however, the full effect was apparent, as placement results dropped five percentage points.
To improve performance in PY 2006, Job Corps will continue to utilize performance-based service contracting for center operators and Career Transition Services (CTS) providers to link revenues to performance on specific measures of student success.
Regional offices conduct assessments and annual contract reviews of outreach and admissions contractors, center operators and CTS providers that include compliance measures for operations and performance measures related to student outcomes.
In addition to improving measured student outcomes, Job Corps continues to focus on customer needs by maintaining safe and healthy environments at all Job Corps centers by cooperatively working with other DOL agencies to conduct safety and health inspections annually.
Busy filling prescriptions, Darshay can’t help but feel successful.
A few years ago, when Darshay was still undecided about her future, she enrolled in the Jacksonville Job Corps Center, where she received training to become a pharmacy technician and even completed two internships in retail pharmacy sales.
After graduating from Job Corps, she spent six weeks at Walgreens and six weeks at a local military base.
She was then hired temporarily at the base and was quickly transferred into a permanent position at another local base, where she works at a pharmacy that fills between 1,500 and 2,000 prescriptions daily.
Although she has a good job, Darshay is continuing her education at a local community college so she can eventually go to pharmacy school.
In the 2004 Program Assessment Rating Tool (PART) process, the Job Corps program was reviewed and rated Moderately Effective.
In response to findings, DOL created a strategic plan to improve services for Hispanic/Latino students and those who are English Language Learners, completed an Asset Management Plan and Capital Asset Plan for the FY 2007 Budget, improved decision-making processes for capital investments in real property, assembled a cost effectiveness workgroup to improve program efficiency, and obtained access to Unemployment Insurance wage record information to more completely report on student employment outcomes.
In PY 2005, the Office of Inspector General (OIG) identified several areas of concern related to Job Corps’ data validation procedures and improper payments to the center operator.
See San Diego Job Corps Center: Student Attendance and Training Data Overstated (Study 4 in Appendix 2).
In response to the OIG findings, Job Corps updated its oversight policy to require regional offices to validate centers’ data using a targeted sampling of records during onsite center assessments and to take steps to recover overpayments if irregularities are identified.
Another recent OIG study, Strengthening Efforts to Assess and Account for Students with Cognitive Disabilities Would Help Job Corps Achieve its Mission, suggested that Job Corps provide additional services to permit early identification of students with unknown or undisclosed disabilities (Study 3 in Appendix 2).
In response, Job Corps developed policies for assessing students with cognitive disabilities and has established a formal audit system for tracking the accuracy of centers’ disabilities data.
Data quality for this performance goal was rated Very Good.
Strengths of the data include timeliness, validity, and accuracy.
The Job Corps program has developed policies and procedures for its Management Information System (MIS) to address data integrity issues identified in recent OIG audits (see previous section).
Steps being taken include revisions to the Program Assessment Guide, utilization of targeted sampling for audit reviews, and procedures for identification and collection of liquidated damages as necessary.
To ensure system-wide data integrity, Job Corps is in the process of updating the guide and has implemented requirements for regional offices to include mandatory reviews of individual student files selected through a stringent targeted-sampling methodology.
These changes will shortly be released to the field.
While verification remains an area for improvement, Job Corps has implemented quality controls – on-site reviews of targeted samples by teams composed of National and Regional Office staff and experienced data analysts.
Job Corps Real Property is listed as a Departmental Major Management Challenge (MMC) by virtue of the fact that this program controls roughly 95 percent of the DOL real property portfolio that is not leased through the General Services Administration (see item IX in the MMC table in the Executive Summary – Ensuring the Effectiveness of the Job Corps Program).
Executive Order 13327, Federal Real Property Asset Management, was issued by President Bush in February 2004 “to promote the efficient and economical use of America's real property assets.
In PY 2005, Job Corps instituted new controls in CATARS (Capital Asset Tracking and Reporting System), the Departmental tracking system.
As a result, annual inventories of Job Corps Real Property are now conducted in accordance with Departmental guidance and the information in CATARS is verified.
Jobs for Veterans State grants support the delivery of employment services needed by veterans and transitioning service members to promote their success in the civilian workforce.
These grants support Disabled Veterans’ Outreach Program (DVOP) specialists and Local Veterans’ Employment Representative (LVER) staff members stationed at the nationwide network of One-Stop Career Centers.
Both DVOP specialists and LVER staff members serve as experts on workforce resources available for veterans.
LVER staff members emphasize the provision of services for recently separated veterans and handle outreach to employers.
DVOP specialists focus their efforts on intensive services for disabled veterans and for other veterans with significant barriers to employment.
The Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program (HVRP) is a competitive grant program emphasizing stable employment as the critical factor in mitigating homelessness among veterans.
Program participants are served by communitybased grantees that provide pre-employment services, establish linkages with service providers funded by other federal agencies, and rely on DVOP specialists to assist in placing participants, once they are job-ready.
One-Stop Career Centers serve younger, recently separated veterans who have limited civilian work experience and older veterans with civilian experience who have become unemployed.
HVRP serves homeless veterans who have minimal attachment to the workforce.
VETS applies the federal job training common measure definitions of entry to employment and retention in employment as the critical indicators of successful outcomes for all veterans and all disabled veterans who receive One-Stop services.
For HVRP, VETS also uses entry to employment and retention in employment as the key outcome indicators and plans to apply the common measure definitions of these indicators starting in 2007.
In setting performance targets, VETS seeks to improve service to veterans at a rate that is ambitious yet attainable.
Cost for this performance goal rose by one percent between PY 2004 and PY 2005.
This is considered a minor variance.
The goal was achieved; all six targets were reached.
The veterans’ employment rate improved by two percentage points over PY 2004 results, while the retention rate was unchanged.
The employment rate and the retention rate for the disabled veterans cohort both improved by one percentage point.
The employment rate for homeless veterans served by HVRP improved by three percentage points and surpassed the target.
Based on preliminary results, the HVRP retention target was reached.
Final data are received too late for inclusion in this report but are not expected to change this result.
During 2006, VETS will continue efforts to emphasize retention for HVRP.
Broad national economic indicators for unemployment and productivity remained generally positive over the past twelve months and helped to maintain positive performance by the veterans’ programs.
Early in 2004, HVRP staff met and interviewed John when he was a resident at the Florida Volunteers of America (FVA) facility.
John was not initially chosen to participate.
Within two months, John vanished.
In March 2005, FVA staff attended the Brevard County Homeless Veterans Stand Down event, where HVRP staff assisted with veterans’ employment issues.
Sitting at a nearby table was John.
His arm was badly bruised and needed medical attention.
He had been sleeping in the woods since leaving their facility a year earlier.
HVRP contacted the Brevard County Homeless Veterans Coordinator, who then arranged for medical help and lodging.
A few weeks later, John returned to the FVA facility.
By May, John had made remarkable improvements, and he was enrolled in the HVRP program.
HVRP staff procured the tools and equipment just in time to allow John to begin his new job – which paid $13 per hour.
HVRP has since confirmed that John is still employed.
John said he knows what it is like to really bottom out, and that he won’t be going there again.
The PART review of the Jobs for Veterans State Grants Program, published in February 2006, rated the program Moderately Effective and noted that it serves a large number of veterans, while focusing on those veterans requiring more intensive services by leveraging other resources within the workforce investment system.
The improvement plan included setting more ambitious indicator targets and conducting an independent evaluation to assess the effects of recent program changes on employment outcomes.
VETS has taken significant action on both items by including ambitious long-term targets in the DOL Strategic Plan and participating in the launch of the evaluation project in August 2006.
In December 2005, GAO published a study on the implementation of the Jobs for Veterans Act, Labor Actions Needed to Improve Accountability and Help States Implement Reforms to Veterans’ Employment Services (see Study 5 in Appendix 2).
GAO also recommended that VETS disseminate information on best practices and improve monitoring of federal contractors’ compliance with obligations related to veterans’ employment.
These actions are expected to be completed during FY 2007.
Employment Rates for Disabled Veterans, an evaluation of services and assistance provided referrals to DVOP specialists from the Office of Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment (VR&E) at the Department of Veterans Affairs (see Study 6 in Appendix 2), identifies areas for follow-up by VETS/VR&E workgroups.
VETS and VR&E have a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) which in part establishes three work groups; performance measures; training; and data collection and sharing.
There are issues in the report that the work groups will address that will ultimately lead to better employment outcomes for this group of disabled veterans.
Recommendations were made by DVOPs and VR&E staff that includes involving DVOP specialists in the development of employment and training plans for VR&E participants; consider having DVOPs become certified as Career Development Facilitators; and develop mutually agreeable outcome measures.
The report was issued at the conclusion of FY 2006 and the work groups have not had an opportunity to review the report and outline a course of action.
Data quality for this performance goal was rated Good.
Strengths of the data include its relevance, timeliness, and completeness.
The four indicators addressing the outcomes of veterans and disabled veterans served by One-Stop Career Centers rely upon the reporting system that produces similar outcome data for DOL Performance Goal 05- 4.1B.
Therefore, in general, the data quality assessment for that goal also applies to these indicators.
The two indicators addressing outcomes for homeless veterans served by HVRP rely upon the Veterans' Employment and Training Operations and Program Activity Report (VOPAR).
VOPAR areas for improvement are reliability and verifiability.
During 2007, VETS intends to develop a second generation VOPAR to accommodate common measures and to add internal consistency checks.
VETS also intends to emphasize greater consistency in grantee reporting and more uniform verification of reports by VETS field staff members responsible for grantee oversight.
Routine quality control measures include trouble-shooting by expert VETS field staff members who oversee HVRP and workshops on reporting at the annual conference attended by all grantees’ representatives and all VETS field staff members who oversee HVRP.
VETS has no major management challenges.
Improve the registered apprenticeship system to meet the training needs of business and workers in the 21st Century.
The National Apprenticeship Act of 1937 established the foundation for developing and expanding the nation’s skilled workforce through apprenticeship programs and establishing standards for safeguarding the welfare of apprentices.
The National Registered Apprenticeship System – a partnership of the Department of Labor, State agencies, businesses, program sponsors, industry leaders, employers, employer associations, and educational institutions – was established with the objective of providing opportunities for jobseekers to find jobs with career paths, earn competitive wages, and obtain nationally-recognized industry credentials.
The system is responsible fo promoting and registering programs and apprentices, certifying standards, safeguarding the welfare of the apprentices, and providing a nationally recognized system for skilled and technical occupational training programs throughout the U.S.
DOL staff promotes the apprenticeship training system to potential sponsors and participants and registers and monitors the partners’ apprenticeship programs.
Industry leaders, employers, or employer associations develop apprenticeship programs based on the skills and knowledge required for workers in particular occupations.
The Department or a Federally-approved State Apprenticeship Council registers programs to certify that they meet standards for quality, fairness, and opportunity, and adequately incorporate the two critical components of a registered apprenticeship program – on-the-job learning with appropriate supervision and related technical instruction.
Educational institutions, such as community colleges, may collaborate with sponsors to provide the occupation-related instruction.
The apprenticeship model has demonstrated success in developing skilled workers for numerous industries and continues to provide employers with resources to develop new occupations and train a skilled workforce to remain globally competitive.
Registered Apprenticeship functions as a self-sustaining system with employers financing most training expenses such as wages, classroom training, supervision, and mentoring for the duration of the program, which can be several years.
FY 2005 was the baseline year for collecting data on the Federal job training program common performance measures of employment retention and wage gain, which reflect individual apprentice outcomes and allow for broad comparison with other ETA training and employment programs.
With limited data available to assess trends in program performance, FY 2006 targets were set at levels deemed realistic and attainable.
As additional data become available and as partners acclimate to these new performance indicators, the Department will analyze trends and set higher targets, as appropriate.
As a system based on voluntary employer participation, apprenticeship program performance is directly impacted by external factors such as wage rates determined by local employer sponsors and by demand for skilled and technical labor in local markets.
Costs associated with this performance goal increased by one percent between FY 2005 and FY 2006, which is considered a minor variance.
Results exceeded targets for both indicators; therefore the Department achieved its performance goal.
Retention was 82 percent, or 4 percentage points above the target of 78 percent.
The hourly wage gain of $1.32 (from $12.16 to $13.48) is almost 5 percent greater than the FY 2005 wage gain of $1.26 (from $11.92 to $13.18).
In addition, the average cost per registered apprentice was $97, or $12 less than the previous year’s result of $109.
While the program’s operating budget increased by just one percent from FY 2005 to FY 2006, the number of registered apprentices increased by more than 20 percent – from 196,000 to over 237,00018.
This considerably reduced the program’s cost per participant.
Apprenticeship’s results continue to demonstrate that the Apprenticeship program is efficient as a Federal training and employment program.
By leveraging large investments from employers and program sponsors, Apprenticeship is a low cost, market-driven approach to training America’s workers.
To improve performance in future years, the Department and our stakeholders are re-engineering Registered Apprenticeship Information System (RAIS), the DOL’s database for registered apprenticeship programs.
The RAIS re-engineering will enable DOL to better analyze program information and strategically target expansion in industries and occupations that demonstrate higher wages and apprentice retention rates.
Additionally, DOL is preparing to conduct a survey of employer sponsors regarding their views on apprenticeship, knowledge of the apprenticeship system, data collection activities, and integration with the workforce development system.
The survey information will help re-orient Federal policy on apprenticeship, and will help State Apprenticeship Councils promote apprenticeship in new industries and with more employer sponsors.
Finally, the Department is promoting the recruitment, training, employment and retention of women in apprenticeship and nontraditional occupations through Women in Apprenticeship and Nontraditional Occupations (WANTO) grants in partnership with the Women’s Bureau.
Grantees, which will be a consortium of apprenticeship sponsors, community-based organizations, and faith-based organizations, will successfully recruit, train, employ and retain women in apprenticeships and nontraditional occupations.
Assessment Rating Tool (PART) and rated Results Not Demonstrated – reflecting lack of data on the common measures at that time.
The improvement plan included completing implementation of the common measures for retention and earnings; evaluating and reporting participants’ employment and earnings after they leave the program to compare apprenticeship program outcomes with those of other training models; and tracking the representation of women in apprenticeship programs through an Equal Employment Opportunity review process.
The program has implemented the new measures and the aforementioned re-engineering of RAIS includes capture of post-training outcomes.
Data for this performance indicator was rated Fair.
Strengths of the data include its validity and accuracy, but room for improvement remains in several areas.
The primary data source is RAIS, an automated system that operates independently from State workforce information systems.
For the 27 states in which State Apprenticeship Councils (SAC) register apprentices, participation in RAIS is voluntary; complete nationwide data are not available and the collection of retention and earnings data continues to be challenging.
Recent implementation of common measures will affect the ability to compare performance trends in the short term.
As indicated in the footnote on the first page of this goal narrative, wage gain data are limited to Federal efforts.
RAIS will be redesigned to include trend analysis capability and offer features to encourage SACs to utilize the new data collection system, as well as greater quality controls to ensure data collected from the States are accurate.
Efforts continue to determine how Unemployment Insurance wage record information may be accessed to verify employment outcomes of registered apprentices.
It is anticipated that the redesigned RAIS will considerably reduce the estimated staff hours needed to report the earnings indicator.
Both GAO’s 2005 study (Registered Apprenticeship Programs: Labor Can Make Better Use Data to Target Oversight) and the PART review discussed the potential of technology to improve services.
These enhancements to RAIS will address a Major Management Challenge (MMC) – Improve Apprenticeship Data, item I in the MMC section of the Executive Summary – by making better use of performance data for program oversight and developing a cost-effective strategy for collecting data from SACs.
For example, two additional states have agreed to participate in RAIS.
Additionally, the Department continues to expand the Apprentice Electronic Registration (AER) project in RAIS to reduce application processing time, improve data quality, increase cost-effectiveness, and improve the program’s ability to track data.
AER’s utilization rate increased to from nine percent of participating States in FY 2005 to 46 percent in FY 2006.
The Department continues efforts that began in FY 2005 to review apprenticeship activities in SAC states.
Monitoring reviews for SACs and the District of Columbia were completed in FY 2006 and final reports identifying areas for technical assistance will be issued in FY 2007.
Advance knowledge and inform disability employment policy that affects systems change throughout the workforce development system.
The Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP) works to reduce and remove the significant barriers to employment faced by individuals with disabilities.
ODEP also ensures coordination among DOL and other Federal agencies on matters related to or affecting employment of people with disabilities.
Increasing workforce participation of people with disabilities requires the removal of barriers found on both the supply (those seeking employment) and demand (employers) sides of the labor market.
Key components of ODEP’s investments include developing national policy related to and affecting employment of people with disabilities; fostering implementation of effective policies and practices within State and local workforce development systems and with employers; conducting research that validates effective strategies for providing disability-employment related services and supports; and providing technical assistance for effective implementation of systems-change strategies to both the demand and supply side of the labor market.
In addition, ODEP seeks to ensure that employers perspectives on the recruitment, retention, and promotion of people with disabilities are fully integrated into disability employment policy analysis and development.
ODEP works with key stakeholders in the Department, other Federal, state, and local governments, non-governmental organizations, and employers, developing policy and effective practices to increase employment opportunities for people with disabilities that will expand access to workforce systems, address the needs of employers, and ensure the availability of employment-related supports.
ODEP also supports the implementation of the employment-related goals of President Bush's New Freedom Initiative.
ODEP’s response to the traditionally low employment rates among people with disabilities is comprehensive and aggressive, and includes securing the active involvement and cooperation among a number of Federal, State, and local agencies as well as private sector organizations.
ODEP strategically invests in initiatives to identify and develop policy options that will improve employment rates of people with disabilities and to validate effective practices for dissemination throughout the workforce development and other service delivery systems and to employers.
ODEP’s investment provides the policy and practices for those systems so that they will achieve better employment outcomes for the individuals with disabilities they serve.
These investments also provide employers with the information they need to benefit from their increased recruitment, retention and promotion of people with disabilities.
The results of these initiatives and their activities – in the form of policy related documents, formal agreements, and effective practice identification – are reflected in the indicators and targets used to measure ODEP’s performance.
Major external factors that influence performance outcomes include several workforce trends.
These trends include projected workforce shortages, turn-over, retirement, and the trend of working beyond the traditional retirement age.
Many of these workers may experience disabling conditions, increasing pressure on the employer to keep workers on the job and to have employees who are temporarily disabled return to work quickly.
ODEP develops policies and practices that enable employers to include people with disabilities as they develop strategies for employee recruitment, development and transition with the goal of retaining long-term, high-quality, high-contributing employees.
Additionally, ODEP develops policies and practices that enhance coordination of the support needed to keep workers on the job and return employees to work quickly following an injury or illness.
This support includes access to healthcare, housing, and reliable transportation.
ODEP achieved its goal.
As planned, during FY 2006, a year in which ODEP underwent a management paradigm shift, it continued collecting data from activities and initiatives.
ODEP has been tracking one indicator – number of effective practices identified – since FY 2004.
ODEP also began developing definitions and valid tracking mechanisms for two new indicators.
At the close of FY 2006, ODEP set baselines for these two indicators.
The policy-related documents baseline is 20 and the formal agreements baseline is 20, also.
These three indicators, which measure achievement of ODEP’s performance goal, more clearly and accurately reflect the agency’s focus on policy development than did previous indicators.
ODEP exceeded its target of identifying 21 effective practices, having identified 26.
In FY 2007, ODEP will complete its management paradigm shift, emphasizing different strategies than in the past.
ODEP will move away from its earlier, heavy reliance on grant making to public and private organizations to a greater emphasis on using its own internal staff to conduct policy analysis and development initiatives.
Activities will continue to focus on ODEP's core mission to develop and influence the implementation of policies and practices that will affect systems change, increasing employment opportunities for, and the recruitment, retention, and promotion of adults and youth with disabilities.
Accordingly, the proposed FY 2007 Performance Goal will remain as presented in FY 2006.
ODEP has reduced cost from $52 million in FY 2005 to $50 million in FY 2006.
Cost for both years also reflects funds awarded in prior fiscal years; the reduction is attributed to a decrease in the budget request and appropriation.
The impact of reduced funding was a significant reduction in pilot project and technical assistance grants.
ODEP was able to use information from those grants in the development of policy.
DOL expects ODEP’s budget to either remain at its current level or to be further reduced.
While in the future ODEP will more heavily rely on its staff of disability and policy subject matter and technical experts as well as other strategies to achieve its goal, it will also continue to draw from information gained from previous pilot project grants.
A career specialist from the MontgomeryWorks One Stop Career Center contacted Dr. Robert Morgenstein, a dentist in the Rockville, MD area, at the suggestion of a patient, to find out more about his practice.
He and his staff welcomed a discussion of their office tasks and alternative work flow designs.
Needs included ushering patients from the waiting area to the appropriate room, pulling and re-filing patient's charts, running errands to the post office, making bank deposits, and additional light clerical tasks.
Ramon DePaula, who was seeking clerical work with some personal interaction, had some, but not all of the capabilities identified by Dr. Morgenstein and his staff.
The career specialist was able to negotiate an opportunity for Ramon to demonstrate his fitness for the practice in conjunction with implementation of a streamlined office operation.
After a volunteer work trial, Ramon was hired as a clerical assistant.
ODEP is being reviewed in this year’s PART process; results will be available with release of the FY 2008 President’s Budget.
ODEP’s independent evaluation is examining the nature and extent to which ODEP’s efforts in pilot projects have increased the capacity of the workforce development system and other systems to serve people with disabilities.
As implementation has progressed, the evaluation is also examining capacity building (e.g., new policies and coordinating vocational rehabilitation, mental health, transportation, and housing funds; appropriately trained staff; formal cooperative agreements with local agencies; and intermediate outcomes (i.e., more people with disabilities being served leads to more people with disabilities getting jobs or moving out of government services such as Social Security).
Findings continue to demonstrate that because of ODEP’s efforts: (1) The capacity of the workforce development system has expanded and the system is strengthened to better serve people with disabilities; (2) People with disabilities are moving from low-skill, minimum wage work to higher-paid jobs in technical or othe new career fields; (3) Attitudes at One-Stop Centers regarding the provision of services to people with disabilities are changing; and (4) Governmental agencies are now working together to share information and leverage resources to better serve people with disabilities.
Data for this goal was rated Good.
Strengths of the data include timeliness, verifiability, and completeness.
ODEP relies on contracted external evaluators to validate the data collection systems that support their performance measures.
As ODEP continues to implement its strategic and performance plan, data quality can be improved to ensure uniform guidelines for collecting and reporting data as well as increasing their validity in measuring program performance.
ODEP continues to refine data systems in an effort to raise the bar on the quality and nature of performance information reported.
BLS is the principal fact-finding agency in the Federal government in the broad field of labor economics.
As an independent national statistical agency within the Department of Labor that collects, processes, analyzes, and disseminates essential statistical data to the American public, the U.S. Congress, other Federal agencies, State and local governments, business, and labor, BLS provides information that supports the formulation of economic and social policy, decisions in the business and labor communities, legislative and other programs affecting labor, and research on labor market issues.
These important policies and decisions affect virtually all Americans.
BLS reports performance for this goal by producing timely and accurate data, as well as by enhancing its outputs.
For example, in order to better meet customer needs for timely and accurate data, BLS improves data relevancy, coverage, and response rates, among other improvements that comprise the BLS indicators.
To continue improving its products and services, BLS analyzes and evaluates new economic and statistical methodologies, new technologies, and new survey design, collection, and dissemination approaches.
Keeping abreast of improvements and using them to deliver data in a more timely and useful manner, while still maintaining cost effectiveness, are essential ingredients to meeting our goals and providing the quality of service our customers expect.
For example, in FY 2006, BLS accelerated the release of Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses data, which are used by employers, policymakers, and safety inspectors to identify and mitigate potential workplace hazards.
BLS also released data that allows users to compare one metropolitan area's wages with over 75 other areas in the United States.
In addition, BLS converted two more of its surveys to the North American Industry Classification System, which more accurately reflects new areas of economic growth and technological changes that have occurred in the economy over the past twenty years than the previous classification system.
The costs for this performance goal increased by seven percent between FY 2005 and FY 2006, primarily due to built-in cost increases, including personnel compensation and benefits and other services, and small differences in the timing of certain expenditures.
BLS reached targets for four of its six performance indicators.
BLS reached 79 percent of the underlying targets for its labor force statistics indicator, missing the target by six percentage points.
Four surveys missed response rate targets.
The hurricanes temporarily depressed response to the Current Employment Statistics program, and legal requirements made it more difficult for the National Longitudinal Survey to contact people in prison or the military.
BLS also had difficulties with the response to its Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey and American Time Use Survey.
In the case of the Time Use Survey, a large proportion of nonrespondents stated that their decision not to participate was because of their previous Current Population Survey participation.
BLS is continuing efforts to mitigate this problem.
In addition, two surveys missed coverage targets.
The Occupational Employment Statistics program released fewer estimates than anticipated to avoid the risk of disclosing confidential respondent information.
The Local Area Unemployment Statistics program target was based on population estimates from the Census Bureau, which were lower than expected.
Finally, the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages did not publish new Business Employment Dynamics series on unit counts in 2006, as originally planned.
BLS reached 77 percent of the underlying targets for its compensation and working conditions indicator, not reaching its target for this indicator.
BLS continues to struggle with response rates, which are dependent on businesses and individuals responding to strictly voluntary questions of an often highly personal or sensitive nature.
The Employee Benefits Survey (EBS) and Employment Cost Index both had difficulty with nonresponse, each missing its target by one percentage point.
EBS also missed its workload measure for number of benefits plans analyzed.
The Locality Pay Survey missed a publication target because five area publications planned for late 2006 will not be published until early 2007.
The Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries missed a measure when the size of revisions to the annual count of fatal work-related injuries was slightly higher than targeted.
Finally, the Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses missed two of its targets.
A decrease in workplace injuries and illnesses that require days away from work led to fewer cases reported by employers.
BLS reached 94 percent of the underlying targets for its prices and living conditions indicator.
The International Price Program missed two of its response rate targets and one of its workload targets.
BLS reached 100 percent of the underlying targets for its productivity and technology indicator.
BLS exceeded its target for decreasing the cost per transaction of its Internet Data Collection Facility – a manageable and secure architecture that survey respondents use to report data.
The cost per transaction was $1.82 in FY 2006 – down from $2.44 in FY 2005.
The BLS Occupational Outlook Handbook (OOH) website is the Bureau’s nationally recognized source of career information.
Using the American Customer Satisfaction Index survey, the OOH website surpassed its target of 75 percent in the third quarter of 2006.
The BLS score was 79 percent; the aggregated scores for the Federal government and the private sector for the same time period were both 74 percent.
For more information, see Study 7, Customer Satisfaction with the BLS OOH Website, in Appendix 2.
In the aftermath of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita, DHS was tasked with developing a plan to rebuild the devastated Gulf Coast region.
Becca O'Brien, Director of Policy & Research at the Office of the Federal Coordinator for Gulf Coast Rebuilding, asked BLS to provide data to aid in assessing the cost-effectiveness of protecting various areas around New Orleans.
Using geocoded data from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages, in which businesses were assigned detailed geographic coordinates, BLS provided Becca with the special tabulations she requested within one day.
That evening, at a meeting at the White House, these measures were used to make decisions that impact the future of the Louisiana Gulf Coast.
Per Becca, “Our decisions would certainly not have been as well-informed without these data.”
BLS also worked closely with mapping experts in California and with the Louisiana Department of Labor to make these tabulations and clear their release.
Using the Program Assessment Rating Tool in FY 2003, BLS was rated Effective, the highest rating category.
BLS resolved the three original PART findings in FY 2005.
In January 2006, new follow-up recommendations replaced the ones that were completed.
The new recommendations included conducting an independent evaluation of agency effectiveness, developing additional efficiency and cost-effectiveness measures, and establishing more ambitious targets.
In response, BLS is examining options for an independent study and plans to begin the evaluation in FY 2007 after it has determined the best course of action.
BLS also will continue to work collaboratively with the Department in establishing new efficiency measures and ensuring that its targets are ambitious.
BLS programs are evaluated both internally and externally to ensure that they provide taxpayer value.
As required by OMB Statistical Policy Directive #3, the seven BLS statistical series that are designated as Principal Federal Economic Indicators are evaluated on a three-year schedule.
In FY 2006, BLS completed performance evaluations for the U.S. Import and Export Price Indexes and the Consumer Price Index (see Study 8 in Appendix 2).
BLS has instituted rigorous, systematic, and comprehensive controls to ensure that all data are of "excellent" quality For example, the BLS executive team meets with program management on a quarterly basis to discuss progress toward meeting performance indicators.
BLS also conducts its own program reviews and contracts for externa reviews as necessary.
These assessments ensure that survey data are accurate, reliable, and released in a timely fashion; systems and procedures are documented adequately; program performance meets or exceeds standards; and pre-release data are kept confidential.
Enforcing legal standards for workers’ wages and working conditions, providing unemployment compensation and other benefits when workers are unable to work, and protecting retirement and health benefit security are central to the DOL mission.
Agencies supporting this strategic goal are the Employment and Training Administration (ETA), the Employment Standards Administration (ESA), the Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA), and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC).
The net cost dedicated to Strategic Goal 2 in FY 2006 was $35.920 billion.
The adjusted net cost dedicated to Strategic Goal 2 for FY 2006 was $2.693 billion; the corresponding net cost in FY 2005 was $3.387 billion.
The Employment Standards Administration’s (ESA) primary challenge is to ensure that protections for workers keep pace with the changes occurring in the American workforce, such as flexible and virtual workplaces, demographic shifts, immigration, increasingly complex labor organizations, the growth of small businesses, and the shift from manufacturing to services.
Under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act, the Family and Medical Leave Act, the Davis-Bacon Act (DBA) and the Service Contract Act, ESA’s Wage and Hour Division (WHD) administers standards for wages and working conditions such as the minimum wage and overtime; child labor protections; field sanitation standards in the agriculture industry; and prevailing wage requirements for government contracts.
The key to ensuring worker protections is to focus on industries and employers with the most persistent and serious violations, to quickly resolve employee complaints, and to ensure accuracy in established wage rates.
ESA’s Office of Labor-Management Standards (OLMS) ensures union transparency, financial integrity, and democracy by administering and enforcing the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA).
OLMS responsibilities under LMRDA include compliance assistance; civil and criminal investigations and enforcement; union compliance audits; and reports/public disclosure administration.
OLMS strategies are aimed at improving timeliness and quality of union reports filed for public disclosure and strengthening LMRDA compliance through union audits and outreach efforts.
WHD found 76 percent of a representative sample of prior violators in compliance, representing an increase of four percentage points over the FY 2005 result.
Baselines were established for compliant investigations and low-wage industry compliance.
Wage determination processing efficiency and timeliness significantly exceeded targets.
OLMS reached its target of reducing the percentage of unions with fraud (to 8 percent) and set a baseline for unions complying with standards for democratic union officer elections (92 percent), but saw union transparency slip by one percentage point from FY 2005 – to 93 percent – missing the target of 96 percent.
FY 2006 program costs of $270 million supported ESA's WHD and OLMS programs.
As indicated by the chart, net costs for these programs have been stable for the last few years.
The drop from FY 2002 to FY 2003 occurred because the Employee Benefits Security Administration’s performance goal was moved to Outcome Goal 2.2.
The Department’s efforts to further improve compliance with wage and hour laws will include outreach and education to increase awareness of employment laws among employers, employees, and other stakeholders.
Other strategies include using quantitative and qualitative performance indicators and targets to increase performance, conducting independent reviews of the program to identify opportunities for improvements, and improving data collection processes, especially those related to wage determinations in the administration of the Davis-Bacon and Service Contract Acts.
Enforcement of the LMRDA to ensure union democracy, financial integrity, and transparency will continue to be complemented by compliance assistance.
Union audits will monitor and promote compliance with the Act; followup action will attempt to correct statutory violations.
The Department will expand its Internet public disclosure service to improve public access to information reported by unions and others under the Act.
DOL increases the economic security of America's working families by protecting the benefits earned and promised to workers.
ETA temporarily replaces the wages of the unemployed through the Unemployment Insurance (UI) program, which is a Federal-State partnership.
ETA provides grants to States to administer their programs and assists the Treasury Department in administering the Unemployment Trust Fund.
ETA ensures that States’ programs are administered efficiently according to Federal standards and requirements.
The trust fund provides States a buffer to enable them to continue to pay benefits during volatile cycles in tax revenues and benefit claims.
ESA protects Federal and certain other workers from the economic effects of work-related injuries and illnesses and death through the Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs’ (OWCP) four disability compensation programs.
OWCP provides wage replacement and cash benefits, medical treatment, vocational rehabilitation, and other benefits to covered workers, their dependents and survivors.
EBSA protects private employee pension plans, health plans and other benefit plans against fraud and abuse by enforcing Title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) through compliance assistance, vigorous enforcement, and education.
Where there has been malfeasance, EBSA restores benefits and assets by bringing civil and criminal cases.
PBGC protects the pension benefits of participants in defined benefit plans that have been terminated, usually due to the sponsoring employer’s bankruptcy, by serving as both insurer and administrator.
As an insurer, PBGC collects insurance premiums from employers that sponsor insured pension plans.
As an administrator, PBGC pays monthly retirement benefits to the participants in terminated plans.
The Unemployment Insurance system reached the overpayments detection target and the new employer status determinations timeliness target, and established a reemployment baseline of 62.4 percent.
However, States’ first payment timeliness declined, in large part due to effects of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita on Gulf State workloads.
The program demonstrated improved efficiency by exceeding its claims processing target.
The goal of improving outcomes for injured workers covered by DOL’s OWCP was achieved; all ten indicator targets were reached.
Return to Work – Outcomes are expressed as reductions in average Lost Production Days (LPD).
In FY 2006, LPD declined again.
Quality Case Management, one of FECA’s principal strategies to improve outcomes for injured workers, reduced compensation costs by approximately $50,000,000 annually since the first measurement of LPD 10 years ago.
Managing Program Expenses – Measured in financial terms, DOL workers’ compensation outcomes reflect the efficiency and quality of benefit payment activities, the impact of case management and benefit services, and the utilization of administrative resources to produce those outcomes.
Review of cases to determine if continued disability status is warranted and to determine the reemployment potential of those receiving compensation resulted in $15.8 million in savings.
OWCP also kept the inflation rate of FECA medical costs below the national rate of health care inflation.
Customer Service – FECA communications efforts increased the use of electronic services, reducing average caller wait times, and meeting call handling quality standards.
Longshore and Harbor Workers’ Program dispute resolution and Black Lung benefit eligibility decision processing efficiency targets were reached, as well.
For the Energy Part B program, initial claims and final decisions were processed within standard time frames.
Finally, the new Energy Part E Program exceeded its target of completing initial decisions on 75 percent of the total available backlog.
DOL achieved its goal to Enhance Pension and Health Benefit Security.
In addition to meeting its criminal case, civil case, customer service and voluntary compliance targets, DOL obtained $1.4 billion in monetary results.
Monetary results are a product of EBSA's investigative and participant assistance activities.
DOL investigated a number of high profile, resource intensive cases with far reaching effects on the participant benefits community.
PBGC’s American Customer Satisfaction Index for practitioner callers was 68, falling short of the targeted 69.
For trusteed plan participants who call the toll-free Customer Contact center, the score was 75, down from FY 2005 and below the target of 80.
FY 2006 program costs of $35.652 billion supported ETA's Unemployment Insurance (UI) programs, ESA programs to reduce the consequences of work-related injuries and EBSA efforts to ensure that individuals receive promised benefits.
PBGC is not included in the Consolidated Statements of Net Cost, hence the cost of its programs is not reflected here.
Costs are driven almost entirely by UI and ESA’s OWCP; the $5 billion decrease from FY 2005 is explained by changes in these two programs’ costs for reasons discussed below.
UI program costs, which account for $33.340 billion (94 percent) of FY 2006 cost for this outcome goal, were $900 million lower than the $34.243 billion cost reported for FY 2005.
Benefit payments were slightly lower – $31.322 in FY 2006 compared to $31.761 billion in FY 2005 – accounting for half of the decrease.
This is consistent with the small decrease in claims, as measured by the comprehensive average weekly insured unemployment (AWIU) − the average number of people filing claims for continuing UI benefits each week.
AWIU decreased from 2.770 million in FY 2005 to an estimated 2.623 million in FY 2006.
The balance of the difference resulted from an adjustment in cost allocation methodology among ETA grant programs.
Net costs for this outcome goal in FY 2005 included a one-time increase in actuarial liability of $3.5 billion due to assumption of workers’ compensation costs associated with Part E of the Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation program, which Congress transferred to DOL from the Department of Energy.
The remaining $500 million reduction in costs resulted from changes to actuarial assumptions related to Part E payouts.
Strategies to pay UI claims accurately and promptly include providing oversight and assistance to States.
DOL will continue to monitor State performance and ensure that States falling below minimum criteria establish corrective actions.
Accuracy and integrity of UI payments will be improved by fostering States’ use of and access to tools such as the National Directory of New Hires; by conducting and sharing analyses of approaches to identify and prevent or recover overpayments; and by sharing information on States’ best practices.
DOL provides States an incentive to prevent and detect overpayments through the use of a State-level detection of overpayments core measure with a performance criterion.
In addition, the Department will support identity theft prevention activities and promote payment accuracy and swift reemployment of UI beneficiaries through reemployment and continued eligibility assessments.
Increase employer partnerships in administration of laws and service to injured workers.
Improve accuracy of benefits payments and liability forecasts and reduce risk to benefit funds.
Assist employers’ compliance with Federal workers’ compensation laws, including providing timely and accurate reports and compliance with insurance requirements.
Improve case management quality for workers covered by the Federal Employees’ Compensation Act.
Better identification of potential Energy program claimants to guide them through the claims process.
Starting in FY 2007, EBSA’s modified enforcement performance indicators will include the ratio of closed civil cases with corrected fiduciary violations to all closed civil cases.
This ratio represents a more challenging measure than the previous one which included lower priority non-fiduciary cases.
With respect to criminal case work, EBSA’s new performance targets will report cases accepted for prosecution rather than the less ambitious cases referred for litigation.
EBSA will also establish a baseline measurement for a customer service index of compliance assistance programs.
The Department will safeguard the pension insurance system for the benefit of participants, plan sponsors, and other stakeholders, provide exceptional service to customers and stakeholders, and exercise effective and efficient stewardship of its resources.
More specifically, PBGC will increase its effectiveness in minimizing loss to the program and increase technical assistance to plan sponsors to encourage their voluntary compliance with pension laws and regulations.
To fulfill its commitment to providing the highest level of service to its customers and stakeholders, PBGC will encourage customers to interact electronically and improve the quality and consistency of customer information.
American workplaces legally employ and compensate workers.
ESA’s Wage and Hour Division (WHD)’s mission is to promote and achieve compliance with labor standards to protect and enhance the welfare of the Nation’s workforce.
WHD enforces laws establishing minimum standards for wages and working conditions.
These include the minimum wage, overtime, and youth employment provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA); the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act; and the Family and Medical Leave Act.
WHD also enforces field sanitation standards in agriculture and the government contracts prevailing wage statutes, and administers the wage determination provisions of the Davis-Bacon and Service Contract Acts (SCA).
The agency’s performance objectives are to maximize benefits for the greatest number of workers through efficient complaint resolution; to promote long-term sustained compliance among employers that the agency investigates; to increase compliance on behalf of low-wage workers in industries with the most persistent and serious violations; and to ensure that wage rates are established in an accurate and timely manner.
To ensure efficiency in WHD complaint investigations and to achieve compliance on behalf of all potentially affected workers, WHD tracks the number of workers helped for every 1000 enforcement hours expended in complaint investigations.
The agency’s low-wage indicator, i.e., percent of low-wage workers employed in compliance, enables WHD to track the effectiveness of its various compliance strategies in low-wage industries over the long term, while the annual recidivism survey measures the impact of prior WHD interventions on employer behavior.
Wage determination indicators track key components of the wage determination survey process.
Improvements in this process contribute to the timeliness of Davis-Bacon Act wage rates.
The statutory protections administered by WHD, and the agency’s success in ensuring that workers are legally employed and compensated, are guaranteed by balancing resources among key strategies – compliance assistance; partnerships and collaborative efforts; and complaint-driven and directed enforcement.
Compliance assistance activities promote voluntary compliance among employers and within industries.
Partnerships leverage resources and broaden the impact of other strategies.
WHD’s directed enforcement in low-wage industries serve to detect, remedy, and deter violations of the law in industries where workers are reluctant to complain.
WHD’s complaint investigations serve individual complainants and provide opportunities for detecting and remedying violations on behalf of other employees.
WHD’s allocation of resources and performance indicators reflect enforcement priorities in three core areas.
The strategic use of complaint investigations, which represent approximately 70 to 75 percent of enforcement resources, will increase labor standards outcomes for the greatest number of workers.
Reinvestigations measure and reinforce WHD’s impact on employer recidivism; and directed investigations are a key component in ensuring greater compliance for workers in low-wage industries, including immigrant and young workers.
WHD’s compliance assistance, including partnership activities, also contributes to the agency’s ability to promote compliance on behalf of all workers.
The hours spent by WHD staff in these key activities are used to track the resources allocated for each indicator.
Another priority seeks to guarantee appropriate worker compensation levels by issuing timely and accurate prevailing wage determinations.
Wage determinations issued and wage surveys conducted provide output measures by which the agency measures progress.
Two key factors influence WHD’s ability to meet and exceed its performance objectives – the increased reliance on foreign-born labor and the growth in the number of illegal or undocumented immigrants.
The tension between the supply and demand for low-wage service sector workers constantly challenges WHD’s ability to target low-wage industries and maintain its effectiveness in resolving complaints.
The costs for this performance goal were unchanged between FY 2005 and FY 2006.
WHD achieved its targets in FY 2006.
This fiscal year, WHD established a baseline to measure its efficiency in resolving complaint investigations.
WHD expects only modest improvements in this indicator over the next several years, in large part because productivity has declined with the attrition of senior investigative staff.
However, some efficiency gains are expected as investigators focus on producing quality investigations that ensure that full compliance reviews are completed in a timely manner.
WHD also expects complaints to increase as its outreach and partnership activities in immigrant communities increase workers’ awareness and comfort in seeking remedies through the agency.
In FY 2006, WHD completed its fourth statistically valid investigation-based compliance survey of prior FLSA violators.
The agency found 76 percent of prior violators in compliance, representing an increase of four percentage points over the FY 2005 result.
This significant increase in compliance – 71 percent as recent as FY 2004 – suggests that the newly implemented strategies of follow-up telephone calls and letters, documentation of employers’ stated commitments for future compliance, commitments for corporate-wide compliance, and the use of civil monetary penalties and other sanctions, are promoting employer compliance.
In FY 2007, WHD will add a measure to track the percentage of prior violators who achieve and maintain “substantial” compliance to improve upon the existing measure, which only tracks those who have achieved “full” compliance.
WHD has traditionally measured low-wage industry compliance by conducting surveys among previously investigated establishments within low-wage industries.
In FY 2006, WHD conducted a nationwide survey of establishments across a broad spectrum of low-wage industries.
This compliance survey will provide the baseline from which changes in industry behavior can be assessed over the long-term, and will inform the agency of the nature and patterns of non-compliant behavior.
WHD will use this information to design and implement strategies for improving compliance during the intervening years between surveys.
WHD will analyze low-wage industries to refine its targeting strategies.
In the years between the FY 2006 baseline and a subsequent national survey, WHD will measure its performance and efficiency by reporting on the number of workers in low-wage industries that WHD helps for every 1000 enforcement hours expended.
WHD also continues to implement upgrades in information technology to drive success in the wage determination program.
A 2003 PART assessment of WHD’s prevailing wage determination program rated it Results Not Demonstrated.
Despite recent process changes in the program, the review found the program lacked ambitious, outcome-oriented performance measures and procedures to measure and achieve efficiencies and cost effectiveness.
In response, WHD developed performance indicators and targets and conducted an external review of the program.
WHD continues to examine changes to the wage survey and outreach to improve data collection processes.
WHD completed two program evaluations in FY 2006.
The first study, Evaluating the Wage and Hour Division Web Site (see Study 10 in Appendix 2), reported that 56 percent of respondents rated the Web site very good or excellent at providing information.
Sixty-four percent said that the information they were looking for was easy to find.
In response, WHD is redesigning and upgrading the information on its Web site.
The second evaluation, Low Wage Industry Operational Models for Compliance, assessed the agency’s performance and efficiency in targeting lowwage industries (see Study 9 in Appendix 2).
The evaluation helped WHD establish measures of incidence and severity of violations across industry sectors, provided a methodology for determining low-wage industries with the highest potential for violations, and analyzed the relationship between violation and complaint rates in order to strengthen targeted enforcement activities.
The next phase will focus on efficiency measures, more effective and strategic use of enforcement tools, and an analysis of compliance within the eating and drinking industry.
In October 2005, the Office of Inspector General (OIG) released the results of its audit, Agreement with Wal-Mart Indicates Need for Stronger Guidance and Procedures Regarding Settlement Agreements, which recommended developing written guidance and coordinating with the DOL Solicitor (see Study 11 in Appendix 2).
The OIG acknowledged in its report that a new settlement agreement policy initiated by WHD in June 2005 resolved both OIG recommendations.
WHD also started implementing recommendations from Government Accountability Office (GAO) reports.
The SCA directory of occupations was updated, enforcement data was integrated into the FY 2007 planning process, and WHD is revising the SCA poster to include agency contact information based on recommendations from the GAO report Service Contract Act: Wage Determination Process Could Benefit from Greater Transparency and Better Use of Violation Data Could Improve Enforcement (Study 13 in Appendix 2).
WHD is also adding contact information to the FLSA poster and has started to evaluate how FLSA misclassification cases are referred to other agencies based on recommendations from the GAO report Employment Arrangements: Improved Outreach Could Help Ensure Proper Worker Classification (Study 12 in Appendix 2).
Data quality for this performance goal was rated Good.
Strengths of the data include relevance, completeness and the quality controls in place to verify the data.
With the exception of the wage determination measures, performance information is extracted from the Wage Hour Investigator Support and Reporting Database, the agency’s record of its investigative case findings and investigator enforcement time.
Investigative case records are reviewed by WHD management staff and are the subject of WHD internal accountability reviews.
Although data are reported quarterly, year-end statistics are not available when the agency begins its planning cycle in April.
As the agency gains experience with new measures and receives better trend information for recent indicators, these concerns will ease and the impact of year-end data on future planning will be minimal.
For wage determination programs, almost all data submission forms come from two sources, paper forms and electronic forms submitted via the Internet.
In both cases, the contents of the data submission forms are electronically entered into the Automated Survey Data System.
The current IT infrastructure does not permit survey results from ASDS to be electronically transferred into the Wage Determination Generation System.
A bridge between these two systems is in the final stages of development and is scheduled to be deployed in the first quarter of FY 2007.
Ensure union financial integrity, democracy, and transparency.
OLMS ensures union transparency, financial integrity, and democracy by administering and enforcing the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA).
The Act requires public disclosure reporting by unions and others; establishes standards for union officer elections; and imposes criminal sanctions for embezzlement of union funds.
To implement the LMRDA protections, OLMS conducts criminal and civil investigations, audits unions, and administers the Act’s reporting and public disclosure program.
Union transparency underpins the union democracy and financial integrity objectives of the LMRDA and is a critical component of the OLMS program.
Therefore, a primary performance objective is to secure complete and accurate union financial reports for public disclosure.
Approximately 25 percent of OLMS resources support the agency’s Internet public disclosure system and a wide range of compliance assistance, liaison, enforcement, and regulatory activities to increase union transparency and LMRDA reporting compliance.
Enforcement of LMRDA union financial integrity protections is another critical OLMS responsibility.
A primary performance objective is to reduce union fraud.
Union audits and embezzlement investigations are key strategies aligned with that effort.
Timely and complete filing of LMRDA public disclosure reports and the resulting increased union transparency are also factors that support union financial integrity.
Another critical responsibility for OLMS is to ensure union democracy.
A primary goal is to ensure that union elections are run fairly and that union members have access to the rights guaranteed them under the LMRDA.
In FY 2006 OLMS conducted a study to determine the rate of union compliance with standards for democratic union officer elections.
OLMS will seek to increase compliance through liaison and compliance assistance as well as through LMRDA enforcement.
The costs for this performance goal decreased by 11 percent between FY 2005 and FY 2006.
OLMS did not achieve this performance goal.
OLMS met its target, 8 percent, for the percentage of unions with fraud.
OLMS also met its target to set a baseline for its new union democracy compliance rate measure, which was found to be 92 percent.
However, not reached was OLMS’ target of 96 percent of unions filing timely and complete financial reports.
Although performance fell short at 93 percent, OLMS has made considerable progress since its FY 2003 baseline of 73 percent for this measure.
Acting on a complaint filed by a member of American Postal Workers Union (APWU) Local 199 in Richmond, Virginia concerning a union election held using mail-in ballots, an OLMS investigation determined that requirements of the LMRDA had been violated.
On May 9, 2006, representatives from the Washington District Office of OLMS supervised a rerun of the contested election to ensure its compliance with the LMRDA.
The violation in the original election involved 80 disputed ballots for which voter eligibility could not be confirmed.
The presence of OLMS at the election rerun sends a message that the agency will not hesitate in taking corrective action to ensure conformity with federal law.
In this photo, APWU member Junious (standing) assists OLMS representative Meng (sitting at left) and APWU Election Committee Chairman Kevin in reviewing returned ballots.
The PART review conducted in 2005 resulted in a rating of Adequate.
It found the program well defined but lacking sufficient tools to effectively enforce the Act’s public disclosure reporting provisions and a performance measure for mission critical union democracy goals.
As a result, OLMS conducted a study in FY 2006 to determine compliance with standards for democratic union officer elections so that goals for improvement can be established and measured.
In FY 2006, OLMS completed this study and established a baseline for a new indicator measuring the rate of compliance with union officer election standards.
The PART also found that no recent independent review of OLMS’ programs had been conducted, noting that such a review “could help to identify and address weaknesses in procedures, compliance and enforcements strategies, or program design, as well as establish a clean performance baseline against which the program could manage.”
OLMS has contracted with an independent research firm to conduct such an external review with the aim of identifying possible areas for improvement in the LMRDA reporting and public disclosure program.
An FY 2005 evaluation of the OLMS Web site found a fairly low customer satisfaction rating, with the lowest scores going to the navigation and search functionality areas.
In response, OLMS has redesigned their Web site, which was launched in January 2006 (see Study 14 in Appendix 2).
Data for this performance goal was rated as Good.
Strengths of the data include its relevance to program performance and accuracy.
OLMS will continue refining data collection protocols to ensure the development of meaningful long-term trends for each of its performance indicators.
In addition, OLMS will continue to examine sampling and data collection protocols, particularly for the recently implemented union democracy performance indicator.
OLMS will continue to promote the use of electronic filing for union financial reports which will enable additional error checking for data accuracy.
Make timely and accurate benefit payments to unemployed workers, facilitate the reemployment of Unemployment Insurance (UI) claimants, and set up unemployment tax accounts promptly for new employers.
By temporarily replacing part of lost wages, the Federal-State Unemployment Insurance (UI) system minimizes individual financial hardship due to unemployment and stabilizes the economy during economic downturns.
For both workers and employers, the program’s success depends upon timely payment of benefits, prevention or prompt detection of erroneous payments, timely establishment of new employers’ tax accounts to ensure the reporting of workers’ wages and payment of taxes to fund benefits, and promoting and facilitating workers’ return to suitable work.
States operate their own programs under their own laws, which must conform to Federal law.
As the Federal partner, DOL provides program leadership, allocates administrative funds, provides technical assistance, exercises performance oversight, and ensures that States meet requirements of Federal UI laws and regulations.
Measuring efficiency and effectiveness of States’ administrative operations is an important aspect of program management.
Economic conditions and the resulting program workloads affect many aspects of UI performance.
For example, when unemployment rises, more claims are filed and UI payment timeliness generally declines; on the other hand, new business creation slows, reducing the number of new employer tax accounts, and the timeliness of tax liability determinations generally goes up.
In addition, external factors such as natural disasters can be extensive enough to affect aggregate UI system performance negatively – e.g., the series of hurricanes that hit the Gulf during 2005.
Performance targets are based on the Administration’s current economic assumptions.
The costs for this performance goal fell by three percent from FY 2005 and FY 2006.
As indicated in the preceding discussion of net costs for Outcome Goal 2.2, this is consistent with the small decline in the average weekly insured unemployment between reporting periods.
This statistic, which represents the average number of people filing claims for continuing UI benefits each week, generally exhibits a positive correlation to benefit payments.
The UI system performed well in FY 2006, aided by improving economic conditions; the total unemployment rate declined from 5.2 percent in FY 2005 to 4.8 percent in FY 2006, and the number of beneficiaries was virtually unchanged at 8.1 million.
States exceeded the Detection of Overpayments target and the new employer status determinations timeliness target.
States began reporting reemployment data in March 2006, establishing a baseline of 62.4 percent.
However, States’ first payment timeliness declined sharply, from 89.3 to 87.7 percent.
States, especially Louisiana, Mississippi, and Texas.
Some of the remaining decline may be attributed to impacts on States that assisted them.
The Department continues to improve UI payment integrity by providing funds for States to implement access to the National Directory of New Hires (NDNH), an additional tool for swiftly detecting and preventing payments to claimants who have returned to work; and conduct Reemployment and Eligibility Assistance (REA) reviews to enforce UI eligibility requirements and speed beneficiaries’ return to suitable work.
Thirtyseven states were funded to implement a NDNH cross match and twenty states have been conducting REAs since 2005.
The UI program demonstrated improved efficiency by processing 8.9 quality-weighted initial claims per $1,000 of inflation-adjusted base grant funds, versus a target of 8.7.
The Department promoted efficiency through competitive grants for automation and remote systems (e.g., telephone and Internet claims-taking).
The Program Assessment Rating Tool review of the UI program in 2003 rated it Moderately Effective.
The improvement plan includes emphasizing use of the NDNH to quickly detect and prevent overpayments to claimants who have returned to work (37 States funded in FY 2005 to use the NDNH); funding States for REAs to enforce continuing eligibility for UI benefits and connect claimants with reemployment services (20 States funded in 2005; funds have been requested to raise the number to 40 in 2007); and simplification of the performance measurement system (announced in 2005 and 2006).
A GAO report issued in May 2006, Unemployment Insurance: Enhancing Program Performance by Focusing on Improper Payments and Reemployment Services (Study 19 in Appendix 2), drew upon results of recent GAO and OIG reports and DOL sources to provide a useful overview of UI overpayments and what steps the Department has taken or planned to address them, as well as how the system promotes the reemployment of UI claimants.
Although the report makes no formal recommendations, the GAO approves the steps taken so far to reduce overpayments, but believes that more needs to be known about the extent claimants receive reemployment services and the outcomes they achieve than what the new reemployment measure will yield.
In March 2006, GAO issued Unemployment Insurance: Factors Associated with Benefit Receipt that examined the extent to which an individual worker’s characteristics are associated with the likelihood of UI benefit receipt and with unemployment duration (Study 18 in Appendix 2).
The report revealed that workers who are younger, who have more years of education, and who have higher earnings are more likely to get benefits, as are workers with a history of UI receipt.
Workers who do get UI benefits tend to be unemployed longer than others with similar characteristics, as do older workers and those with lower earnings before unemployment.
In March 2006, the Government Accountability Office issued Offshoring in Six Human Services Programs: Offshoring Occurs in Most States, Primarily in Customer Service and Software Development (Study 15 in Appendix 2) that examined the occurrence and nature of offshoring in six federally funded human services programs that included UI.
Offshore contracting for software development was found in only 8 of 46 responding UI state programs in 2004.
These contracts amounted to about $1.3 million, out of only $194 million in total outsourcing and $3 billion in total administration.
Recent OIG studies addressed two UI integrity issues: overpayments and misclassified workers.
The State agencies are taking steps to recover the $239,648 still outstanding.
In December 2004, the OIG found that only nine States were using IRS 1099-MISC information to find employees misclassified as self-employed (see State Workforce Agencies Use of IRS Form 1099 Data to Identify Misclassified Workers – Study 17 in Appendix 2).
The Department sent the OIG report to all State UI agencies urging them to do so.
By April 2006, 28 SWAs were using 1099 data, and more were expected to enroll in August.
Data for this performance goal was rated Very Good.
Strengths of the data include timeliness and reliability, which result from the use of consistent data collection and reporting methods.
Quality controls and procedures for verifying program data could be strengthened in order to continue to reduce instances of overpayment and worker misclassification, for example, by assuring that definitions are uniformly applied among the States and that performance data are correctly reported.
ETA continues to address these challenges by enhancing UI data validation efforts; in 2005 ETA provided funding to 25 states to have independent verifications of reported data conducted and expects to have an updated automated validation system in place by spring 2007.
On August 31, 2006, the Department received OMB approval to collect additional data that will enhance the overpayment detection measure.
Full implementation is expected in January 2008.
The OIG expressed concern that the UI overpayment estimates reflected little improvement in the UI overpayment rates over the past several years, and in a 2004 report, the OIG listed reducing improper payments and improving the integrity and solvency of the UI program among the Department’s top management challenges (see item II, Safeguarding Unemployment Insurance, in the Major Management Challenges section of the Executive Summary).
In addition to funding for identity theft detection and prevention and New Hires crossmatches, the Department has promulgated a State-level detection of overpayments Core measure with a performance criterion, giving States incentives to prevent and detect overpayments.
Effectiveness of these tools is limited by State agency expertise.
In April 2006, the Department held an Integrity Conference for State staff involved in overpayment prevention, detection and recovery activities, at which best practices and information about new tools to reduce overpayments were shared.
To reduce overpayments and facilitate reemployment, REA grants were implemented in 21 States in FY 2005 and have been continued in 20 states in FY 2006.
The REA grants have been used to conduct in-person claimant interviews in One-Stop Career Centers to assess UI beneficiaries’ need for reemployment services and their continued eligibility for benefits, and to assure that beneficiaries understand that they must stop claiming benefits upon their return to work.
The program plans expansion to about 40 States during the FY 2007 budget cycle.
A report on the FY 2005 REA activity is due in March 2007.
UI trust fund solvency has improved over the last two years.
Borrowing from the UI trust fund by States has declined, and significant portions of previously borrowed amounts have been repaid.
As of August 2006, only one State had an outstanding loan from the Federal UI trust fund.
As the result of an expanding economy and the counter cyclical financing mechanisms characteristic of UI tax systems, most States’ trust fund accounts had a positive cash flow over the last 12 months, and overall fund solvency is higher than last year.
Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation (EEOIC) for nuclear weapons employees of the Department of Energy or its contractors.
Activities of the Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs (OWCP) include adjudicating claims; mediating disputed claims; processing payments; assisting with injury recovery and return to work; controlling costs; and providing technical assistance and other customer services.
Effective deployment of resources among these activities ensures that OWCP is able to effectively deliver benefits, properly manage its benefit funds, and ensure that employers comply with regulatory requirements and support delivery of services and program administration.
Ten performance indicators measure the outcomes of key OWCP strategies and program priorities.
Quality Case Management success in FECA is measured as reductions in Lost Production Days (LPD) rates.
Financial integrity of the FECA Compensation Fund is the objective of beneficiary roll reviews and medical benefit cost control.
Communications goals seek to improve customer service by increasing the accessibility, quality, and responsiveness of program information and services.
The Black Lung and Longshore programs measure the effective mediation of disputes and improved decision quality.
Ensuring efficient and accurate claims processing is a vital objective of the EEOIC program.
This performance goal has been achieved or substantially achieved every year since FY 2002.
Lost production days for both the Postal Service and for the rest of the Federal Government had been trending upward during the beginning of this decade, but both targets were met last year and this year.
FECA has met its customer service and medical cost containment targets consistently.
The Longshore program has met its ambitious targets to timely resolve disputed issues in contested cases three of the last five years, reducing the number of days to resolution by over 15 percent during that time.
The Black Lung program has met its targets in each of the last five years, and EEOIC has met most of its timely and accurate claims processing targets since the program began in 2001.
Several external factors influence the achievement of OWCP program goals.
Economic and workplace trends change the nature of new injuries and job availability for workers ready to return to duty.
Medical costs continue to rise with the expanded use of new technology, medicines and treatment procedures.
For the Longshore program, the potential for greater security threats to U.S. contractor employees overseas results in a growing number of Defense Base Act and War Hazards Compensation claims, which require additional planning and resource investment.
Customer demands for sophisticated information and assistance grow more rapidly than OWCP’s resources available to address these demands.
FY 2006 cost for this performance goal was less than half the level reported in FY 2005.
The majority of this decrease is explained by an event unique to FY 2005 – an actuarial liability charge of $3.5 billion due to assumption of workers’ compensation costs associated with Part E of the Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation program, which Congress transferred to DOL from the Department of Energy.
The remaining $500 million reduction in costs resulted from changes to actuarial assumptions related to Part E payouts.
Fulfilling DOL’s commitment to injured workers is measured by the ten indicators.
In FY 2006, DOL achieved this goal, meeting or exceeding each of the targets.
The results discussion is organized into three categories: Return to Work, Reducing Program Expenses and Customer Service.
Return-to-work outcomes are expressed as reductions in average LPD.
In FY 2006, the USPS and All Other Government LPD goals were exceeded.
Total paid disability days declined overall, reflecting a better than 18% reduction in continuation-of-pay being reported, few new cases overall, and continuation of FECA’s principal strategy to reduce lost production days: Quality Case Management (QCM).
QCM has reduced compensation costs by $50 million annually since the first measurement of LPD 11 years ago.
DOL also continued its leadership role in the OWCP/OSHA Safety, Health and Return-to-Employment (SHARE) initiative.
Under SHARE, Federal agencies set goals to reduce on-the-job injury rates, expedite notification of injuries to DOL, and reduce lost production day rates.
To capitalize on the program’s momentum, the President has extended SHARE to FY 2009, with more ambitious SHARE performance targets.
The Administration also has proposed legislation to reform and update the FECA program, which would build return-to-work incentives into the Federal Employees’ Compensation Act.
Measured in financial terms, DOL workers’ compensation outcomes reflect the efficiency and quality of benefit payment activities, the impact of case management and benefit services, and the utilization of administrative resources to produce those outcomes.
OWCP also reached its target of keeping the inflation rate of FECA medical costs below the national rate of health care inflation, as measured by the Milliman USA Health Cost Index.
In the past year, the rate of increase in average FECA medical treatment costs rose by only 6.3 percent compared to a projected 8.6 percent for the nation’s average.
DOL attributes this success to several recently implemented administrative procedures that include centralized bill processing, strengthened review of treatment authorization requests, fee schedules, and stronger automated edits and other controls.
Since FY 2000, the growth rate for FECA medical costs has remained below the nationwide rate, resulting in savings of nearly $40 million annually.
OWCP met its FECA communications goal by increasing the use of electronic services, reducing average caller wait times, resolving more inquiries at the time of the call, and meeting call handling quality standards.
OWCP exceeded its target to reduce the time required to resolve disputed issues in Longshore and Harbor Workers’ Program contested cases by 14 days.
The Longshore program attributes this success to its district offices’ commitment to ensuring timely and amicable dispute resolutions in contested cases.
Mediation will continue to play an important role in helping parties reach agreements.
Longshore will continue conducting outreach and working closely with parties to contested cases in order to reach a timely resolution.
OWCP exceeded its target to reduce requests for further action following Black Lung benefit eligibility decisions.
The revised regulations for Black Lung benefit claims have produced faster and fairer final benefit determinations without changing eligibility requirements.
The result has been an increase in the number of stakeholders who accept the district director’s initial decision and who decide not to pursue the claim further.