The Department of Labor (DOL or the Department) fosters and promotes the welfare of the job seekers, wage earners, and retirees of the United States by improving their working conditions, advancing their opportunities for profitable employment, protecting their retirement and health care benefits, helping employers find and retain workers, strengthening free collective bargaining, and tracking changes in employment, prices, and other national economic measurements.
We will promote the economic well-being of workers and their families; help them share in the American dream through rising wages, pensions, health benefits and expanded economic opportunities; and foster safe and healthful workplaces that are free from discrimination.
The seal of the Department of Labor was approved by President Woodrow Wilson on June 21, 1913.
The seal is a gold shield divided horizontally by a red band.
The gold color denotes integrity; the red color is for courage and endurance.
On the gold shield above the red band is an anvil and below the band is a plough, both in their natural colors.
These represent industry.
On the red band are a pulley, a lever, and an inclined plane.
They are in silver and represent the three fundamental principles of mechanics and represent humanity’s efforts to understand and harness the forces of nature for productive ends.
The crest is an eagle with outspread wings.
DOL accomplishes its mission through component agencies and offices that administer the various statutes and programs on behalf of the Department.
These programs are carried out through a network of regional offices and smaller field, district, and area offices, as well as through grantees and contractors.
The largest program agencies, each headed by an Assistant Secretary, Commissioner, or Director, are the Employment and Training Administration (ETA), Employment Standards Administration (ESA), Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA), Veterans’ Employment and Training Service (VETS), Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA), Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC)1, and Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).
The organization chart and the major activity description that follows include the most significant offices of the Department.
ETA provides high quality job training and education, employment, labor market information, and income maintenance services primarily through State and local workforce investment systems.
For example, the Trade Adjustment Assistance Program provides re-employment services such as occupational training, job search and relocation assistance, and income support to workers who have lost their jobs due to increased imports or shifts of production to foreign countries.
VETS helps veterans, reservists, and National Guard members in securing and maintaining employment and the rights and benefits associated with employment.
The Women’s Bureau (WB) promotes profitable employment opportunities for women, empowering them by enhancing their skills and improving their working conditions, and providing employers with more alternatives to meet their labor needs.
The Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP) seeks to increase employment opportunities for people with disabilities by expanding access to training, education, employment supports, assistive technology, integrated employment, entrepreneurial development, and small-business opportunities.
ETA’s Unemployment Insurance (UI) programs provide unemployment benefits to workers who are unemployed because of a lack of suitable work and meet other eligibility requirements that are established mostly by the States.
ESA’s Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs (OWCP) provides wage replacement benefits, medical treatment, vocational rehabilitation, and other benefits to Federal and certain other workers who are injured at work or acquire an occupational disease, and/or to other members of their families.
OSHA seeks to assure for every working man and woman in the Nation safe and healthful working conditions.
OSHA enforces compliance with the regulations and safety and health standards contained in the Occupational Safety and Health Act.
Employers subject to the Act have a general duty to provide work and a workplace free from recognized, serious hazards.
MSHA protects the safety and health of miners by assuring compliance with Federal safety and health standards through inspections and investigations and working cooperatively with the mining industry, labor, and States to improve training programs aimed at preventing accidents and occupationally-caused diseases.
ESA protects the welfare and rights of, and generates equal employment opportunity for, American workers by promoting compliance with laws such as the Fair Labor Standards Act, which contains rules concerning the safe employment of young workers.
The Department is responsible for administering and enforcing provisions of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA).
EBSA enforces ERISA through civil and criminal actions, provides consumer information on benefit plans and compliance assistance to employers and plan service providers and develops regulations encouraging the growth of employment-based benefits.
PBGC, for which the Secretary serves as Chair of the Board of Directors, insures retirement-plan participants’ pension benefits and supports a healthy retirement plan system by encouraging the continuation and maintenance of private pension plans, protecting pension benefits in ongoing plans, providing timely payments of benefits in the case of terminated pension plans, and making the maximum use of resources and maintaining premiums and operating costs at the lowest levels consistent with statutory responsibilities.
BLS provides key economic statistics to the public, Congress, Federal agencies, State and local governments, businesses, and others, including data on employment, wages, inflation, productivity, and many other topics.
The Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB) develops and implements Departmental policy, oversees programs relating to international labor activities, and coordinates Departmental international activities involving other U.S. Government agencies, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations.
This report, prepared in accordance with the Reports Consolidation Act of 2000, presents the results of the Department’s program and financial performance for FY 2007.
The Secretary’s Message is a letter from the chief executive that highlights the Department’s achievements for the year and communicates direction and priorities.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) introduces the Department’s mission, vision, organization, and activities; summarizes program and financial performance, including Program Assessment Rating Tool reviews and compliance with relevant financial management legislation; addresses major management challenges such as those identified annually by the Office of Inspector General (OIG); and reports on DOL’s implementation of the President’s Management Agenda.
The Performance Section presents program results and costs, and includes assessments of progress in achieving the Department’s performance goals as presented in the Strategic Plan and Performance Budget.
The Financial Section demonstrates our commitment to effective stewardship over the funds DOL receives to carry out the mission of the Department.
It includes a letter from the Chief Financial Officer, the Independent Auditors’ Report (an independent opinion on the Consolidated Financial Statements) and the Annual Financial Statements.
Three Appendices supplement the performance and financial sections by providing additional information on improper payments reduction, a list of acronyms and a list of Web sites featuring labor programs and issues.
Labor Day, celebrated on the first Monday in September, is a yearly national tribute to the contributions workers have made to the strength, prosperity, and well-being of America.
The Central Labor Union of New York City first proposed to celebrate Labor Day “as a general holiday for the laboring classes.”
They appointed a committee that planned a street parade to demonstrate the esprit de corps of the trade unions and a festival for workers and their families, and held the first celebration on Tuesday, September 5, 1882, in New York City.
Members took unpaid leave and invited other unions to join them in the march.
At first, only a handful of marchers assembled and onlookers jeered.
Then, shortly before the march started, 200 men and a band from the Jewelers’ Union arrived.
By the time they reached the reviewing stands in Union Square, there were around 10,000 marchers.
Afterwards, the marchers and their families went to Wendel’s Elm Park for a picnic, speeches, dancing and fireworks.
In 1884, the Central Labor Union went back to their original idea of celebrating Labor Day on the first Monday of September.
They urged similar organizations in other cities to follow suit, and by 1885, Labor Day was celebrated in many industrial centers across the country.
The first governmental recognition of the holiday came through city ordinances passed in 1885 and 1886.
Legislation was first introduced in New York, but first passed in Oregon on February 21, 1887.
The same year, four more states – Colorado, Massachusetts, New Jersey, and New York – passed Labor Day legislation.
Connecticut, Nebraska, and Pennsylvania did so by the end of the decade.
Over the next seven years, 23 other states joined.
Finally, a bill making it a national holiday was passed unanimously by both houses of Congress and signed by President Grover Cleveland on June 28, 1894.
Fiscal Year (FY) 2007 marks the ninth year that the Department of Labor has reported program results under the Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA).
These performance goals and their indicators provide the basis for assessments of DOL’s effectiveness.
The Department’s goal structure has three levels that are described below.
The table that follows indicates FY 2007 program performance goal achievement by strategic goal.
DOL has four goals that express outcomes associated with the Department’s mission and serve to focus Departmental efforts on links between activities and higher purposes: A Prepared Workforce, A Competitive Workforce, Safe and Secure Workplaces, and Strengthened Economic Protections.
Each of DOL’s strategic goals is supported by several program-level goals that provide clarity of purpose.
Quantitative measures determine achievement of performance goals.
For this reporting period, 87 indicators serve this purpose.
DOL requires that all indicator targets are reached to qualify as Achieved.
Substantially Achieved, which recognizes results that were very close to the goal, requires that for 80 percent of indicators, targets are reached or results improved over the prior year.
The total of 64 percent achieved or substantially achieved compares with 50 percent last year and 60 percent in FY 2005.
Starting in FY 2007, DOL simplified its performance reporting by replacing the indicator result category “substantially reached” with “improved.”
Of the five substantially achieved goals, just two would have qualified under the old rule, and the overall percent achieved and substantially achieved would have been 52 percent.
In other words, two percentage points of the improvement are due to performance and the other twelve points are accounted for by methodology.
Charts below present, by strategic goal, FY 2007 achievement as measured by performance indicators and performance goals.
The performance goal number,5 goal statement, and responsible agency appear on the left axis, the total percentage of indicator targets reached or improved is indicated in the horizontal bars, and the goal result is on the right axis.
Corresponding strategic goal and DOL-wide averages for indicators and performance goals (percentage of goals achieved or substantially achieved) are presented at the bottom of each chart in the bars and on the right axis, respectively, to facilitate comparisons.
If the goal is achieved, the bar will run all the way across because by definition, 100 percent of indicator targets were reached.
If the goal is substantially achieved, the indicator total can range from 80 percent to 100 percent as determined by the category definition (see “Performance Indicators” description on the preceding page).
As indicated in the chart above, DOL had five performance goals under Strategic Goal 1 in FY 2007, of which three were achieved or substantially achieved (60 percent) – below the Department wide average of 64 percent.
BLS achieved its goal, reaching all six targets.
Job Corps reached its literacy/numeracy target but not its targets for placement in employment or education and attainment of a degree, General Educational Development (GED) credential or certificate.
The WIA Youth program, which uses the same measures, substantially achieved its goal; student academic attainment reached the target, while placement improved over PY 2005 results but fell slightly below the target.
The Office of Apprenticeship achieved its goal by reaching its employment retention and average hourly wage gains targets.
VETS’ goal was not achieved; three of six targets were reached.
DOL achieved or substantially achieved five of ten performance goals (50 percent) in Strategic Goal 2, which is below the Department’s average of 64 percent.
The WIA Adult program goal was not achieved, but two of the three Federal job training program common measure6 targets were reached.
The WIA Dislocated Worker goal was not achieved, either, missing the entered employment and retention targets but reaching the average earnings target.
The performance goal for One-Stop employment and workforce information services was not achieved; in this case, the average earnings target was reached but targets for entered employment and employment retention were not.
Results for Performance Goal 06-2D (Community Based Job Training Grants) are not reported because data are considered inadequate for the purpose of determining goal achievement.
The performance goal for increasing accessibility of workforce information through National Electronic Tools was achieved, reaching all three targets.
The Senior Community Service Employment Program did not achieve its goal, reaching just one of two targets.
The Trade Adjustment Assistance program reached all three of its targets, achieving the goal.
The Foreign Labor Certification program goal was not achieved; one of four targets was reached.
ODEP achieved its goal, reaching all three targets.
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy achieved its goal by reaching all three of its targets.
ILAB’s goal to reduce exploitive child labor worldwide was achieved by reaching both targets.
For Strategic Goal 3, DOL achieved or substantially achieved four of five performance goals (80 percent), exceeding the FY 2007 average of 64 percent.
OSHA achieved its goal by reaching targets for reducing the workplace injury and illness rate and the fatality rate.
MSHA substantially achieved its goal to improve mine safety and health by reaching targets for four performance indicators and improving results for another (of six total).
ESA’s Wage and Hour Division did not achieve its goal because it reached just one of four targets – for improving efficiency of the wage determination process.
ESA’s Office of Federal Contractor Compliance Programs achieved its goal, reaching its targets for reducing discrimination and increasing compliance among Federal contractors.
VETS’ goal for protecting employment and reemployment rights of service members was achieved via improvement in the program’s comprehensive Progress Index.
DOL achieved or substantially achieved four of the five performance goals in Strategic Goal 4 (80 percent) – above the 64 percent Department wide average.
The Unemployment Insurance program did not achieve its goal; however, it reached two of its four indicator targets and improved results for a third.
ESA’s OWCP substantially achieved its goal by reaching eight of nine targets for Federal Employees' Compensation Act, Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation, Black Lung Benefits and Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation programs.
ESA’s OLMS substantially achieved its performance goal by reaching one target and improving results for the other two indicators.
EBSA achieved its goal, reaching all three targets.
PBGC substantially achieved its goal by reaching five of six targets and improving results for the sixth indicator.
A tally of goals achieved and targets reached, while providing an indication of whether DOL is on schedule with its plan, does not convey any actual performance information.
To understand what was achieved in terms of benefits to the public, it is necessary to look at whether observed results indicate positive program impacts.
Separate performance goal narratives in the Performance Section discuss significant trends and their implications.
The next table lists Program Year 2007 goals (July 1, 2007 – June 30, 2008) for which results will be reported in the FY 2008 Performance and Accountability Report.
All track spending and performance on a cycle that lags the Federal fiscal year by nine months due to WIA forward-funding provisions.
The Program Assessment Rating Tool (PART) was developed to assess and improve programs’ positive impact on outcomes that matter to the public.
A review using the PART helps identify a program’s strengths and weaknesses to inform funding and management decisions aimed at making the program more effective.
Federal programs are scored on their purpose and design, strategic and performance planning, management, and results and accountability.
Total scores determine ratings: Effective, Moderately Effective, Adequate, Ineffective, or Results Not Demonstrated.
The final category can apply to a program with any score if performance goals and measures are not sufficiently outcome (results) oriented and/or the program does not have adequate data.
Summaries of each program’s assessment and improvement plan are published on ExpectMore.gov, a site dedicated to making meaningful information about Federal program performance more accessible to the public.
To date, 35 DOL programs have been assessed using the PART.
One is rated Effective, ten Moderately Effective, fifteen Adequate, four Ineffective, and five Results Not Demonstrated.
The table below lists the programs as they are identified in ExpectMore.gov.
For cross-referencing with the performance section of this report, where Departmental performance goals apply, goal numbers are provided.
The list is sorted first by the calendar year in which the review was conducted, then by total score.
PART assessments are useful because they lead to improvement plans intended to enhance accountability and performance.
Total Net Cost7 of DOL activities for FY 2007 was $47.872 billion.
An allocation based on the Department’s goal structure indicates that the fourth strategic goal, Strengthened Economic Protections, is dominant – accounting for $38.495 billion, or 80 percent of the total.
This figure consists in large part ($35.101 billion, or 91 percent) of mandatory benefit payments to unemployed workers or workers disabled as a result of workrelated injuries or illnesses.
The first goal, A Prepared Workforce, required $3.103 billion (6 percent) for employment-related services.
The second goal, A Competitive Workforce, accounted for $5.027 billion, 11 percent of the total, which went toward job training programs and other services focused on maintaining America’s position in a global market for labor.
Approximately $1.237 billion (3 percent) went toward the third goal, Safe and Secure Workplaces, to fund direct services (such as salaries of Federal employees) aimed at improving safety and health in the workplace.
The table that spans the next several pages, DOL Program Net Costs, provides a comprehensive view of the cost information presented in the Performance Section, including footnotes that explain terms and methodology.
It is important to note that while all net cost information in this report is derived from the same financial accounting system, DOLAR$, there are significant differences between statements in the Performance Section and in the Financial Section due to the Department’s numerous forward-funded programs (those operating on a Program Year).
Where applicable, the program net cost statement includes a row labeled “Dollars not associated with indicators” to indicate costs that cannot be associated with the current set of performance indicators.
Remaining difficulties may be resolved over time and lead to more complete allocations in future statements.
However, it could also require a change in performance indicators that reduces the overall value of performance information.
Frequently, costs for several indicators are intentionally combined by merging cells because program activities are not separable into categories associated with one or another of them (e.g., job training program common measures – entered employment, employment retention and average earnings).
As indicated in the preceding paragraph, several programs make mandatory benefit payments that account for the majority of their costs.
Because performance indicators and the Department’s managerial cost accounting system that generates this information are designed to inform analysis and decision-making related to discretionary budgets and program management, such payments are shown separately and not included in allocation cost models.
DOL’s FY 2005 Performance and Accountability Report was the first to feature a statement of full costs at the performance goal level.
Last year, allocation of costs reached the performance indicator level for some goals.
This year, most DOL programs were able to associate costs with their performance indicators.
This information is provided along with results in the tables at the beginning of each performance goal narrative in the Performance Section.
Many of these narrative sections also include charts that display three years of net cost data at the performance goal level.
However, the cost data reported in the preceding table -- and in the Financial Section of this report -- do not include the costs (and benefits) to non-DOL entities of compliance with these regulations.
To further improve transparency and accountability of our PAR, we are introducing data on the cost of our regulations this year, and plan to make additional information available in subsequent reports.
Reporting costs at the performance indicator level took several years, and we expect this ambitious effort to take some time, as well.
In the Performance Section of the PAR, we quantify our results (or benefits) via outcome or output indicators that are seldom monetized, or valued in dollars.
However, the DOL regulatory agencies do provide reports to OMB’s Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA), which produces the annual Report to Congress on the Costs and Benefits of Federal Regulations.
Accounting in these reports relies on rigorous, defensible estimates of the monetary value of both the cost and benefit sides of the ledger.
February 2006 – on Occupational Exposure to Hexavalent Chromium was the only DOL rule among the seven added to OIRA’s 2007 Report to Congress.
Hexavalent chromium compounds include chromate pigments found in some dyes, paints, inks, and plastics, and can also be used in the production of stainless steel and as anticorrosive agents in paint, primers, and other surface coatings.
Workers who breathe hexavalent chromium compounds at their jobs for many years may be at increased risk of developing lung cancer – and breathing high levels of hexavalent chromium can irritate or damage the nose, throat, and lungs.
Annual costs of this regulation were estimated to range from $244 million to $253 million, and annual benefits were estimated at $36 million to $896 million (both cost and benefit data are expressed in 2001 dollars).
OSHA’s estimated compliance costs are based on the need to install engineering controls and to purchase and use supplemental respirators.
Benefits are based on OSHA’s estimate that the rule would prevent 40-145 fatal cancers annually and 5-20 non-fatal lung cancers per year.
OSHA also quantified, but did not monetize, an estimated benefit of avoiding from 332-1,140 nasal perforations per year.
The only major final rule issued by a DOL agency in FY 2007 is MSHA’s Mine Evacuation Rule.
A summary of the costs and benefits of this rule appears in the narrative for Performance Goal 07-3B.
Improving financial management continues to be high priority at DOL and an essential element of demonstrating accountability and enhancing services provided to the public.
With the added impetus of tightening budgetary resources, improvements initiated under the President’s Management Agenda continue to mature from externally driven “initiatives” to internally embraced “ways of doing our business better.”
Pivotal to driving better performance results through enhanced financial management practices has been DOL’s ongoing efforts to better inform day-to-day decision making with reliable cost information.
In a July 2007 study of managerial cost accounting (MCA) practices in ten agencies, GAO found that only three agencies, including DOL, had implemented an MCA system entity-wide (GAO-07-679).
The GAO Report commended DOL and the other agencies for having a strong leadership that supports MCA implementation.
DOL’s ongoing efforts to improve its MCA tool, Cost Analysis Manager (CAM), are creating an instrument of change that managers increasingly value and use in their decision making.
CAM allows agencies to identify, accumulate, and assign costs to outputs and bring relevant cost information to the desktops of managers throughout the department.
An indispensable tool for improving program performance, CAM improves accountability and transparency for how well tax dollars are spent.
One of DOL’s remaining challenges is the validation of labor distribution and performance data, where labor cost is often the most predominant factor when determining the cost of an activity.
In FY 2007, DOL used CAM for costing quarterly performance indicator results using continual refinements for more accurate reporting.
Throughout the year, DOL expanded the use of CAM by developing cost models for several programs, including one model that calculates the marginal rate of return on investment.
Broader use of CAM is also being seen in the support of other budget activities.
In DOL’s FY 2007 PAR, CAM provides net costs for 89 percent of the performance indicators.
The Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996 (DCIA) designated the Department of the Treasury as the central agency for collection of Federal debts over 180 days delinquent.
The Department applies crossservices to all delinquent debts in accordance with this statute.
Debt management accounts for a relatively small part of our financial management activity.
The majority of debts managed by the Department relate to the assessment of fines and penalties in our enforcement programs.
As of the end of 3rd quarter FY 2007, DOL referred $65.2 million, which represents 57 percent of all delinquent debt required to be referred to Treasury for collection.
The Department continues to monitor and aggressively pursue its debt greater than 180 days old.
The Department continues to make improvements in its efforts to meet guidance and regulations outlined in the Prompt Payment Act (PPA).
The PPA requires Executive agencies to pay commercial obligations within discrete time periods and to pay interest penalties when those time constraints are not met.
During FY 2007, approximately $1.2 billion in gross payments were made.
Included in this amount was just over $355,000 in interest penalty fees.
Also during FY 2007, there were over 111,000 payments made to vendors and travelers.
Of this amount, 3,352 invoices were paid late resulting in only 3 percent of the total payments incurring interest penalties.
This is the same percentage rate that was reported by the Department for FY 2006.
The Department continues to work aggressively with its agencies to increase the number of vendors receiving payments through electronic fund transfer (EFT).
The total number of vendors receiving EFT payments in FY 2007 increased by 4 percent to 99 percent as the fiscal year ends.
Although our Employment Standards Administration is continuing to promote EFT payments for their benefit and medical programs, their percentage rates continues to remain below Treasury’s goal of 98 percent.
The principal financial statements summarize the Department's financial position, net cost of operations, and changes in net position, provide information on budgetary resources and financing, and present the sources and disposition of custodial revenues for FY 2007 and FY 2006.
Highlights of the financial information presented in the principal financial statements are shown below.
The Department's Balance Sheet presents its financial position through the identification of agency assets, liabilities, and net position.
The Department's total assets increased from $83.6 billion in FY 2006 to $92.8 billion in FY 2007.
The increase in total assets primarily was accounted for in the Department's investments.
The Department invests in non-marketable, special issue Treasury securities balances held in the Unemployment Trust Fund.
The Department did not experience major changes in liabilities during FY 2007.
Liabilities totaled $19.8 billion at the end of FY 2006 and $21.3 billion in FY 2007.
Beginning in FY 2006, agencies were required to report earmarked non-exchange revenue and other financing sources, including appropriations.
The Department was also required to report the portions of cumulative results of operations and unexpended appropriations on the face of the Balance Sheet.
The Department's total net cost of operations in FY 2007 was $48.3 billion, an increase of $3.4 billion from the prior year.
Income Maintenance programs continue to comprise the major portion of costs.
These programs include costs such as unemployment benefits paid to individuals who are laid off or out of work and seeking employment, as well as payments to individuals who qualify for disability benefits due to injury or illness suffered on the job.
Income maintenance increased by $3 billion from FY 2006 to FY 2007.
There are two reasons for the increase.
The Unemployment Trust Fund weekly reimbursement rate increased by 4.5% and the Energy Benefit Program actuarial liability increased by $1 billion.
Employment and Training programs comprise the second largest cost.
These programs are designed to help individuals deal with the loss of a job, research new opportunities, find training to acquire different skills, start a new job, or make long-term career plans.
Statement of Budgetary Resources.
This statement reports the budgetary resources available to DOL during FY 2007 and FY 2006 to effectively carry out the activities of the Department as well as the status of these resources at the end of each fiscal year.
The Department had direct obligations of $52 billion in FY 2007, an increase of $1.7 billion from FY 2006.
Limitations on the Principal Financial Statements.
As required by the Government Management Reform Act of 1994 (31 USC 3515 (b)), the principal financial statements report the Department's financial position and results of operations.
While the statements have been prepared from the Department's books and records, in accordance with formats prescribed by OMB, the statements differ from the financial reports used to monitor and control budgetary resources, which are prepared from the same books and records.
The statements should be read with the realization that they are a component of the U.S. Government, a sovereign entity, and that liabilities reported in the financial statements cannot be liquidated without legislation providing resources to do so.
The Department successfully implemented the internal control requirements outlined in the revised OMB Circular A-123, Management's Responsibility for Internal Controls, Appendix A. The Department's A–123 compliance builds upon existing successes in financial management, including the Quarterly Financial Management Certification program, which requires managers at all levels to attest to the adequacy of effective management controls over program resources, financial systems, and financial reporting.
The Department's approach to the A-123 requirement is compliance at managed cost, sustainability by reducing compliance mindset and reliance on outside parties to discover errors and problems, and improvement in effectiveness and efficiency of agency programs.
The Department of Labor's management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective internal control and financial management systems that meet the obiectives of the Federal Managers' Financial Integrity Act (FMFIA).
DOL is able to provide a qualified statement of assurance that the internal controls and financial management systems meet the objectives of FMFlA, with the exception of two significant deficiencies in complying with the Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA) which are required to be reported as material weaknesses.
The details of the exceptions are provided on the following page.
Dol conducted its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over the efficiency and effectiveness of operations and compliance with applicable laws and regulations in accordance with OMB Circular A-123, Management's Responsibility for Internal Control.
Based on the results of this evaluation, DOL identified two significant deficiencies which are reguired to be reported as material weaknesses in its internal control over the effectiveness and efficiency of operations and compliance with applicable laws and regulations as of September 30, 2007.
Other than the exceptions noted on the following page, the internal controls were operating effectively and no other material weaknesses were found in the design or operation of the internal controls.
DOL is also in conformance with Section 4 of FMFIA.
In addition.
DOL conducted its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, which includes safeguarding of assets and compliance with applicable laws and regulations, in accordance with the requirements of Appendix A of OMB Circular A-123.
Based on the results of this evaluation, DOL can provide reasonable assurance that its internal control over financial reporting as of June 30, 2007, was operating effectively and no material weaknesses were found in the design or operation of the internal control over financial reporting.
The Federal Financial Management Improvement Act of 1996 (FFMIA) requires agencies to implement and maintain financial management systems that are substantially in compliance with Federal financial management systems reguirements.
Federal accounting standards, and the United States Government Standard General Ledger at the transaction level.
All Department of Labor financial management systems substantially comply with FFMIA as of September 30, 2007.
FISMA requires the Office of Inspector General (OIG) to perform annual independent evaluations of the DOL information security program and practices based upon audits of a subset of DOL’s identified major information systems.
The objective of the audits is to determine if security controls over the systems are in compliance with FISMA requirements.
Based on the audits performed during FY 2007, the OIG identified two significant deficiencies.
One significant deficiency relates to access control weaknesses covering eight financial and non-financial information systems.
None of the systems had an individual significant deficiency; however, when taken together the OIG stated that an access control significant deficiency exists at the Department level.
Management has determined that the deficiencies relating to financial systems did not rise to the level of a significant deficiency.
The other significant deficiency relates to a lack of an effective information security program in one other non-financial system.
The OIG recommended that DOL: (1) implement an enhanced Department wide monitoring program to address the first deficiency, and (2) establish an information security program to address the second deficiency, with both programs designed to afford management reasonable assurance of compliance with DOL security controls, policies and procedures.
In its response to the audit report, DOL stated that it has already taken certain corrective actions and is in the process of taking additional corrective actions to address the recommendations.
During FY 2007, DOL continued to pursue its financial management systems strategy to improve reporting, accountability, and decision-making, while furthering implementation of key provisions of the President’s Management Agenda, e-Gov requirements, and other regulatory mandates.
The Department seeks to maintain financial management systems, processes, and controls that ensure financial accountability, provide useful information to management, and satisfy Federal laws, regulations, and guidance.
DOL’s existing enterprise architecture for financial management consists of a central, mainframe-based core accounting system, DOLAR$.
DOLAR$ receives and transmits financial data through both manual and automated processes from numerous feeder systems.
These feeder systems include PeoplePower, CAM, eProcurement, systems maintained by program agencies to oversee the Department’s benefits programs, and others.
DOLAR$ has been in use for over 18 years and was implemented prior to the passage of numerous significant laws affecting Federal financial management, including the Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990, the Government Performance and Results Act of 1993 (GPRA), the Government Management Reform Act of 1994 (GMRA), the Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, the Reports Consolidation Act of 2000, and the Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 (FISMA).
It is no longer cost-effective to upgrade DOLAR$, which is a mainframe, COBOL-based system, to continue to meet the new requirements intended to enhance accountability and results through improved financial management that have been and will continue to be promulgated by Congress, OMB, the Department of the Treasury, and the Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board.
In 2004, the Department began an effort to supersede DOLAR$ with a commercial off-the shelf (COTS) financial management system that would ensure sufficient flexibility to comply with new requirements and meet the Department’s future needs.
In FY 2007, an assessment of this effort, which included a comprehensive cost-benefit analysis (CBA).
In FY 2008, DOL will issue a solicitation to both public and private providers whose services comport with the requirements of the FMLoB for serving as an SSP.
The timely replacement of DOLAR$ is critical to continuing to meet DOL’s financial management needs and support the Secretary’s 21st century and competitive workforce priorities.
The completion of this initiative will provide managers with the financial information and metrics they need to manage their programs efficiently and effectively.
Improved financial performance through the reduction of improper payments continues to be a key financial management focus of the Federal government.
At DOL, developing strategies and the means to reduce improper payments is a matter of good stewardship.
Accurate payments lower program costs.
This is particularly important as budgets have become increasingly tight.
Over the past several years, identifying and reducing improper payments has been a major financial management focus of the Federal government.
A key PMA component is to improve agency financial performance through reductions in improper payments.
The Improper Payments Information Act of 2002 (IPIA) broadened the original erroneous payment reporting requirements to programs and activities beyond those originally listed in Circular A-11.
In August 2006, OMB issued Circular A-123, Appendix C - Requirements for Effective Measurement and Remediation of Improper Payments.
IPIA defines improper payments as those payments made to the wrong recipient, in the wrong amount, or used in an improper manner by the recipient.
IPIA requires a Federal agency to identify all of its programs that are high risk for improper payments.
It also requires the agency to implement a corrective action plan that includes improper payment reduction and recovery targets and to report annually on the extent of its improper payments for high risk programs and the actions taken to increase the accuracy of payments.
To coordinate and facilitate the Department's efforts under IPIA, the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) is the Erroneous Payment Reduction Coordinator for the Department.
The OCFO works with program offices to develop a coordinated strategy to perform annual reviews for all programs and activities susceptible to improper payments.
This cooperative effort includes developing actions to reduce improper payments, identifying and conducting ongoing monitoring techniques, and establishing appropriate corrective action initiatives.
In FY 2007 and consistent with prior years, programs with FY 2006 outlays totaling less than $200 million were deemed to be low risk, unless a known weakness existed in the program management based on reports issued by oversight agencies such as the Department's Inspector General (IG) and/or the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO).
Hence, these programs were not statistically sampled.
For benefit programs with outlays greater than $200 million, the Department conducted sampling to determine the improper payment rates.
This sampling included FECA, UI, Black Lung Disability Trust Fund, and Energy Employees Occupationa Illness Compensation Fund.
UI was the only program determined to be susceptible to high risk17 as a result of this approach.
However, the Department is also reporting on FECA's improper payment rate, since it is required per OMB guidance.
As mentioned earlier, the Department used a separate methodology to assess the risk of improper payments in grant programs.
The Department analyzed all FY 2005 Single Audit Act Reports18 to identify questioned costs, which were used as a proxy for improper payments, and to estimate an approximate risk for the Department's grant programs.
All error rates were determined to be well below the 2.5 percent threshold; therefore, no grant programs were determined to be susceptible to risk as a result of this approach.
However, like FECA, the Department is reporting on WIA's improper payment rate since it is required per OMB guidance, even though its improper payment rate is well below the 2.5 percent threshold.
Like many other Federal agencies, the Department faces challenges in meeting its improper payment reduction and recovery targets, particularly with programs that are sensitive to the U.S. economy fluctuations or natural disasters, such as the UI program.
Furthermore, meeting improper payment reduction and recovery targets of programs such as UI and WIA are contingent upon the cooperation and support of State agencies and other outside stakeholders who are intricately involved in the day-to-day management of these programs' activities.
The Department met its reduction and recovery targets for improper payments.
The estimated improper payment error rates were 9.71 percent for UI, 0.1 percent for FECA and 0.08 percent for WIA for FY 2007.
The Department's analytical studies indicate that earlier detection of recoverable overpayments, especially those where claimants have returned to work but continued to claim benefits, is the most cost-effective way to address improper payments.
Early detection allows agencies to stop benefit payments for a claimant who has returned to work and to recover these overpayments more readily.
The Department estimates that the forty-five states that crossmatch UI beneficiaries with the State Directory of New Hires (SDNH) or the National Directory of New Hires (NDNH) instead of UI wage records prevented approximately $75 million of overpayments in each of the past two fiscal years.
A pilot study showed that a cross-match using the NDNH is more effective than the SDNH in identifying individuals no longer eligible to receive UI benefits, by including benefit year earnings for out-of-State employers, Federal agencies, and multi-State employers that report all of their new hires to a single state.
The Department provided states with funds to implement these NDNH cross-matches; as of September 30, 2007, thirty-five states have implemented the NDNH crossmatch, and seven others have signed the computer-matching agreement with the Department of Health and Human Services that is the prelude to connecting with the NDNH.
The remaining states are in the planning process.
All States are required to use NDNH crossmatches as part of their Benefit Accuracy Measurement programs by January 1, 2008.
In FY 2005, the Department began providing States funds to conduct Reemployment and Eligibility Assessment (REAs) with UI beneficiaries, to reduce improper payments both by speeding claimants' return to work and by detecting and preventing eligibility violations.
Twenty states received funds to continue REAs during FY 2006, and the Department has sought $40 million to expand the number to about forty in FY 2008.
A solicitation of grant applications has been sent to all States.
The REAs in the twenty states are estimated to return about $66 million to the UI trust fund.
An impact evaluation of nine states' REA programs will be published in fall 2007.
To address the second largest cause of overpayments -- errors in handling separation issues -- the Department has two efforts underway.
First, funding has been provided to states to support the training of approximately 400 adjudicators to address improper payments that result from nonmonetary determination errors.
Secondly, the Department is facilitating the design and implementation of an automated system - Unemployment Insurance Separation Information Data Exchange System (UI SIDES).
UI SIDES is expected to provide more timely and complete separation information from large multi-State employers or Third Party Agencies (TPAs) to make more accurate benefit eligibility decisions.
The table below lists the major challenges the Department is addressing by identifying specific actions to be taken and measuring its progress in accomplishing these actions.
For the purposes of transparency we use the same titles used in the OIG’s following discussion of Top Management Challenges.
However, the table below includes related matters appearing in numerous GAO audits, such as the audits covering mine safety and health and DOL responses to disasters such as Hurricane Katrina that also had action items identified from the FY 2006 PAR.
The following list of ten items listed in “2007 Top Management Challenges Facing the Department of Labor” covers both the OIG challenges and includes the action items remaining from previous PARs and other audit reports.
This is the first year the OIG has identified Preserving Departmental Records as a challenge.
Although the management of performance and financial data was not identified as a standalone challenge this year, DOL is tracking completion of remaining actions.
These are included as follow-up actions under challenges I and IX.
The complete list of challenges for FY 2007 is shown below.
II.
IV.
VI.
IX.
The narrative in the heading of each challenge indicates the significance of the challenge, when the challenge was first identified, and a progress assessment for FY 2007 using a stoplight system: ●Green – Actively Implementing All Remedial Actions; ● Yellow – Actively Implementing Most Remedial Actions; and, ● Red – Not Implementing Most Remedial Actions.
Actions completed in FY 2007 are also briefly noted in the heading.
The heading also shows the strategic and performance goals affected by the challenge.
The table below breaks down each challenge into the specific issues that need to be addressed, as identified in previous PAR findings and FY 2007 GAO and OIG audits.
The source of each specific issue is noted in the cells of the left column.
The table’s three columns break out the Management Challenges into specific issues (left column), actions taken in FY 2007 (center column), and actions remaining/expected completion date (right column).
Additional information on many of these management challenges and their specific issues is in the performance goal narratives.
The Department aggressively pursues corrective action for all significant challenges, whether identified by the OIG, GAO, OCFO or other sources within the Department.
Required Regional Offices to perform rigorous data quality/data integrity reviews in addition to comprehensive onsite policy compliance monitoring reviews at least once every 24 months.
Assessed $315,739 in liquidated damages for recovery.
Continue to conduct rigorous data integrity audits concurrently with onsite compliance/quality assessments – FY 2008.
Maintaining the Integrity of the Foreign Labor Certification Program Challenge first identified in FY 2001.
Problems with the integrity of the labor certification process and fraud may result in economic hardship for American workers, the abuse of foreign workers, and may have national security implications when applications are not adequately screened.
DOL published the PERM fraud regulation reducing the incentives and opportunities for fraud and abuse.
Affects Strategic Goal 2 – A Competitive Workforce, Performance Goal 2H-Address worker shortages through the Foreign Labor Certification.
Reduce high incidence of fraud.
Increase the detection of fraudulent labor applications during the certification process.
Monitor the impact of the actions taken in FY 2007 and make adjustments as necessary to enhance detection of fraud – FY 2008.
For 2007, the Office of Inspector General (OIG) considers the following areas to be the most serious management and performance challenges facing the Department of Labor.
They involve workplace protections, compliance, accountability, and delivery of services and benefits.
The OIG has assessed the Department’s progress in these areas and will continue to review and monitor the Department’s effort to address these complex challenges.
Overview: The Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977, as amended by the Mine Improvement and New Emergency Response Act of 2006 (MINER Act), charges the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) with protecting the safety and health of over 300,000 men and women who work in our nation's mines.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), authorized by the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, promulgates and enforces occupational safety and health standards and provides compliance assistance to employers and employees.
State OSHA Programs provide comparable protections and services to over 7.7 million state and local government employees.
Recent OIG audits have identified opportunities for strengthening MSHA and OSHA’s enforcement and assistance activities.
Challenge for the Department: The magnitude of the Department’s mission to protect the health and safety of workers and the finite resources available presents a significant challenge requiring an appropriate balance between enforcement and compliance assistance and vigilance in ensuring that such programs are effectively administered.
MSHA created an Accountability Program to ensure that its health and safety enforcement program is working effectively.
This Accountability Program is MSHA’s internal peer review process that is supposed to ensure that mine safety inspectors are doing their jobs effectively.
However, a recent OIG audit found that this program is not well-designed and should be strengthened, because some peer reviews only looked at paper records of mine inspections and peer review teams did not always visit the mines to review what inspectors had examined.
Recent tragic events involving several mines underscore the importance of thorough mine safety inspections and of having an effective peer review process to provide assurance that mine inspections are properly conducted.
OSHA’s Consultation Program was designed to encourage employers to volunteer for an inspection and then resolve work place safety and health issues without the use of enforcement fines and penalties.
However, a recent OIG audit found that consultation program officials seldom ensured that interim protection was in place before granting employers’ requests for extensions to correct serious hazards, and employers who did not complete corrective actions in a timely fashion were seldom referred for enforcement actions.
We have recommended that OSHA establish a performance measure that benchmarks and reports the percentage of serious hazards corrected by the initial correction due date.
Department’s Progress: MSHA has proposed several steps to address shortcomings in its Accountability Program.
Office of the Assistant Secretary to ensure that management controls are in place and fully implemented to prevent potential lapses in enforcement policies and procedures.
In response to problems in its Consultation Program identified by our audit, OSHA will ensure that its new OSHA Information System will not allow consultants to grant extensions without the assurance that proper interim protections are in place.
In addition, OSHA has taken some actions and will implement additional measures to ensure that consultation program officials refer employers for enforcement action.
These measures include clarifying existing requirements, training for both Federal and state consultation staff, and increased monitoring by Regional Offices.
While OSHA disagreed with our recommendation on performance measures, the OSHA Information System is being designed to allow OSHA to create specific benchmarks for states that may have problems monitoring the correction of serious hazards.
Overview: Job Corps operates 126 centers throughout the United States and Puerto Rico to provide occupational skills, academic training, job placement services, and other support services, such as housing and transportation, to approximately 60,000 students each year.
Its purpose is to assist eligible at-risk youth who need intensive education and training services.
The program was appropriated nearly $1.5 billion in FY 2007.
It utilized contracts with private companies to operate 98 centers and interagency agreements with the Departments of Interior and Agriculture to operate 28 centers.
4) assessment of incoming students for cognitive disabilities.
For example, a recent OIG report found numerous health and safety problems, such as inoperable fire alarms, and an unhealthful food handling area at the Oconaluftee Job Corps Center, which is operated by another Federal agency.
Job Corps needs to utilize the results of facilities surveys conducted by its contractor to make sure necessary repairs are funded and completed as scheduled.
In addition, we have found that the Department needs to hold regional offices accountable for utilizing effective monitoring techniques in their oversight of services provided by Job Corps contractors and government operators.
Further, an OIG audit of Job Corps’ processes for assessing students for cognitive disabilities found that Federal law requires assessment for cognitive disabilities under specific circumstances, but that Job Corps had not done so.
Job Corps must identify and address cognitive disabilities of current and future students in order to improve their outcomes and long-term success.
Another concern relates to the fact that Job Corps runs contractor-operated centers through performancebased contracts, which tie incentive fees and bonuses directly to contractor performance.
Under such contracts, there is a risk that contractors will inflate their performance reports so they can continue to operate centers.
Recent audits determined that specific centers have manipulated their reported performance data.
Our audits have disclosed other challenges as well, including inadequate financial management systems, unauthorized costs charged to center budgets, and deficiencies in the management of personal property.
Department’s Progress: Job Corps has addressed some student safety and health issues raised by the OIG by temporarily closing the Oconaluftee Center.
In addition, Job Corps has indicated that it will provide more rigorous monitoring of all centers.
Job Corps has also taken action to improve performance data reliability at all centers, including requiring each regional office to conduct mandatory audits of student records concurrent with annual center quality assessments.
Further Job Corps has developed additional criteria and a dedicated website for identifying and addressing students with cognitive disabilities.
Much remains to be done to address the many challenges faced by this program to provide safe, quality, and long-impact services to disadvantaged youth.
Overview: Pension, health, and welfare benefit plans consist of over $5.6 trillion in assets covering more than 150 million workers and retirees.
These plans and their service providers continue to be a strong audit and investigative focus of both the OIG and the Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA).
EBSA is charged with overseeing the administration and enforcement of the fiduciary, reporting, and disclosure provisions of Title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA).
Challenge for the Department: Protecting pensions and health benefit plan assets against fraud is a challenge for the Department.
OIG labor racketeering investigations and the increased criminal enforcement by EBSA continue to find that plan assets are vulnerable to criminal activity.
Plan audits by independent public accountants provide a first-line defense for plan participants against financial loss.
Ensuring that audits by independent public accountants meet quality standards adds to the Department’s challenges in providing adequate oversight.
However, the Department’s authority to require corrective action is currently limited.
The Department should increase its efforts toward legislative change to strengthen its oversight authority over plan auditors and the scope of plan audits to increase plan protections for American workers.
Another challenge is the Department’s increased responsibility for regulatory oversight of ERISA health care provisions.
In the health care arena, the Department needs to continue its efforts to decrease the number of fraudulent Multiple Employer Welfare Arrangements, which are typically marketed to small businesses as a way to obtain inexpensive health coverage for their employees.
In this regard, the Department should continue, through its national enforcement projects, to work closely with State insurance commissioners and the Department of Justice to identify and prosecute fraudulent MEWAs.
Department’s Progress: The Department has made several improvements to its processes for identifying and correcting deficient employee benefit plan audits.
Also, the Department has sought legislative changes to obtain more authority over plan auditors and the scope of plan audits.
The Department continues to utilize a multi-pronged strategy to help ensure compliance with ERISA Title I. This includes imposing criminal penalties to correct violations of the law, ensuring the security of employee benefit plan assets, and regulatory oversight of health care laws.
Overview: The Department partners with the states in administering unemployment benefit programs.
State Unemployment Insurance (UI) provides benefits to workers who are unemployed because of a lack of suitable work and meet other eligibility requirements established by their respective states.
UI benefits are financed through employer taxes imposed by the states and collected by the Internal Revenue Service, which holds them in the Unemployment Trust Fund (UTF) until needed to pay benefits.
The second program, Disaster Unemployment Assistance (DUA), is a Federally funded program that provides financial assistance to individuals who lose their jobs as a direct result of a major disaster and are ineligible for other UI.
The 2005 hurricanes demonstrated the importance of effective controls to ensure that unemployment benefits reached only eligible persons.
Through the Benefits Accuracy Measurement (BAM) program, the Department has identified duplicative payments to individuals who are working while concurrently claiming UI benefits as the single largest cause of overpayment errors.
Also, audit work initiated following Hurricanes Katrina and Rita identified potential benefit overpayments as a result of claimants concurrently filing under the UI and DUA programs, states not timely verifying eligibility for DUA, and other reasons.
For example, we found that Louisiana paid claimants when the National Directory of New Hires (NDNH) database reported those individuals as having obtained jobs requiring further follow-up by the state.
This one example represented potential overpayments of $51 million.
In addition, following the 2005 hurricanes, the OIG opened over 300 cases of potential UI and DUA fraud resulting in 77 indictments and 43 convictions.
As of August 10, 2007, 189 of these cases have been closed.
Challenge for the Department: Preventing UI and DUA overpayments and reducing fraud against these programs remains a major challenge for the Department and states.
The Department, other Federal agencies, and the states are further challenged in having the necessary systems and controls in place to quickly respond and yet prevent improper payments during national emergencies or disasters.
Ongoing audit and investigative work indicate that improper payments related to past disasters may be extensive.
The prevention and early detection of overpayments is critical because the follow-up required to verify and collect an overpayment once it has been made is significant.
Therefore, the Department needs to continue its efforts to disseminate information to the states about best practices and promote the use of mechanisms, such as the NDNH, to help states identify ineligible claimants more timely.
Department’s Progress: The Department has taken some measures to eliminate UI and DUA overpayments.
For example, in coordination with other Federal partners and the National Association of State Workforce Agencies, the Department developed action plans using lessons learned from recent disasters.
The Department has also brought together Federal partners to develop a resource guide to facilitate coordination and streamline the delivery of services in the event of a major disaster.
In addition, the Department stated in its FY 2006 Performance and Accountability Report that it has developed a new core performance measure on overpayment detection and has begun to improve states’ ability to identify individuals who are working while also claiming UI benefits.
Further, the Department is working with state agencies to encourage the use of the NDNH database, which will improve the states’ efforts to detect overpayments early.
The Department and its state partners need to continue to incorporate the results of BAM and the NDNH to better prevent and detect overpayments.
The OIG will continue to monitor the Department’s use of this new performance measure to detect UI overpayments.
Overview: The Federal Employees’ Compensation Act (FECA) Program provides income and pays medical expenses for covered Federal civilian employees injured on the job or who have work-related occupational diseases, and dependents of employees whose deaths resulted from job-related injuries or occupational diseases.
This program is administered by the Department and impacts employees and budgets of all Federal agencies.
FECA benefit expenditures totaled $2.5 billion in 2006.
These costs were charged back to individual agencies for reimbursement to the Department’s Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs (OWCP).
Challenge for the Department: The structure and operation of the FECA program is both a Departmental and government-wide challenge.
All Federal agencies rely upon OWCP to adjudicate the eligibility of claims, to manage the medical treatment of those claims, and to make compensation payments and pay medical expenses.
Beginning in FY 2003, we reported that OWCP had not consistently obtained and reviewed medical evidence when determining claimants’ continued eligibility for FECA compensation payments.
Further, beginning in FY 2000, we reported that OWCP did not have the legal authority to match FECA compensation recipients against social security wage records.
This is still the case.
This match would help enable OWCP to identify individuals who are collecting FECA benefits while working and collecting wages.
It is a challenge for the Department to ensure that only eligible recipients are receiving FECA benefits.
Department’s Progress: The Department has taken several steps to improve the administration of FECA and is seeking legislative reforms to the FECA program.
These legislative changes would: enhance incentives for employees to return to work; discourage unsubstantiated claims; and make other benefit and administrative improvements.
If these proposals are enacted, the Department estimates that the government will save $608 million over 10 years.
Last year, the Department completed the roll-out of its new FECA benefit payment system, Integrated Federal Employees’ Compensation System, which tracks due dates of medical evaluations; revalidates eligibility for continued benefits; contains increased internal mechanisms to prevent improper payments; boosts efficiency; and promises improved customer satisfaction.
Overview: The Department contracts for many goods and services to assist in carrying out its mission.
In FY 2006, the Department’s acquisition authority exceeded $1.7 billion and included over 8,800 acquisition actions.
The OIG continues to be concerned about the Department’s procurement activities.
Specifically, for several years, we have recommended that the Department separate program and procurement responsibilities to ensure procurement integrity.
Several OIG audits have reported that failure to adequately segregate program and procurement duties places procurement actions at risk due to conflict of interest or preferential treatment, among other things.
In addition, the Services Acquisition Reform Act (SARA) of 2003 requires that executive agencies appoint a Chief Acquisition Officer (CAO) whose primary duty is acquisition management.
However, the Department’s current organization is not in compliance with this requirement, as the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management is serving as the CAO while retaining other significant non-acquisition responsibilities.
Challenge for the Department: Until procurement and programmatic responsibilities are properly separated and effective controls are put in place, the Department will be at risk for wasteful and abusive procurement practices.
The Department must improve its procurement and contract management processes to ensure that it is receiving quality services at fair prices in compliance with contract terms.
An important first step to improving procurement integrity is the appointment of a CAO, whose primary duty is acquisition management, as required by SARA.
Department’s Progress: The OIG has classified six of the eight recommendations from Audit Report Number 05-05-005-07-720 (March 31, 2005) as “resolved and closed,” due to improved Departmental procurement processes and operating procedures.
The Department has taken preliminary steps to implement SARA.
In January 2007, the Secretary issued Order 2-2007, which formally established the position of CAO within DOL.
This Order specifically stated that the CAO will have acquisition management as his or her primary duty.
Further, the Order emphasized that the CAO will report to the Secretary with day-to-day guidance from the Deputy Secretary and that the CAO will have responsibility for overseeing other Department acquisition activities.
The OIG encourages the Department to move expeditiously to implement the Secretary’s Order, comply with SARA requirements, and separate the procurement and program functions as the OIG has recommended.
Overview: The security of the Department’s information technology (IT) systems and data is vital.
Those systems produce key economic indicators and pay billions of dollars in benefits and services.
In FY 2007, the OIG identified a significant deficiency related to access controls across DOL financial and non-financial information systems.
As of March 2007, the OIG found that the Department had not fully implemented OMB’s government-wide requirements to protect personally identifiable information (PII).
The term “personally identifiable information” refers to information that can be used to distinguish or trace an individual's identity, such as name and social security number.
Challenge for the Department: Our audits have identified a number of IT challenges for the Department, including preventing unauthorized access to systems, certification and accreditation of systems, and incident response capability.
It is also a challenge for the Department to fully implement OMB’s requirements for protecting PII and close outstanding security issues within management’s planned actions and target dates.
Keeping up with new threats and IT developments, providing assurances that IT systems will function reliably, and safeguarding information assets will continue to challenge the Department and require a sustained effort.
As the need to raise the level of accountability for IT security in government continues, it is important for agencies to have the proper structure in place to achieve accountability, effectiveness, compliance with security controls, and remediation of vulnerabilities to prevent security breaches.
To this end, as in last year’s Top Management Challenges, the OIG recommends the creation of an independent Chief Information Officer (CIO) to provide oversight of IT issues.
In addition, we also believe that the Department should now consider having agency-level security officers report to the Department’s Chief Information Security Officer (CISO), in addition to reporting to their respective agency heads as they do now.
Similarly, the CISO could report to the Secretary’s Office as well as to the CIO.
The OIG believes such steps would enhance effectiveness within the Department-wide information security program.
Department’s Progress: To meet the challenges associated with securing IT systems from harm, the Department is continuing to identify, assess, and remediate IT security vulnerabilities and is providing IT security training to program agency ISOs.
In addition, the Department has indicated its plans to fully implement OMB’s PII recommendations by the first quarter of 2009.
The Department has also required all employees to complete Computer Security Awareness Training.
Overview: The Department’s Foreign Labor Certification (FLC) programs provide U.S. employers access to foreign labor to meet worker shortages under terms and conditions that do not adversely affect US workers.
The Permanent Foreign Labor Certification Program allows an employer to hire a foreign worker to work permanently in the United States, if a qualified US worker is unavailable.
The H-1B program allows the Department to certify employers’ applications to hire temporary foreign workers in specialty occupations.
OIG audits have identified vulnerabilities in FLC programs, and our investigations, some of which have been initiated based on referrals from DOL’s Employment and Training Administration (ETA), have identified fraud against these programs.
The foreign labor certification process continues to be compromised by dishonest attorneys, labor brokers, and employers.
For instance, a recent OIG case led to the conviction of a former owner of an information technology company.
He was convicted for his role in fraudulently assisting hundreds of immigrant aliens to live and work illegally in the United States.
This former business owner was sentenced to prison and ordered to forfeit $5.7 million.
Challenge for the Department: The Department is challenged in maintaining the integrity of the FLC programs, while effectively reviewing employer requests for foreign workers.
For instance, the Department must increase its detection of fraudulent labor applications during the certification process.
FLC programs are one of the few legal avenues available for foreign workers who want to enter the U.S. on a temporary or permanent basis.
This fact, combined with the large amounts of money that can be made by unscrupulous entities, continues to create strong incentives to commit fraud or abuse.
Because the Department must certify that H-1B applications are accurate and complete within seven days, DOL has limited capacity to validate the information on the application, which presents a challenge to the program’s integrity.
Considering the large number of both Permanent and H-1B applications, it remains a challenge for the Department to avoid backlogs while maintaining the integrity of the FLC process.
Department’s Progress: The Department has instituted measures to reduce fraud in its FLC programs.
As a result of OIG investigations repeatedly demonstrating the need to eliminate the practice of substituting a new foreign worker for the one originally named on a permanent labor certification application, the Department enacted the Fraud Rule which prohibited the practice of substitution.
The Fraud Rule became effective on July 16, 2007.
In addition, the OIG and ETA have been working collaboratively to identify and reduce fraud in the FLC process by immigration attorneys, employers, and others.
Finally, the Department recently announced that it had eliminated the backlog of permanent program applications on-time.
Overview: The competitiveness of the American workforce is a top priority for the Department.
To that end, the Department’s FY 2008 Budget proposed $3.4 billion to fund its training and employment grant programs.
In addition, the Department proposed significant reforms to how the funding will be managed at the Statelevel.
Grant funds are mainly provided as Federal awards to state and local government entities and to other non-profit organizations.
To ensure that grant monies are being used for their intended purpose, in addition to ETA’s monitoring and oversight, the Single Audit Act (SAA) requires each recipient that expends $500,000 or more in Federal awards in a year to obtain an annual audit.
The single audit covers both the reporting entity’s financial statements and Federal awards.
As more than 90% of its expenditures are by state and local governments and other non-DOL organizations, the Department relies on audits conducted under the SAA to provide oversight of its grants.
Challenge for the Department: Given the amount of money annually provided by the Department to grantees, it is critical that the Department has an effective means to ensure that funds were used as intended.
OIG audit work disclosed high error rates in the performance data reported by Departmental grantees and raised concerns about the usefulness of that data for decision making.
In addition, the OIG continues to be concerned about the adequacy of information that the Department receives from SAA audits, which are conducted by independent public accountants or state auditors.
Our quality control reviews of single audits and a June 2007 report on the National Single Audit Sampling Project have revealed serious deficiencies.
As a result, the Department is not receiving reliable information that it needs to make program and funding decisions.
Further, a recent OIG audit disclosed that the Department lacks monitoring procedures to ensure that single audits of its grantees are completed and that reports are received in a timely manner for each grantee that meets the single audit threshold.
Department’s Progress: The Department is completing its second full year of operating its new data validation system which was designed to reduce errors in performance data reported by grantees.
In support of the Department and other Federal entities that issue grants, the National Single Audit Sampling Project has made significant recommendations to OMB to improve the reliability of single audits.
Also, the Department has agreed that single audit procedures should be strengthened and will coordinate with appropriate agencies to develop and implement changes as recommended.
These efforts are important steps in the Department’s effort to improve performance accountability of grants.
Overview: The Department and other Federal agencies must create and maintain Federal records to account for their official business.
As part of this responsibility, the Department is required to ensure that its Federal records are preserved and retrievable to document its policies and activities, and comply with Freedom of Information Act requests, and other statutory and regulatory reasons.
The Department implements its records management program through the policy and guidelines established in the DOL Manual Series and Records Management Handbook.
Challenge for the Department: The burgeoning use of electronic media to administer its programs makes it essential for the Department to have systems and processes in place to manage records effectively.
Like other Federal agencies, the Department faces a major challenge in determining what information constitutes records that must be preserved as well as efficiently determining how to store, back-up, or dispose of records and other information.
For example, current Departmental policy requires employees to treat e-mail like any paper record.
If an email is an official record, then employees are expected to print and file the email in a manual recordkeeping system.
Recently, the OIG reported that department employees may not be aware of their responsibilities to preserve Federal records and recommended that the Department require records management training for managers and employees.
To this end, the Department needs to keep their employees trained and apprised of records management responsibilities.
Department’s Progress: Records management is an emerging challenge for the Department and agencies government-wide.
The OIG is conducting an audit which will assess the Department’s progress in this area.
The OIG recognizes that matters meriting the continued attention of Departmental management may be omitted from the list of its top challenges.
This year we removed the challenge of Preparing for Emergencies from the list, because of the Department’s progress in making employee safety and emergency preparedness a priority.
The OIG will continue to monitor the Department’s actions in this area.
This year, we added a new challenge, Preserving Department Records Management, because of the Department’s legal requirements to maintain and safeguard its records.
In FY 2007, the Department continued its focus on implementing the President’s Management Agenda (PMA) – and securing the taxpayer benefits tied to PMA success.
Announced in 2001, the PMA remains the key strategy for improving the management and performance of the Federal government.
The objective is to ensure a Federal government that is citizen-centered, not bureaucracy-centered; results-oriented, not output oriented; and market-based – actively promoting rather than stifling innovation through competition.
The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) regularly assesses all Federal agencies’ implementation of the PMA, issuing a quarterly Executive Branch Management Scorecard rating of green, yellow or red for both status and progress on each initiative.
On June 30, 2005, the U.S. Department of Labor became the first Executive Branch department or agency to achieve green status scores on all five government-wide PMA initiatives.
While not an end in itself, this achievement represents an ongoing commitment to good management to bring quality services to the American people.
As noted on the table below, as of September 30, 2007 DOL is pleased to have again achieved all-green status scores on the five government-wide initiatives– as well as on two of the three PMA program initiatives managed by DOL.
Government-wide PMA results can be found at www.results.gov.
We are now into the OMB-led Proud to Be V campaign, which runs through June 30, 2008 – with other goals linked to June 30, 2009 – and DOL intends to maintain its dedication to improve its performance through PMA implementation.
To ensure that the good-government principles are used in day-to-day management, the Department uses a similar scorecard on a semi-annual basis to measure DOL individual agency progress on the PMA.
The Human Capital initiative requires Federal agencies and departments to develop and use a comprehensive human capital plan, with the aim of significantly reducing mission-critical skill gaps.
Department continued its MBA Fellows, Senior Executive Service (SES) Candidacy, and Management Development programs.
Each of these programs is structured to develop the core competencies required for successful performance in the SES and necessary to continue the Department’s mission.
DOL’s successful MBA Fellows program welcomed its sixth class of 15 Fellows in the summer of 2007 – Increasing the total to 92 participants.
Of the 49 Fellows who have completed the program, 48 have been placed in permanent positions within the Department.
Competitive Sourcing allows the government to take advantage of market-based competition while simultaneously allowing the existing Federal employees to compete for the work.
Competitive sourcing requires Federal employees to compete against private sector bidders for work that is deemed commercial activity.
The skills and competencies that are not required to be performed by government personnel can often be performed more effectively and efficiently when subject to the competition of the marketplace.
The Department encourages the development of a government “most efficient organization” (MEO) to compete with bids which may be received from the private sector.
The MEO is designed to find innovative solutions to existing work processes that can be made more efficient to improve the Department’s chances of retaining the work in-house when competing against private-sector firms.
The competition process generally results in savings regardless of whether the performance decision is in favor of the government or the private sector.
All four competitions resulted in the work being retained in-house, which means that the work continues to be performed by DOL employees.
The availability of timely, accurate, and useful information is essential to any well-managed, effective organization.
The Improved Financial Performance initiative requires Federal agencies to receive clean audit opinions on their annual financial statements, meet accelerated financial reporting deadlines, implement managerial cost accounting practices, improve internal controls, and have financial management systems that are compliant with Federal laws and regulations.
The Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) has devoted significant resources to secure the Department’s achievement of excellence in financial management in the Federal Government.
DOL’s clean audit opinion for FY 2007 marks the 11th straight year for this achievement.
DOL’s managerial cost accounting system, Cost Analysis Manager (CAM), provides program managers with costs of outputs and activities to better understand how those costs affect the operations of their programs.
This tool collects and allocates costs to activities — and ties these costs to performance.
In doing so, it improves accountability and transparency by showing the results for the tax dollars spent.
CAM generated the goal costing information at the strategic and performance goal levels for this report and for the second year straight year CAM generated costing information at the performance indicator level.
Last year, costs were allocated at the indicator for about half of DOL’s performance goals.
This year, most DOL programs were able to associate costs with their performance indicators.
The Expanding Electronic Government (E-government) initiative requires Federal agencies and departments to develop secure Information Technology (IT) systems and strictly adhere to IT project cost, schedule, and performance projections.
The Department’s Unified DOL Technology Infrastructure (UDTI) initiative is consolidating 30 IT service components into a unified, efficient environment.
Savings resulting from UDTI on network maintenance costs alone are estimated at $3 million.
In addition, E-Grants – a web-based grants management tool – is used by all DOL grant-making programs to award some $9 billion in grants each year.
E-Grants lowers administrative costs, strengthens internal controls, improves efficiency and customer service.
Estimated savings associated with E-grants is nearly $20 million over the system’s twelve-year life.
DOL also continues to seek other creative strategies and efficiencies to better serve our stakeholders.
In April 2002, GovBenefits.gov was launched – with DOL serving as the managing partner.
GovBenefits’ mission is to use the Internet to connect citizens to government benefit program eligibility information; increase access to information, particularly for people with disabilities; reduce the burden and difficulty of doing business with the government; and continue to add programs to become the single source for Federal, State, and local government benefit programs.
In April 2005, DOL launched GovBenefits en Espanol – and in April 2007, GovBenefits.gov was named as one of the Top 50 most innovative government programs in the Innovations in American Government Award program of Harvard University’s John F. Kennedy School of Government.
In fact, GovBenefits.gov was one of only six Federal programs so recognized.
Since its 2002 launch, GovBenefits.gov has had over 25 million visits – and now includes over 1,000 programs, both Federal and State.
A recent management efficiency was gained through how DOL’s FY 2009 budget submission was created: the Departmental E-Budget System (DEBS).
DEBS is an innovative tool designed to automate the budget formulation process – and allow budget analysts the ability to easily and electronically merge budget data with justification narrative using a web browser.
For our FY 2008 cycle, we successfully completed pilot tests of the new DEBS system – which involved five DOL agencies or offices with 50 volunteer users.
The DEBS system was rolled out to all of DOL for this FY 2009 budget cycle – and we are proud of the efficiencies gained by and budget produced through this new system.
DOL recently concluded six assessments and reassessments through the 2007 PART process.
These assessments included National Emergency Grants, the Energy Employees Occupational Injury Compensation Program, Job Corps, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, and Trade Adjustment Assistance.
All new PART assessments, scores, ratings, and Improvement Plans were published this summer on www.ExpectMore.gov.
This was several months in advance of when they have been published in the past – and allowed PART findings to play a more central role in the formulation of the FY 2009 DOL Budget.
DOL is contracting an independent study of program effectiveness – using administrative data – to be completed in 2008.
Also in 2008, a more rigorous, seven-year evaluation will begin to determine WIA services’ impact on employment and earnings outcomes for participants.
This is the first report in which DOL will report on progress against the strategic goal structure launched last September 30 in DOL’s 2006–2011 Strategic Plan.
The Government Performance and Results Act of 1993 calls for six-year strategic plans that must be updated every three years.
Last year’s strategic planning process offered an opportunity to re-examine goals, program strategies and targets, and to solicit feedback from Congressional leadership and the public.
The updated plan demonstrates how the Department’s diverse agency missions and program objectives will contribute to achieving our four overarching strategic goals: A Prepared Workforce, A Competitive Workforce, Safe and Secure Workplaces, and Strengthened Economic Protections.
In addition, the Department’s commitment to the new Performance Improvement Initiative continues through the Program Assessment Rating Tool (PART) process and implementation of PART program improvement plans.
To date, 35 DOL programs have been reviewed under the PART process.
FY 2007 was the first year of in which previously reviewed programs were reassessed to determine the impact of program improvements identified in the first review.
DOL has implemented nearly half of the non-legislative PART recommendations.
In addition, DOL is responsible for three of the PMA components found in selected departments: Eliminating Improper Payments, Faith-Based and Community Initiative, and Federal Real Property Asset Management.
The Improper Payments Act of 2002 defines improper payments as payments made to the wrong recipient; in the wrong amount; or used in an improper manner by the recipient.
Better detecting and preventing improper payments to ensure taxpayer dollars are wisely and efficiently spent is the goal of the Eliminating Improper Payments initiative.
At DOL, developing strategies and the means to reduce improper payments is good stewardship – and good business.
Accurate payments lower program costs, thereby improving efficiency.
The Department has three programs classified as high-risk for improper payments.
Two are benefit programs – Unemployment Insurance in ETA and the Federal Employees Compensation Act program in ESA – and the third is an ETA grant program administered under the Workforce Investment Act.
While Eliminating Improper Payments is still a fairly new PMA initiative, DOL is making progress and achieving results.
Through the efforts of the Department’s Office of the Chief Financial Officer and ETA, 35 States now use a cross-match of National Directory of New Hires data with State UI claimant data to identify individuals no longer eligible to receive UI benefits.
In 2008, all States will be required to do so.
Over the past six years, DOL has significantly expanded opportunities for partnerships with faith-based and community non-profit organizations (FBCOs) to better serve Americans in need.
Critical to this effort is removal of any unnecessary barriers to the participation of small and faith-based and community organizations in DOL grants and programs, thus establishing a level playing field for all.
As reported last year, the Department employs a wide range of grants, technical assistance and other tools to draw upon the unique strengths of FBCOs in efforts such as serving the unemployed and underemployed, aiding homeless and incarcerated veterans, helping ex-offenders transition from prison to work, and reducing exploitive child labor abroad.
In FY 2007, DOL strengthened its partnerships between faith-based and community organizations and the workforce investment system at the state and local levels.
In 2007, DOL’s Center for Faith-Based and Community Initiative worked with the Employment and Training Administration to fund a sixth year of Grassroots grants, which feature simplified application and reporting requirements.
These modest $25,000 grants allow DOL to draw upon the unique assets FBCOs bring to the task of assisting individuals looking for training and employment.
This is particularly true with hard-to-serve populations who often need long-term, in-depth assistance to find and retain jobs.
In Program Year 2006, the grantees reported impressive results.
Forty-three Grassroots grantees, in partnership with One-Stop Career Centers, provided an expansive range of services, including enabling 1,460 high-need individuals to enter employment.
Significantly, 1,007 of these individuals – ranging from ex-offenders to homeless individuals to persons with disabilities – were helped to retain their jobs for at least six months.
Part of the partnerships’ success came through the efforts of the grantees to leverage a remarkable 14,275 volunteer hours!
In FY 2008, we look forward to reporting greater achievements.
Better managing the Department’s properties is at the core the Federal Real Property Asset Management effort.
This PMA initiative is intended to eliminate surplus assets; better manage the cost of inventory, and improve the condition of critical assets.
The Department’s ongoing efforts in real property management have yielded important benefits including DOL’s new Space Management System.
Our Space Management Initiative includes a new tracking system with data on space holdings, utilization rates, rent costs, and square footage.
Using this data to identify potential consolidations, since 2001 the Department has closed just over 100 offices and released over 100,000 square feet – which accounts for an approximate annual cost savings of $2.8 million.
As demonstrated above, the Department has continued to make solid progress in improving DOL’s effectiveness and accountability to the American public.
This is reflected in the fact that, since 2004, DOL has been honored with four President’s Quality Awards for management excellence.
More important than the awards are the results for the taxpayers highlighted in this report.
We are dedicated to ensuring that our programs achieve the best possible results, are managed effectively, and provide high quality services.
In recognition of your outstanding efforts preparing DOL's Performance and Āccountability Report for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2006.
Jobn H. Hummel, CGFM Chair.
The Performance Section of this report presents results at the Strategic Goal and Performance Goal levels.
The four Strategic Goals established in our FY 2006-2011 Strategic Plan are general outcomes clearly linked to the Department’s mission.
Performance goals articulate more specific objectives associated with one or more programs administered by a distinct DOL agency.
Progress in achieving these goals is measured by one or more quantifiable performance indicators, for which targets are established in the annual Performance Budget.
Each of the four strategic goal sections is introduced by an overview of results, net cost and future plans for its component performance goals.
Headlines describe the goal in very basic terms.
Goal numbers (e.g., 07-1A) start with a two-digit year corresponding to the funding (budget) period.
The single digit following the hyphen identifies the strategic goal and the letter distinguishes the performance goal from others in the same group.
The agency acronym (e.g., BLS) is in parentheses.
Goal statements appear in italics.
Indicators, Targets and Results tables list each indicator, its targets and results for the reporting period and previous years that have data for the same indicators.
Indicators that were dropped prior to the current year are not shown; however, a note indicates where additional historical performance information (legacy data) can be obtained.
Where all data for any year are shown, goal achievement is indicated.
Where “baseline” appears in the target cell for new indicators, no data were available for establishing a numerical target, and these data do not count towards goal achievement.
If results improve over the prior year but do not reach the target, “I” appears in the target cell.
Program Perspectives and Logic narratives describe the purpose of the program, how its activities are designed and managed to have a positive impact on the goal, and how it measures success and external factors that influence performance.
Photos and vignettes communicate examples of programs’ impact at the personal level.
Analysis and Future Plans narratives interpret results, assess progress, explain shortfalls and describe strategies for improvement.
Performance data at the indicator level and net cost at the goal level are displayed in charts where sufficient data are available to illustrate trends.
PART, Program Evaluations and Audits narratives provide updated information on Program Assessment Rating Tool reviews and improvement plans.
Relevant audits and evaluations completed during the fiscal year are summarized in tables that highlight study purpose, major findings, recommendations and follow-up actions.
OIG assesses the internal controls of DOL agencies -- systems used to validate, verify and record data submitted by field staff and partners (e.g., grantees).
These systems are identified as Data Sources at the bottom of each performance goal history.
Lack of findings does not imply that data are factual.
Material inadequacies are disclosed in the Secretary’s Message, which includes a statement on the adequacy of program performance data that is supported by signed attestations from each agency head responsible for a performance goal in this report.
OMB Circular A-11 defines “material inadequacy” as a condition that significantly impedes the use of program performance data by agency managers and government decision makers.
For Departmental management, this threshold is established at the performance goal level as data that are insufficient to permit determination of goal achievement.
This is an unlikely occurrence, as most DOL performance goals have sufficient indicators and historical data to allow reasonable estimation of results.
Generally, if agency or program level managers do not trust their own data, the results are not reported, because the problems created by skewed targets and trends are much worse than a gap in the data.
Because DOL aspires to maintain high standards and because performance information is being used more than ever for decision-making and accountability, DOL recently created a Data Quality Assessment process to improve the quality of performance information reported to the public.
The Data Quality and Major Management Challenges section of each performance goal narrative includes an overall rating of data quality (Excellent, Very Good, Good, Fair, or Unsatisfactory).
Discussions summarize the rationale for these ratings and, for all but those rated Excellent, improvement plans.
Data assessments are based on seven criteria, of which two – accuracy and relevance – are weighted twice as much as others in the rating system (see box below).
If data do not satisfy the standards for both of these criteria, the rating is Data Quality Not Determined.
This reflects the DOL policy that further assessments of quality are irrelevant if the information is not reasonably correct or worthwhile.
DOL piloted the Data Quality Assessment process in FY 2006.
By doing so, DOL not only increased the transparency of data quality among performance goals, but also implemented a forward-looking method for systematically evaluating data systems using widely accepted criteria.
In its pilot year, the assessments provided a valuable baseline by identifying weaknesses and establishing improvement plans.
By increasing the visibility of data quality, DOL is using the assessment process as an important benchmark for monitoring progress and stimulating change.
In this year’s report, data for four performance goals are rated Excellent, ten are Very Good, six are Good, two are Fair, and two are Data Quality Not Determined.
No performance goals were rated Unsatisfactory.
Ratings this year largely remained the same; exceptions are higher ratings for ESA’s Wage and Hour Division, Office of Federal Contractor Compliance Programs and Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs goals, and lower ratings for ETA’s Senior Community Service Employment Program and VETS’ Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act goals.
For two other goals, FY 2006 and FY 2007 ratings were not directly comparable due to the restructuring of performance goals.
The Community Based Job Training Grants program did not report results and therefore, was not included.
Given the short duration between the FY 2006 year-end pilot assessment and the FY 2007 mid-year assessment, this year’s reporting focused on improvement plans to address the criteria not met in the pilot year assessment and considered the impact of any pertinent reports or audits released in FY 2007.
OIG continues to identify data quality issues among its Major Management Challenges.
Central to this ongoing challenge is the Department’s limited ability to ensure the quality of data reported by States and other sources below the Federal level.
The Employment and Training Administration (ETA) is the principal agency affected by these findings.
While their data quality assessments consistently identify verifiability as a weakness, these findings strictly relate to data collection systems for their performance goals.
The OIG findings, however, cover data quality for sources not related to the performance goals.
Beyond ETA, measuring the societal impact of compliance assistance, enforcement, policy development, and outreach also poses measurement challenges.
Individual agencies must find a balance between measuring activities linked to their performance goals and measuring the far-reaching benefits to their constituents.
Multiple performance measures, often relying on various data collection systems, allow an agency to focus on key performance areas linked to specific strategies.
It is important to recognize that the data quality rating system evaluates only those data collection systems which support performance indicators appearing in this report.
Program evaluations and audit reports, such as those listed in the performance goal chapters, supplement the performance data and give agencies a more comprehensive view into the effectiveness of their programs and help identify areas for improvement.
In FY 2008, the data quality assessment process will entail full re-assessments for all performance goals.
This could result in upward or downward adjustments of ratings for some goals.
As data quality standards are further institutionalized and awareness of data quality increases Department-wide, DOL expects improved quality and quantity of information.
It may also result in minor changes to ratings.
As a testament to the robustness of the assessments to date, subsequent pertinent reports and audits generally confirmed assessment findings.
This year’s improvement plans focused on remedying deficiencies among data systems that are mostly rated between Good to Excellent.
Nonetheless, the Department views these results as the beginning of a long-term strategy to raise the bar in data quality and performance reporting.
The diagram below illustrates the theoretical foundation of performance planning and evaluation structures, processes and results covered in this section of the Performance and Accountability Report.
The outer circle represents the scope of DOL’s resources and influence.
At the core is our mission.
Everything in between is in continuous motion, clockwise and counter-clockwise.
Quadrants represent the planning elements that are tied to periodic budget documents.
Spokes incorporate the actual processes that follow resource allocation decisions and translate theory into practice.
These elements are managed on a real-time basis; emergent cost and results information ultimately closes the feedback loop via reporting documents and the next period’s budget.
A more detailed description of planning and evaluation processes follows the diagram.
The planning cycle begins in the upper left quadrant and moves clockwise.
While planning can occur throughout the year, budget formulation officially launches the cycle.
At this stage, programs define and prioritize desired outcomes by translating mere notions into realistic program goals.
With clearly articulated goals in place, programs then need a mechanism for measuring their progress against those goals.
Performance indicators, which appear throughout this plan, attempt to capture the results of program activities.
Programs collect and monitor the data for these indicators in order to gauge progress towards their performance goals.
Managers may adjust program strategies based on these results.
As the budget formulation cycle nears, decision-makers can use performance data to strategically allocate resources to the most effective program strategies.
Decision-makers also consider cost and which strategies will yield the maximum benefit for the least cost to the public.
Starting with the same quadrant but this time moving counter-clockwise, the budget defines fiscal parameters for execution of strategies constrained by program authorization legislation.
Strategies materialize as activities, the results of which are assessed using performance indicators.
Data from the performance indicators demonstrate whether goals are achieved.
Outcomes – in generic terms, demonstrated effectiveness at achieving goals – justify further budget requests.
Develop a prepared workforce by providing effective training and support services to new and incumbent workers and supplying high-quality information on the economy and labor market.
America’s engine of prosperity is its skilled workforce.
The maintenance of our strong national economy depends, in part, on developing a steady stream of workers that possess skills required by today's employers.
The Department must ensure that every available labor pool is tapped, including job seekers with disabilities, veterans, and disadvantaged youth.
Center for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives.
The Working Women in Transition (WWIT) program is a multiregional Women’s Bureau demonstration project focusing on women who are making a significant transition in their work lives.
Sites in ten states target incarcerated women, Hurricane Katrina survivors, women in rural areas, recipients of Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, women recovering from substance abuse, baby boomers changing careers, minority women desiring to start or grow their own businesses, and single mothers.
WWIT equips women with the skills and confidence they need to pursue career goals.
For example, WWIT works with Vermont Works for Women and the Southeast State Correctional Facility in Windsor, Vermont, to teach building trade skills to incarcerated women.
In addition to the hands-on training, the WWIT program also provides tailored support systems that include online and face-to-face mentoring; extra skills training; and tracking mechanisms to ensure participant success.
A prepared workforce has the skills and the education that employers demand.
Education – from literacy to vocational training – plays a fundamental role in preparing workers for life-long employment.
In addition, DOL focuses on helping those who face exceptional barriers to successful employment.
These individuals, such as low-income youth and homeless veterans, benefit from specialized training tailored to their unique situations.
DOL provides comprehensive training programs that focus on specific, occupational skills while taking into account the trainees’ special circumstances.
In addition, DOL produces labor statistics that individuals and businesses can use to better understand the job market and the economy.
Performance indicators for these programs measure the extent to which DOL has successfully placed these individuals in jobs.
In FY 2007, DOL delivered timely and accurate labor statistics, improved literacy skills and increased educational attainment for youth, connected individuals with better jobs through Apprenticeship programs, and placed homeless veterans in jobs.
The Job Corps program improved basic reading and math skills for nearly 60 percent of its students.
The job prospects for many low-income youth increased.
Nearly 60 percent of low-income students entered employment, post-secondary education, or occupational skills training after exiting DOL funded training programs.
Over 80 percent of workers in apprenticeship programs remained employed for nine months after entry.
For individuals learning a trade, job experience leads to increasing skills and wages.
Average hourly wages increased by $1.50.
More veterans with disabilities found and kept their jobs.
More homeless veterans found jobs.
These national results are realized by bringing together the right mix of services, education, and information to help each person fulfill his or her career goals.
The vignettes throughout this section illustrate some of the stories behind Strategic Goal One.
For more specific information, see the Performance Goal narratives.
The following table provides key information, goal statements, and achievement for DOL performance goals associated with this strategic goal.
Those with labels that begin with “06” operate on a Program Year (PY) basis, and are reporting on the period from July 1, 2006 to June 30, 2007 due to the forward-funding authorized in the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (WIA).
The net cost dedicated to Strategic Goal 1 in FY 2007 was $3.103 billion.
The first chart below is based on total Departmental costs of $47.872 billion; the second is based on an adjusted net cost of $12.771 billion that excludes the major non-discretionary program costs associated with Strategic Goal 4.24 Net cost dedicated to Strategic Goal 1 in FY 2006 (restated to reflect current goal structure) was $3.360 billion.
Improve information available to decision-makers on labor market conditions, and price and productivity changes.
BLS is the principal fact-finding agency in the Federal government in the broad field of labor economics.
As an independent national statistical agency within the Department of Labor, BLS collects, processes, analyzes, and disseminates essential statistical data to the American public, the U.S. Congress, other Federal agencies, State and local governments, business, and labor.
BLS provides information that supports the formulation of economic and social policy, and decisions that affect virtually all Americans.
BLS reports performance for this goal by producing timely and accurate data, as well as by improving its products and services.
BLS evaluates new economic and statistical methodologies; technologies; and survey design, collection, and dissemination approaches.
Keeping abreast of improvements and using them to deliver data in a more timely and useful manner, while still maintaining cost effectiveness, are essential ingredients to meeting DOL goals and providing the quality of service BLS customers expect.
In 2007, BLS began publishing information on employee hours and earnings, which will enhance understanding of wage growth and provide improved input for other major economic indicators.
BLS also developed new measures of labor productivity and unit labor costs for three additional service-producing industries.
In addition, BLS added new Business Employment Dynamics data at the State level, which are particularly useful in highlighting the forces behind the net changes in employment.
BLS reached the targets for all six of its indicators, achieving its goal.
Performance indicators for this goal include quality indicators for four categories of statistical surveys, a customer satisfaction index, and an efficiency measure.
Each of the four survey quality indicators – for prices and living condition surveys, productivity and technology surveys, labor force statistics, and compensation and working conditions surveys – consist of output, timeliness, accuracy, and long-term improvement targets.
BLS measures its survey quality by percent of these targets achieved, and in FY 2007 results exceeded targeted levels for all four categories.
Cost per transaction of the Internet Data Collection Facility, the agency’s efficiency measure improved to $1.12 and also reached its target.
The Occupational Outlook Handbook (OOH) is the Bureau’s nationally recognized source of career information.
Using the American Customer Satisfaction Index, the OOH Web site reached its target score of 79 percent.
See the PART, Program Evaluations and Audits section on the next page for more information on the recommendations DOL will implement to improve customer satisfaction with the BLS Website.
The Department of Energy’s Office of Science operates 10 national laboratories (including Argonne, Fermi, and Oak Ridge) employing about 25,000 people.
Since 2002, the Acting Director has set a priority on workplace safety.
He stated, “To be world class in science, we must be best-inclass in our safety performance.”
Using tabulations from the BLS Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses, the office set ‘Best-in-Class’ safety goals for its laboratories.
As a result, between 2002 and 2006, the Office of Science reduced its annual injury and illness cases from 593 to 283 – over 50 percent.
During that same period, the days away from work, restricted activity, and transfer (DART) cases decreased 71 percent from 301 to 87.
The Acting Director credits BLS data for “helping the Office of Science set safety goals and improve our laboratories.”
Under the labor force statistics indicator, BLS will improve its products by increasing the number of establishments surveyed by the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages program, which is used to help guide the allocation of tens of billions of dollars in Federal assistance programs.
As part of the prices and living conditions indicator, the Producer Prices and Price Indexes (PPI) program is continuing work to upgrade two of its systems.
PPI releases the Finished Goods Price Index, one of the Nation’s most closely watched indicators of economic health.
PPI data are also used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis to calculate the gross domestic product (GDP) deflator.
Within the compensation and working conditions indicator, BLS will publish data from a redesigned, more efficient Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses sample.
Under the productivity and technology indicator, the International Comparisons program will be enhanced.
International Comparisons data are used to evaluate the competitive position of the U.S. in global markets.
In FY 2007, for the first time, BLS is reporting on its costs at the performance indicator level.
BLS will report on cost trends in future performance reports.
The cost increase for this performance goal between FY 2005 and FY 2006 was primarily due to budgeted increases in personnel compensation and benefits and other services and small differences in the timing of certain expenditures.
Costs were virtually unchanged from FY 2006 to FY 2007.
BLS programs and services underwent a Program Assessment Rating Tool (PART) review in 2003 and received a rating of Effective, the highest rating category.
BLS completed the three original PART recommendations in 2005.
In 2006, DOL started work on new recommendations that will ensure continuous improvement: BLS is conducting an independent evaluation of agency effectiveness, developing additional efficiency and cost-effectiveness measures, and establishing more ambitious targets.
In addition, in 2007, BLS made upward revisions to its long-term performance indicator targets.
BLS programs are evaluated both internally and externally to ensure that they provide taxpayer value.
As required by OMB, the seven BLS statistical reports that are designated as Principal Federal Economic Indicators are evaluated on a three-year schedule.
In FY 2007, BLS completed a performance evaluation for the Current Population Survey.
BLS has instituted rigorous, systematic, and comprehensive controls to ensure that its data are of Excellent quality.
For example, the BLS executive team meets with program management on a quarterly basis to discuss progress toward meeting performance indicators.
BLS also conducts its own program reviews and contracts for external reviews, as necessary.
These assessments ensure that survey data are accurate, reliable, and released in a timely fashion; systems and procedures are documented adequately; program performance meets or exceeds standards; and pre-release data are kept confidential.
Improve educational achievements of Job Corps students and increase participation of Job Corps graduates in employment and education.
Job Corps is an intensive educational and vocational training program (primarily residential) for economically disadvantaged youth ages 16 through 24 who often face multiple barriers to gainful employment.
This program provides career counseling, technical skills and academic training, social education, and other support services, such as housing, transportation and family support resources to more than 60,000 individuals at 126 centers – including four satellite centers – nationwide.
Job Corps centers, ranging in size from 200 to 2000 students, are located in both urban and rural communities.
Job Corps centers provide individually tailored services to help students achieve the skills and credentials required to be successful, productive citizens and to obtain work opportunities that lead to long-term employment.
Job Corps’ performance can be influenced by external factors such as local labor market conditions and national economic trends.
In recent years, an increasingly knowledge-based labor market has challenged Job Corps to redirect both academic and technical career training approaches.
Performance of the Job Corps program is assessed using the Federal job training program common measures for youth – placement in employment or education, attainment of a degree or certificate, and literacy or numeracy gains – as indicators of student achievement in improving their long-term employability.
The Job Corps program did not achieve its goal for PY 2006; only one of its three indicator targets was reached.
In PY 2006, Job Corps met its target for learning gains; literacy or numeracy skills increased by one Adult Basic Education (ABE) level for 58 percent of all students who were deficient in basic skills when they entered the program.
Certificate attainment – students achieving a high school diploma (HSD), General Equivalency Diploma (GED) or vocational certificate while enrolled in Job Corps – fell for the second year in a row.
In fact, the PY 2006 result of 57 percent was lower than PY 2005’s result of 60 percent.
After data integrity reviews revealed that in past years misreporting of certificate attainments may have occurred, DOL implemented more stringent documentation requirements.
The Department believes the correction of data integrity deficiencies, rather than a decline in actual performance, contributed to the reported drop in HSD, GED and vocational certificate attainments.
From January 15 through February 22, 2007, more than 500 Job Corps students from 26 centers traveled to Lafayette, Louisiana, to participate in the Blitz Build project and build 11 Habitat for Humanity homes for victims of the 2005 hurricanes that devastated the Gulf Coast region.
The Blitz Build project, a partnership of Habitat for Humanity, Major League Baseball and the Dallas Region of Job Corps, gave students a chance to demonstrate leadership skills and use their career technical training in a real-world setting.
Students from a variety of construction trades, including plumbing, electricity, and building maintenance received valuable hands-on experience while logging more than 20,000 hours of community service.
This project and its positive impact on victims’ lives serve as testimony to the character of our students.
DOL also attributes the second consecutive decline in placement results to changes in data collection and reporting.
The pool of students has grown over the past few years due to the addition of former enrollees (students who did not complete their programs but were enrolled in Job Corps for more than 60 days).
PY 2004 was the first year that former enrollees were included, producing a modest impact on the results; by PY 2005, the full effect was apparent and the negative impact continued through PY 2006.
While these changes will not happen all at once or improve results overnight, the cumulative effect is expected to improve program performance.
Costs associated with this performance goal have trended downward over the last two years because of changes in cost allocations to Job Corps.
The Job Corps program underwent a PART review in 2007 and received a rating of Adequate.
This is a decline from the Moderately Effective rating Job Corps received in a 2004 PART review.
This decline is primarily attributable to a reduced score in the Results and Accountability section of the Job Corps PART.
In response to findings that suggest changes to Job Corps’ financial management practices, DOL is adopting efficiency measures that are linked to performance outcomes, account for all costs, and facilitate comparisons across Department of Labor training and employment programs.
DOL is also improving cost effectiveness by transitioning to a center career clustering approach, improving the tracking and reporting of real property, and using the real property data to make informed resource allocation decisions.
Data quality for this performance goal was rated Very Good.
The data are accurate, relevant, complete, reliable, timely, and valid.
When the OIG cited insufficient management controls over performance data in 2004, DOL designed and implemented new data integrity procedures.
These procedures required regional offices to utilize targeted samples (that highlight the most likely cases where error or manipulation has occurred) for audit reviews to be conducted in conjunction with on-site assessments.
Regional offices were also required to develop procedures for identification and collection of liquidated damages, as necessary.
Since that time, regional offices have recovered $315,739 in liquidated damages.
Trends in performance data show that these audits, and resulting penalties, have affected performance reporting and results; the Office of Job Corps is confident that the new data integrity strategy is producing more reliable student outcome data from Job Corps centers and career transition service providers.
Ensuring the Effectiveness of the Job Corps Program is listed as a Departmental Major Management Challenge (see item II in the challenges table located in Management’s Discussion and Analysis).
To address this challenge, DOL is improving the way Regional Offices monitor the performance of contractors that operate 98 of its Job Corps centers.
In FY 2007, a new process that included both a fiscal and a performance review was implemented.
The Office of Job Corps conducted training for three of six Regional Offices on monitoring contractor performance of financial management and cost reporting, data integrity, and asset management.
The staff at the three remaining Offices will be trained in October of 2007.
The Departments of Interior and Agriculture operate 28 Job Corps centers via Interagency Agreements with DOL.
DOL is negotiating revisions to the Interagency Agreements with these Departments to provide for more accountability on financial and property management by the agencies and greater oversight by the Office of Job Corps.
Finalized agreements are expected to become effective in FY 2008.
Increase placements and educational attainments for youth served through the WIA youth program.
The Workforce Investment Act (WIA) authorizes services to low-income youth (age 14-21) with barriers to employment.
The program serves both in- and out-of-school youth, including youth with disabilities and other youth who may require specialized assistance to complete an educational program or to secure and hold employment.
Through this program, youth are prepared for employment and post-secondary education by stressing linkages between academic and occupational learning.
Additional services available to youth include tutoring, alternative schools, summer employment, occupational training, work experience, supportive services, leadership development, mentoring, counseling, and follow-up services.
DOL collects data for three performance indicators, all common measures for youth and lifelong learning aspects of Federal employment and training programs.
The first, percent of youth entering employment, advanced training or education after leaving the program, indicates whether DOL is transitioning youth into the workforce or post-secondary education – a key to successful careers.
The second, percent of participants earning educational credentials, is a proxy for the preparedness of participants to compete in the 21st century knowledge-based economy.
The third indicator measures literacy/numeracy gains by basic skills deficient out-of-school participants in the WIA Youth Program.
Data on literacy/numeracy gains were collected but are insufficient to report at this time; DOL will establish a baseline in PY 2007 and then targets for PY 2008.
The goal for the WIA youth program was substantially achieved.
In PY 2006, the program reached its target for attainment of a degree or certificate.
Results for placement in employment or education fell slightly below the target; however, the result is an improvement over the PY 2005 result.
DOL is in the process of collecting data to establish a baseline for literacy/numeracy gains.
Increased emphasis on serving out-of-school and the neediest youth likely impacted the program’s ability to meet the target for the entered employment or education indicator.
These populations are the most difficult to serve, and they historically have lower performance outcomes.
Results should improve as WIA-funded youth programs become more effective in serving out-of-school youth and continue to increase coordination with other youth-serving agencies and systems such as juvenile justice and education.
Suzzie is a teen parent attending the Carver-Scott Educational Cooperative (CSEC) in Shakopee, Minnesota.
She took the Medical Careers class which allows students to explore the health field.
Park Nicollet Clinic, CSEC and Scott County developed a 10-week work experience program with academic credits.
Suzzie was one of three parenting/pregnant teens enrolled in job shadowing a variety of high growth medical occupations at the clinic.
Suzzie felt that the WIA youth program helped her with teamwork, communication and mathematics.
She enjoys math now and understands how important it is in a medical profession.
With this inspiration, Suzzie achieved straight A’s and is now attending Crown College as a Post Secondary Education Option student, taking classes that are applicable for her enrollment next year in their two-year nursing program.
Suzzie is the first in her family to go to college and she hopes to inspire others to follow.
Collection of baseline data on literacy/numeracy gains will continue in PY 2007 to enable the program to set a valid target for PY 2008.
The Department will continue strategies that recognize out-of-school and at-risk youth as an important part of the new workforce “supply pipeline” needed by businesses to fill job vacancies in the knowledge economy.
WIA-funded youth programs connect these youth with quality secondary and postsecondary educational opportunities, and high-growth and other employment opportunities.
To support these strategies, DOL formed a Shared Youth Vision (SYV) Federal partnership with the Departments of Health and Human Services, Education, Justice, Housing and Urban Development and Transportation, and the Social Security Administration and the Corporation for National and Community Service.
The focus of the Federal partnership is to assist States in coordinating resources and program delivery strategies to achieve positive outcomes for the neediest youth.
In conjunction with the SYV Federal partnership, DOL awarded grants to 16 States for the development and implementation of pilot projects to provide integrated services to a specific population of the neediest youth.
The decrease in costs for PY 2006 is also attributable to a twelve percent decline in the number of participants served.
The number of participants served fluctuates from year to year.
Costs are not allocated at the indicator level since funds provided to the States support all the measured outcomes – entering employment or education, attaining a degree or certificate, and demonstrating gains in literacy or numeracy – and many of the youth who exit the program experience all three.
The program underwent a PART review in 2003 and received a rating of Ineffective.
After the review, DOL implemented the improvement plan recommendations: In PY 2006, the Department began collecting data from WIA grantees on all three common performance measures for Federal job training programs.
DOL is also contracting an independent study of program effectiveness – using administrative data – to be completed in 2008.
The Government Accountability Office conducted an evaluation titled, “Workforce Investment Act: Additional Actions Would Further Improve the Workforce System.”
To view a summary of the findings, recommendations, and a link to the study, please see Performance Goal 06-2A.
Data quality for this performance goal was rated Very Good.
Strengths of the data included its relevance, reliability, and routine verification.
While verification remains an area for improvement, extensive effort has been directed toward improving data quality through the use of DOL’s data validation system and monitoring at both the national and regional levels (see item IX, Improving Performance Accountability of Grants in the Major Management Challenges section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis).
In particular, ETA drafted a revised Monitoring Guide for data validation in PY 2006 and will implement a streamlined performance reporting system in 2008.
To support the new reporting system, benchmarks for data validation results will be established once baseline studies are completed.
Improve the registered apprenticeship system to meet the training needs of business and workers in the 21st Century.
The National Registered Apprenticeship System is a partnership of the Department of Labor, State agencies, sponsors, industry leaders, employers, employer associations, labor and management organizations, and educational institutions.
It was established in 1937 to provide opportunities for jobseekers to find jobs with career paths, earn competitive wages, and obtain nationally-recognized industry credentials.
The CVS Career Prescriptions for Success (CAPS) program addresses projected shortfalls of Pharmacy Technicians and Pharmacists through a multifaceted career path strategy, which includes building community interest in pharmaceutical jobs, targeting recruitment in high unemployment neighborhoods in Detroit, providing apprenticeships, and assisting current workers with career advancement through academic and training programs.
As a result of this program, several successful apprentices have emerged, including Teresa.
Teresa learned of the CVS CAPS program through Goodwill Industries, a faith-based and community partner.
The mother of two young sons, Teresa was looking for a challenging job in a new field with advancement opportunities.
She joined CVS in August 2006.
Since then, she has excelled as a Pharmacy Service Associate and is now training to become an Assistant Manager.
The Department promotes the apprenticeship training system to potential sponsors and participants and registers and monitors these partners’ apprenticeship programs, in some cases via State Apprenticeship Council/Agencies (SAA).
Registration and oversight officials certify that standards are met for quality, fairness, and opportunity, and that apprenticeship programs incorporate appropriately supervised on-the-job learning and occupation-related technical instruction.
The apprenticeship model has demonstrated success in providing employers in numerous industries with resources to develop new occupations and train a skilled workforce to remain globally competitive.
As a system based on voluntary industry participation, apprenticeship program performance is directly impacted by external factors such as wage rates determined by local apprenticeship sponsors and by the demand for skilled and technical labor in local markets.
Apprenticeship continues to demonstrate positive results as it reached FY 2007 targets for both indicators; therefore, the Department achieved its performance goal.
In fact, the target for the employment retention of registered apprentices was exceeded by four percentage points.
Nationally, there was modest wage gain reported from all apprenticeship programs.
However, due to an unusually high demand for skilled workers in southern Nevada, there was a substantial increase in wages in that area that affected the national average for the wage gain indicator.
The average cost per registered apprentice was $74, or $23 less than the FY 2006 result of $97, because the number of registered apprentices increased from 220,000 in FY 2006 to 304,500 in FY 2007.
In summary, the program’s continued positive results demonstrate that Apprenticeship is an efficient and effective approach to training America’s workers.
The Office of Apprenticeship is working with YouthBuild programs at various sites in Massachusetts to link with construction trades apprenticeship programs throughout the Commonwealth.
The academic and hands-on training in construction safety and building techniques that participants receive is a natural lead into apprenticeship for program graduates interested in pursuing construction careers.
YWCA YouthBuild Springfield is noteworthy because it graduated one of the first two Youth Development Practitioner journey workers in Massachusetts.
The Department continues to re-engineer its database for registered apprenticeship programs.
The system’s new and enhanced reporting capabilities will also reduce staff time necessary to generate management reports, which will improve program efficiency.
Additionally, a survey of employer sponsors conducted in the spring of 2007 portrays their views on apprenticeship and integration with the workforce investment system.
Findings from the survey will be published in FY 2008 and will help shape future improvements to the National Apprenticeship System.
Costs associated with this performance goal remained fairly constant between FY 2005 and FY 2007.
Costs are not allocated to the performance indicator level since funding supports both measured outcomes for apprentices served by the federally administered programs.
The program underwent a PART review in 2005 and received a rating of Results Not Demonstrated – reflecting lack of data on the common measures at that time.
The resulting improvements DOL implemented include adopting the common measures for retention and earnings, and redesigning the Registered Apprenticeship Information System (RAIS) to capture post-training outcomes.
Additionally, the Department continued efforts to expand the numbers of women in apprenticeship by awarding three Women in Apprenticeship and Nontraditional Occupations (WANTO) grants to a consortium of apprenticeship sponsors, and community- and faith-based organizations to recruit, train, employ and retain women in apprenticeship and nontraditional occupations.
Data quality for this performance indicator was rated Fair.
Strengths of the data include its accuracy, but room for improvement remains in verifiability, completeness, timeliness, and validity.
The primary data source is RAIS, an automated system that operates independently from State workforce information systems.
For the 25 States in which SAAs register apprentices, participation in RAIS is voluntary; therefore, complete nationwide data are not available and the collection of retention and earnings data remains challenging.
Recent implementation of the common measures will affect the ability to compare performance trends in the short term.
As indicated in the footnote on the first page of this narrative, wage gain data are limited to Federal efforts.
RAPIDS (which will replace RAIS) includes trend analysis capability and offers features to encourage SAAs to utilize this data collection system.
The system also has greater quality controls to ensure the accuracy of data collected from the federally administered programs.
Efforts continue to determine how Unemployment Insurance wage record information may be accessed to verify employment outcomes of registered apprentices.
It is anticipated that RAPIDS will considerably reduce the estimated staff hours needed to report the earnings indicator.
Implementation of RAPIDS will address a Major Management Challenge (MMC), Improve Apprenticeship Data Quality – included in item IX of the MMC table in Management’s Discussion and Analysis – by making better use of performance data for program oversight and developing a cost-effective strategy for collecting data from SAAs.
Expansion of the Apprentice Electronic Registration (AER) project in RAIS reduces application processing time, improves data quality, increases cost-effectiveness, and improves the program’s ability to track data.
AER’s utilization rate increased from nine percent of participating States in FY 2005 to 50 percent in FY 2007.
The Department continues efforts that began in FY 2005 to review apprenticeship activities in SAA States.
All 25 SAA States are complying with the Department’s SAA review recommendations.
DOL anticipates that the SAA States will continue to correct any deficiencies identified during the review process.
Improve employment outcomes for veterans who receive One-Stop Career Center services and Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program services.
Jobs for Veterans State grants support the delivery of employment services needed by veterans and transitioning service members to promote their success in the civilian workforce.
These staff serve as experts on workforce resources available for veterans.
The local representatives emphasize the provision of services for recently separated veterans and handle outreach to employers, while the outreach specialists focus their efforts on intensive services for disabled veterans and other veterans with significant barriers to employment.
The Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program (HVRP) is a competitive grant program emphasizing stable employment as the critical factor in mitigating homelessness among veterans.
Program participants are served by community-based grantees that provide pre-employment services, establish linkages with service providers funded by other Federal agencies, and rely on the specialists to assist them in finding employment once they are job-ready.
One-Stop Career Centers serve younger, recently separated veterans who have limited civilian work experience and older veterans with civilian experience who have become unemployed.
HVRP grantees serve homeless veterans who have minimal attachment to the workforce.
DOL applies the Federal job training common measure definitions of entry to employment and retention in employment as the critical indicators of successful outcomes for all veterans and all disabled veterans who receive One-Stop services.
For HVRP, DOL has used similar indicators; common measure definitions will be fully implemented in PY 2007.
In setting performance targets, VETS seeks to improve service to veterans at a rate that is ambitious yet attainable.
The goal was not achieved; only three of the six targets were reached.
For all veterans served by One-Stop Career Centers, entered employment and employment retention rates declined by two percentage points from PY 2005.
The employment rate target was reached while the retention rate target was not reached.
For disabled veterans, the employment and retention rates also declined by two percentage points from PY 2005; as for all veterans, the employment rate target was reached while the retention rate target was not reached.
The employment rate target for HVRP participants was not reached, and an estimate of the final retention result indicates it will exceed the target.
Results in the charts below are for the first two indicators, which include disabled veterans but not HVRP participants.
During the past year, continued improvement in broad national economic indicators for unemployment, interest rates and productivity had a positive impact on VETS program performance.
The decline between PY 2005 and PY 2006 of two percentage points across the results of all four indicators for veterans served by One-Stop Career Centers is attributable, at least in part, to a temporary disruption in interstate sharing of data on employment outcomes.
That situation is expected to improve during PY 2007.
While the employment rate attained by HVRP for PY 2006 was the second highest in the program’s history, an increase in the proportion of new grantees may have contributed to the failure to reach the ambitious target.
In response to these results, DOL intends to redouble its efforts to facilitate coordination among the VETS State offices, State Workforce Agencies and community based grantees, such as those responsible for implementing HVRP.
To improve employment outcomes for veterans, DOL is developing and implementing State Workforce Agency performance standards.
Within the HVRP, VETS is implementing common measure reporting procedures to facilitate comparison of results across agency programs.
Additionally, VETS will place increasing emphasis on serving those homeless veterans with significant barriers to employment or chronically homeless veterans by extending the period grantees actively support and monitor employment retention.
VETS also is expanding the Recovery and Employment Assistance Lifelines program by assigning additional program outreach staff at the major medical installations throughout the country.
This program, which is complemented by efforts of the Departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs, provides individualized job training, counseling and reemployment services to seriously injured or wounded veterans of Operation Iraqi Freedom, Operation Enduring Freedom and other recent conflicts.
In addition, VETS plans to enhance states’ flexibility with the Jobs for Veterans Act of 2002 (JVA) Grant program by helping states to more effectively integrate DVOP specialists and LVER staff into the One-Stop Career Center System.
Net costs for this performance goal remained fairly constant between PY 2004 and PY 2006.
The 2005 PART review of the Jobs for Veterans State Grants Program rated the program Moderately Effective and noted that it serves a large number of veterans, while focusing on those veterans requiring more intensive services by leveraging other resources within the workforce investment system.
The improvement plan included setting more ambitious performance targets and conducting an independent evaluation to assess the effects of recent program changes on employment outcomes.
VETS established ambitious targets in the DOL FY 2006-2011 Strategic Plan and completed the first phase of a two-year evaluation (see summary of SRA International study in table below).
HVRP was rated Moderately Effective in its 2006 PART review, which noted that it provides competitive grants to community-based organizations that coordinate the wide range of local services required to enable homeless veterans to achieve self-sufficiency.
The improvement plan included conducting a rigorous evaluation, continuing to improve cost-effectiveness, and strengthening accountability.
VETS has taken significant action on these items by conducting competitions for PY 2007 grants, fully implementing common measures for PY 2007, and launching an independent evaluation in September 2007.
Data quality for this performance goal was rated Good.
Strengths of the data include relevance, timeliness, and completeness.
The four indicators addressing the outcomes of veterans and disabled veterans served by One-Stop Career Centers rely upon the reporting system for One-Stop Career Centers (Performance Goal 06- 2C).
Therefore, in general, the data quality assessment for that goal also applies to these indicators.
The two indicators addressing outcomes for homeless veterans served by HVRP rely upon the Veterans' Employment and Training Operations and Program Activity Report (VOPAR).
VOPAR areas for improvement are reliability and verifiability.
During 2007, DOL enhanced the system to accommodate common measures and added internal consistency checks.
During 2008, DOL plans additional system upgrades and focused oversight of implementation and verification processes.
Routine quality control measures include trouble-shooting by expert VETS field staff and workshops on reporting at the annual conference attended by all grantees representatives.
VETS has no DOL major management challenges.
Meet the competitive labor demands of the worldwide economy by enhancing the effectiveness and efficiency of the workforce development and regulatory systems that assist workers and employers in meeting the challenges of global competition.
The nation’s future economic success will largely depend on a workforce that meets employers’ needs for new and skilled workers.
Through partnerships with State and local workforce agencies, business and industry, education and training providers, faith-based and community organizations, and economic development agencies, DOL makes strategic investments in job training and increase accessibility and quality of information that helps match workers with employers.
The current competitive economic environment requires a regulatory structure in which benefits of regulations exceed their costs.
DOL conducts reviews to determine if regulations have or will have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small businesses.
These reviews examine the regulations’ compliance costs and whether the regulatory burdens of all employers, both large and small, are reduced.
In today’s global economy, the well-being of American workers is increasingly tied to international stability, which is in part a function of broad-based economic prosperity.
DOL-supported international technical assistance programs focus on raising living standards through workplace-related interventions, supporting the expansion of free and fair trade, eliminating exploitive child labor, and promoting the basic rights of workers.
Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB).
To support expansion of Whirlpool manufacturing operations in Ohio, the Governor’s office committed $1.2 million in customized workforce services as part of an incentive package connected with the company’s acquisition of Maytag.
As operator of the local One-Stop Career Center, Marion Connections was charged with securing a workforce to support Whirlpool’s implementation of a weekend production operation which would create 500 jobs within 90 days.
This challenge involved recruiting, application screening, testing, interviewing and referring for hire.
Results met project goals and greatly exceeded Whirlpool’s expectations.
Due to the success of this initial partnership, Whirlpool (the county’s largest employer) has designated Marion Connections as its exclusive portal to employment.
To date, over 3,000 interviews have been conducted and over 1,500 job seekers have been hired.
Fostering a competitive workforce means providing workers with training that meets the rapidly evolving workforce needs of employers.
By connecting workers with those needs, DOL can more effectively place those workers in better paying, long-term jobs.
DOL supports training efforts that tie directly into local economies – where jobs are located.
To achieve this goal, DOL relies on a mix of programs that deliver training focused on the skills employers need to succeed.
DOL tailors its programs to specific situations and workers whose skills are no longer in demand, individuals with disabilities, and veterans.
DOL primarily measures its success by the numbers of individuals who find and remain in those jobs.
In FY 2007, DOL helped more workers find jobs, improved foreign worker application processing for employers, and improved workers protections internationally.
Greater percentages of older workers were still employed several months after completing training programs.
In addition to finding a job, staying employed is an important measure of success.
More policies and effective practices were developed to assist workers with disabilities.
Almost 100 percent of H-1B applications were processed within seven days of filing.
Workers with H 1B visas help fill critical skill gaps.
The timeliness of permanent labor certification applications increased.
More children were removed or kept out of exploitive child labor worldwide.
The number of countries better prepared to address child labor increased.
These national results are realized by meeting the needs of one worker and one employer at a time.
Vignettes throughout this section provide stories about the individuals who benefit from programs in Strategic Goal Two.
For more program-specific information, please see the Performance Goal narratives.
The following table provides key information, goal statements, and achievement for DOL performance goals associated with this strategic goal.
Those with labels that begin with “06” operate on a Program Year (PY) basis, and are reporting on the period from July 1, 2006 to June 30, 2007 due to the forward-funding authorized in the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (WIA).
Results for Performance Goal 06-2D (Community Based Job Training Grants) are not reported because data are considered inadequate for the purpose of determining goal achievement.
Five of the ten performance goals in Strategic Goal 2 are for employment and training programs whose results are measured by entered employment rate (percent of participants who obtain jobs subsequent to receipt of services) and by employment retention rate (percent of those who obtained jobs who are still employed six months later).
The charts below indicate these programs’ current and previous year results.
Earnings results are not included because the programs that measure earnings used different indicators prior to this year.
Average earnings will be reported in FY 2008, when we expect to have comparable data for these programs.
Significant differences in results between programs are generally explained by differences in types of services offered and populations served.
The net cost dedicated to Strategic Goal 2 in FY 2007 was $5.027 billion.
The first pie chart below is based on total Departmental costs of $47.872 billion; the second is based on an adjusted net cost of $12.771 billion that excludes the major non-discretionary program costs associated with Strategic Goal 4.28 Net cost dedicated to Strategic Goal 2 in FY 2006 (restated to reflect current goal structure) was $5.064 billion.
Samson thought he knew everything about cars since his father had opened an auto repair shop in his native Ethiopia.
But when he entered the General Service Technician (GST) program at Shoreline Community College, Samson realized how challenging modern car repair had become.
The program, funded through the President’s High Growth Job Training Initiative, provides industrycertified automotive technician training.
In addition to learning about automotive repair, Samson also says he has become a better listener and communicator.
He graduated from the program in 2006 and is now working full-time.
Samson aspires to become a National Institute for Automotive Service Excellence-certified repairman.
Increase the employment, retention, and earnings of individuals registered under the Workforce Investment Act Adult Program.
The Workforce Investment Act (WIA) Adult Program helps adult workers (unemployed and employed) acquire the skills they need to compete in a global economy.
Funds are provided by formula to States, which operate statewide networks of One-Stop Career Centers to provide comprehensive services to workers and employers.
Services include assessments of skills needs, individual career planning, occupational skills training, on-thejob training, skills upgrading, entrepreneurial training, and adult literacy activities.
States also use the WIA Adult Program to leverage additional, non-Federal resources to increase the quality and variety of assistance.
Through collaboration with program partners, the WIA Adult Program seeks to assist individuals in their career goals, reduce welfare dependency, and improve the quality, productivity and competitiveness of the nation’s workforce.
The Department evaluates this program’s success using the Federal job training program common measures: entered employment and employment retention rates, and average earnings.
A high entered employment rate indicates that participants have improved financial opportunity.
A high retention rate indicates stability of participants’ new positions.
Increased average earnings indicate that participants are getting better jobs.
Future performance targets will reflect performance information and data analysis.
Jamie, a single mother of a 22-month old girl, entered the Starke County WorkOne Office in February seeking help to attain marketable skills.
Within three weeks of her initial appointment at WorkOne, Jamie was enrolled in high-growth occupational training to become a Certified Nurses Aide (CNA), her first step toward self-sufficiency.
Using Workforce Investment Act funds to pay for her tuition and supportive services, Jamie was able to complete her CNA training and certification in April.
She began working the next day at Wintersong Village, a local nursing facility in Knox, Indiana.
With the assistance of a local faith-based organization, Jamie acquired her own home.
Jamie is continuing her education at IVY Tech.
The performance goal for the WIA Adult Program was not achieved.
However, DOL reached two of the program’s three performance indicator targets.
The exception was the entered employment rate of 69.7 percent, which fell six percentage points below the target.
As the workforce investment system moves to an integrated service delivery model with broader reach through co-enrollment efforts involving those with lower statistical success such as traditional Wagner-Peyser Act employment services recipients, some drop-off in the entered employment rate was expected.
Thus, program performance must be viewed in the context of strategic approaches such as program integration and co-enrollment.
The employment retention rate of 82.2 percent reached the target; this means people who find a job are staying employed.
Six month average earnings of $11,850 also reached the target.
Continued progress in this indicator will help show the workforce investment system’s effectiveness in preparing and placing workers in high growth, high wage industries.
Key strategies to improve services to WIA participants include strengthening strategic partnerships (through strategic planning and grant application requirements) with business and industry, and the education community to develop workforce solutions in the context of State and regional economies.
These partnerships promote the use of WIA resources to prepare workers for jobs with career pathways in high demand occupations and industries.
Also, the Department expects its grantees to leverage a wide array of non-WIA resources to maximize the impact of WIA investments and prepare more workers with the skills they need to be successful in today’s global economy.
For example, many States and regions are align WIA funds with other economic development, education, and foundation dollars to transform their regions’ talent development approach.
The WIA Adult program plays a critical role in this process by preparing workers in new high-growth industries and occupations.
Funds may also be dedicated to new talent development models.
For example, many areas are placing additional emphasis on entrepreneurship training and lifelong learning.
In order to address employees’ need to work and upgrade skills simultaneously, DOL encourages States to implement educational strategies for adult learners that are flexible and offer multiple entry and exit points.
Costs associated with this goal decreased five percent from PY 2005 to PY 2006.
This partly reflects normal spending fluctuations since States have three years to expend obligated funds.
Costs are allocated to the performance goal rather than at the indicator level, as funding supports all the outcomes for the Adult program.
The WIA Adult program underwent a PART review in 2005 and received a rating of Adequate.
As required in the PART improvement plan, DOL is working with Congress to reform the WIA and consolidate funding for related programs to reduce administrative overhead and increase States’ flexibility to tailor services.
Common performance measures, allowing for comparison between various job training programs, have already been instituted.
In addition, DOL is contracting an independent study of program effectiveness – using administrative data – to be completed in 2008.
Also in 2008, a more rigorous, seven-year evaluation will begin to determine WIA services’ impact on employment and earnings outcomes for participants.
In the FY 2008 Budget, the Department is proposing to implement Career Advancement Accounts (CAAs).
These personal $3,000 accounts are designed to help workers more efficiently access education and training options, and successfully transition to the global market place.
Data quality for this performance goal was rated Very Good.
Strengths of the data include its validity, accuracy and completeness.
While verification remains an area for improvement, extensive effort has been directed at improving data quality through the use of ETA’s data validation system and monitoring at both the national and regional levels (see item IX, Improving Performance Accountability of Grants in the Major Management Challenges section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis).
ETA drafted a revised Monitoring Guide for data validation in PY 2006 and is working to implement a streamlined performance reporting system in 2008.
Increase the employment, retention, and earnings of individuals registered under the Workforce Investment Act Dislocated Worker Program.
The Workforce Investment Act (WIA) Dislocated Worker Program aims to quickly reemploy laid-off workers and to enhance their employability and earnings by increasing occupational skills.
The Department allocates 80 percent of funds by formula to the States.
The Secretary of Labor may use the remaining 20 percent for discretionary activities specified under WIA, including assistance to localities that suffer plant closings, mass layoffs or job losses due to natural disasters, and military base realignment and closures.
The types of training services available to dislocated workers are occupational skills training, on-the-job training, skills upgrading, entrepreneurial training, job readiness training, adult literacy activities, and customized training for employers who commit to hiring.
The Federal job training common measures assess this program’s success.
The entered employment rate measures the success of participants returning to work.
The retention rate demonstrates if a participant has employment stability.
Average earnings is a measure of salary after program intervention.
The performance goal for the WIA Dislocated Worker Program was not achieved.
The entered employment rate indicator result of 77.3 percent missed the target by seven percentage points.
The Department is investigating the impacts of co-enrollment strategies (simultaneous participation in multiple employment and training programs) on performance.
Thus, program performance must be viewed in the context of this strategic approach.
The employment retention rate for dislocated workers nearly equaled last year’s result, but missed the target by two percentage points.
This may be due to residual impacts of the coenrolled participant pool.
In the first year of recording results for the average earnings measure, the program posted a result of $14,212, reaching the target.
Continued experience with this indicator will help show the workforce investment system’s effectiveness in preparing and placing people in high growth, high wage industries.
Many paper mills in Maine are closing due to foreign competition.
Many of these displaced workers have specialized job skills that are not transferable to other industries.
However, with the assistance of the WIA Dislocated Worker Program, Brian was able to receive the training to successfully compete in a changing economic environment.
Brian was selected for the Radiological Technologist program, graduated with honors and was hired by the office where he completed his practicum.
Today, Brian is a Certified Medical Assistant at the Family Medicine Institute.
As a testament to his success, Brian states, “I love my job, and I work with great people.”
Brian will attend Kennebec Valley Community College to complete that degree and his employer will pay for tuition.
Great work Brian!
DOL encourages and supports States and local areas to eliminate duplicative systems, to develop integrated service delivery strategies for dislocated workers, and to focus education and training investments on skills and occupations in demand.
The Department is also developing strategies for a regional approach to workforce and economic development, and education.
In instances of worker dislocations in PY 2007, DOL expects States and regions to provide increased support for postsecondary education and lifelong learning opportunities, and place additional emphasis on connecting dislocated worker populations to high growth occupations consistent with the region’s talent development plans.
Costs associated with this goal dropped six percent from PY 2005 to PY 2006, likely due to normal spending fluctuations since States have three years to expend obligated funds.
Costs are allocated to the performance goal rather than at the indicator level, as funding supports all the outcomes for dislocated workers.
The Dislocated Worker Program underwent a PART review in 2002 and received a rating of Adequate.
The program has generally met its goals for increasing participants’ reemployment and earnings after getting a new job, and program accountability has improved with the adoption of the new common measures (a PART recommendation), allowing for comparisons between various job training programs.
However, the review found that States and local communities have insufficient flexibility to help dislocated workers.
DOL has been working with Congress to reform the Workforce Investment Act to further consolidate funding for related programs to reduce administrative overhead and increase States’ flexibility to tailor services.
In addition, DOL is contracting an independent study of program effectiveness – using administrative data – to be completed in 2008.
Also in 2008, DOL will sponsor a more rigorous, seven-year evaluation that will begin to determine WIA services’ impact on employment and earnings outcomes for participants.
The Government Accountability Office conducted an evaluation titled, “Workforce Investment Act: Additional Actions Would Further Improve the Workforce System.”
To view a summary of findings, recommendations, and a link to the study, please refer to Performance Goal 06-2A.
Data quality for this performance goal was rated Very Good.
Strengths of the data include its validity, accuracy and completeness.
While verification remains an area for improvement, extensive effort has been directed toward improving data quality through the use of DOL’s data validation system and monitoring at both the national and regional levels (see item IX, Improving Performance Accountability of Grants in the Major Management Challenges section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis).
DOL drafted a revised Monitoring Guide for data validation in PY 2006 and is working to implement a streamlined performance reporting system in 2008.
Improve outcomes for job seekers and employers who receive One-Stop employment and workforce information services.
A fundamental underpinning of the nation’s One-Stop Career Centers is the delivery of core employment and workforce information services to both businesses and job seekers.
Core services include job matching, referral, assessments, and a wide array of workforce and labor market information, career guidance products and tools.
Funded principally through the Wagner-Peyser Act, as amended by the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) of 1998, these services are designed to help both employed and unemployed workers obtain jobs and give employers access to skilled workers who will help them compete in the global economy.
In addition to core services, the One-Stop Career Centers provide customized services to clients with special needs such as Unemployment Insurance claimants, veterans, and migrant and seasonal farm workers.
Providing employment and workforce information services that account for the uniqueness of local/regional labor market conditions and the needs of workers is the key to achieving successful outcomes for job seekers and employers.
Services are provided in collaboration with a wide array of One-Stop partners and are coordinated with other services available through One-Stop Career Centers, such as training, child care, and transportation.
The Department uses the common measures for Federal employment and job training programs to evaluate its core employment and workforce information services: the entered employment rate, the employment retention rate, and average earnings.
The performance goal for the Wagner-Peyser Act funded Employment Service system was not achieved.
The entered employment rate of 61.0 percent and employment retention rate of 78.0 percent were both three percentage points below targets and two percentage points below PY 2005 performance.
These measures gauge the workforce system’s ability to bring together individuals who are seeking employment and employers who are seeking workers.
The Employment Service system registers roughly 13 million participants a year, far more than other employment and training programs.
Therefore, the lower results are driven, in part, by the system’s universal approach for jobseekers and workers with a diverse range of skills and employment needs.
Nicole came to the MontgomeryWorks One-Stop Career Center looking for a job.
She had a limited work history and low self-esteem; her goal was to be able to “look someone in the eye.”
Nicole had four children under the age of 5 and was receiving food stamps/housing from a program for battered women.
Her school Individual Education Plan diagnosed her with learning disabilities.
With services coordinated by the Disability Program Navigator (DPN), Nicole enrolled in the WIA Adult program and received occupational training related to computers and customer service, both high growth industries.
Upon completion, Nicole’s skills were a match for a recipe consultant.
In less than a year, she was promoted to a management position.
The One-Stop DPN helped Nicole receive assistance with child care, transportation, occupational skills training and employment.
Today, in her new career, Nicole can confidently look people in the eye!