WAsHINGToN, D. C., December 1, 1911.
Sir: I have the honor to submit, for your consideration, my first annual report as Secretary of the Interior, covering the year ended June 30, 1911.
I was appointed to this office by you on March 7, 1911, and qualified on March 13, 1911, succeeding the Honorable Richard A. Ballinger.
Less than one-third, therefore, of the year included in this report has been covered by my administration.
Columbia Institution for the Deaf and Dumb.
The Secretary of the Interior is also charged with certain duties in connection with the District of Columbia, including the protection of the public streets, avenues, squares, and reservations in the city of Washington from improper appropriation or occupation; the issuance of deeds to certain lots in that city, and special duties imposed by particular acts of Congress.
A very substantial increase of efficiency and economy would undoubtedly result from a rearrangement of these executive departments so that work of a related character could be administered by one department, and so that the mass of work itself could be more evenly distributed among the departments.
The grouping of related subjects in a single department would undoubtedly materially reduce the work of some, without greatly increasing that of others.
The present situation is the quite natural outgrowth of the manner in which the Department of the Interior was first created and the inconsistent duties which were then imposed upon it.
The principal bureaus which were at first placed under it were the General Land Office, the Office of Indian Affairs, the Patent Office, and the Pension Office, but as new matters were undertaken by the General Government which did not logically fall under any of the other departments they were naturally assigned to the Department of the Interior, which became a sort of administrative'"catchall"and has so continued, although partially relieved by the establishment of the Department of Agriculture and the Department of Commerce and Labor.
It is difficult to understand why the Patent Office should not have been transferred to the latter department upon its creation, although the Patent Office is now so thoroughly organized and systematized and its work so definitely covered by statutory and administrative regulations that the matters which come up from it to the Secretary of the Interior do not add materially to his work.
I am of the opinion, however, that if this bureau should be transferred to the Department of Commerce and Labor a relationship could be established between it and the head of that department which would increase its efficiency and usefulness.
The local duties of the Secretary of the Interior relating to various matters in the District of Columbia should unquestionably be turned over to the Commissioners of the District.
I do not feel, however, that my brief period of office qualifies me to recommend a comprehensive reorganization of the Department of the Interior.
What I have said above is chiefly intended as preliminary to the statement that the real function of the Department of the Interior has been, broadly speaking, the administration and disposition of the lands and natural resources held directly or in trust by the Nation.
I believe that the Department will more effectively and economically carry on this tremendously important function if it is given all of the distinctively administrative duties relating to it.
The general theory under which the Government has proceeded and is now proceeding is that the public domain should be utilized for actual settlement and development rather than as a source of revenue for the General Government.
In my judgment this theory is entirely correct.
The essential thing is to see that the theory is, in fact, carried into effect and that under the guise of settlement we do not permit mere exploitation which in the last analysis retards and prevents both settlement and development.
While settlement and development afford and should afford ample opportunity for the profit of the individual settler and of all those who contribute to legitimate development, it is the conviction that exploitation under the guise of development has not been effectively prevented which has led to the great public movement for the conservation of our national resources.
This movement is not in any way opposed to prompt and wise development of the public domain, nor to its immediate settlement by those who really intend in good faith to occupy and improve it and not merely to acquire it so that it may be turned over to the actual settler after an unnecessary profit has been paid to the middleman and the promoter.
There is undoubtedly a legitimate field for the resident or nonresident promoter of enterprises upon which the effective settlement of certain portions of the public domain practically depends.
There is a legitimate field for the expenditure of capital in the development of the land and its contents.
Indeed, the bona fide settler is dependent in many instances upon the services of the promoter and the money of the capitalist.
In so far as this need is properly supplied the promoter and capitalist should be protected, but there is no disguising the fact that both promoter and capitalist frequently seek and secure advantages to which they are not justly entitled.
Often their efforts not only do not tend to develop, but actually retard and prevent development.
Large areas of the public land, great quantities of timber and of mineral deposits, extensive water powers, are eagerly sought after, not for the purpose of immediate utilization and development, but so that they may be held to await the aftergrowth of the country, to be then transferred to those who will actually utilize them after an unearned increment has been paid to those who acquired the property from the Government under insufficient laws or lax administration.
It is this sort of exploitation which should be frankly and absolutely prevented and which, if prevented, would enable us to remove many of ¿he restrictive provisions which now irritate and hamper the bona fide settler and industrial pioneer.
The man on the ground should be the object of our solicitude, and we should protect him against those who would place upon his shouiders any unnecessary burden.
I believe that to this end we can profitably modify certain of the existing laws relating to the public domain.
Take, for instance, our agricultural lands.
The object of the law with respect to these is to ensure actual settlement.
This can be accomplished only by rigid insistence upon the requirement of actual residence upon the ground with only such exceptions as are required or justified by agricultural conditions which make town residence in close proximity to the tract cultivated appropriate.
The system should be flexible enough to recognize the actual differences which in fact exist with respect to the different kinds of land and the different methods of cultivation.
Land adapted to dry farming, land adapted to ordinary cultivation without irrigation, and land requiring irrigation each presents differences in method of cultivation and should admit of appropriate differences in the rules with regard to residence.
The law should insist upon the cultivation of agricultural lands by the entryman, but should permit the application to such lands of rules and methods of treatment suited to their differing characteristics under the general administrative supervision of the Secretary of the Interior.
In other words, the laws and the administrative regulations should be made to fit actual conditions as they exist, and they should be just as stringent in the prevention of nonresident exploitation as they are liberal in the encouragement of the bona fide settler.
Although substantially true of all homestead entries, this is especially true of irrigated lands under the Reclamation Service.
The present law requires the man who desires to acquire a home on a Government reclamation project to reside upon the particular tract he enters for five years under the homestead law and to reclaim at least one-half of the irrigable area as well as to pay the full reclamation charge, which must be divided into not more than 10 annual installments.
This law has been a perfectly natural outgrowth of the previous laws relating to the public domain, and it has worked marvelously well in spite of its disadvantages.
It is now clear, however, that it contains certain serious disadvantages for which there is no longer any adequate excuse.
What we desire is actual settlement.
We should have no desire to impose any unnecessary hardships upon the actual settler.
What has happened is that the law has failed to take into account the conditions under which the actual settler is required to work.
Irrigated lands, as a rule, are in their natural state but parts of the desert.
They are usually covered with the growths which the desert produces.
These must be cleared and the land graded and otherwise prepared for the application of water before any crops whatever can be raised.
In many instances each tract must also be fenced, and where it is adapted for actual residence on the ground itself the horne must be constructed, together with the necessary outbuildings and shelters for the agricultural implements and machinery essential to cultivation.
All of this requires a considerable expenditure which is usually a heavy drain upon the resources of the settler.
The land itself can seldom be made to produce any immediate revenue.
If it is fruit land, the trees must be planted and reach a certain growth before they will bear fruit.
Subsidiary crops can often be raised, but frequently not with profit until after one or two years' preliminary cultivation.
It is often essential to plant the land in alfalfa or other leguminous crops before it is suitable for the raising of grain, sugar beets, or other crops for which it is ultimately intended.
All of this means that where the settler has not accumulated a considerable capital and is without other means of livelihood, the requirement of actual residence upon the land during the first two years after entry is a serious hardship and a real obstacle to settlement.
Many men who would make admirable settlers and citizens of the Western States are prevented from acquiring the homes and the substantial livelihood which would otherwise be opened to them.
I see no reason whatever for insisting upon the requirement of actual residence at the outset in such cases.
On the other hand, it would be subversive of the public interest if the residential requirement were reduced without strict insistence upon actual and progressive cultivation and improvement of the ground.
The law should fasten its attention upon the real situation.
It should absolutely insist upon cultivation and it should permit the relaxation of the rule requiring residence during the first two years.
Actual residence, however, should be rigidly required for a sufficient period to make certain that the entryman was a real settler with the intention of making his home upon the land.
I believe a residential requirement of three years following the first two after entry would protect the public interest, ensure the carrying out of the essential purpose of the law, and at the same time facilitate and encourage settlement and development.
It would permit many men who sincerely desire to acquire homes for themselves to enter tracts of land, put them under cultivation, and build homes without depriving themselves of the means of livelihood during the period when the ground would not support their families.
Clerks, mechanics, and small farmers, as well as many others, would be enabled to invest their accumulated savings in their future homes and to continue in their present employment while they were preparing these homes for future occupation.
The requirement of progressive cultivation and three years' residence would be an effective obstacle to the mere exploitation of the public domain.
The repayment of the reclamation charges also requires some modification of the existing law.
The theory of the law is entirely correct.
It is that the Government has set aside the available revenue from the sale of public lands and has added to it certain other funds, all of which are, in effect, loaned to the future settlers on the public domain.
The Reclamation Service is constituted a trustee for the Government and for the settlers.
It invests the public moneys in the construction of irrigation works and administers these works while the land is being settled and until the investment has been returned to the Government, to be invested in the irrigation of other lands and the development of other sections of the country.
It is a useful agent of public benefaction, and nothing should be done to interfere with its beneficent operation.
At the same time the settler should be enabled to carry the financial load with as little effort as possible.
The law requires that it shall be repaid in annual installments not exceeding ten in number, and in view of recent legislation permitting the readjustment of these charges under appropriate conditions when circumstances require it, I believe the division into ten installments is wise, provided the settler is enabled to acquire patent earlier.
However, these installments should not be, and fortunately the law does not require them to be, equal in amount.
This permits the recognition of the actual conditions to which I have already referred and which call for an unequal division of the water charges so that the installments required during the early years of settlement shall not be so large as those of later years when the ground has been made more productive and better able to carry the load.
The policy of readjusting these charges in the manner described is now being put into practical effect in the Reclamation Service wherever occasion requires.
There is, however, urgent need for the modification of the existing law so as to permit the settler to acquire the title of the property, subject to the lien of the Government for the unpaid installments of the water charge, at any time after the settler has complied with the residence and cultivation provisions already recommended and has paid a proper portion of the water charge.
In other words, at any time after five years from the date of entry and within the life thereof, when the settler has actually lived upon the land continuously for three years and has put it under continuous and progressive cultivation and has paid a definite and substantial portion of the total water charge, he should be given the title to his property, subject to an effective lien for the payment of whatever part of the water charge remains unpaid.
This will enable him to do what he is not now able to do-mortgage his property for the purpose of raising funds with which to continue its development, or to meet any unexpected obstacle to its profitable cultivation, or any unanticipated drain upon his financial resources.
In my judgment, the failure of the law to fit the facts in the respects already noted is largely responsible for a feeling sometimes existing on the part of the settlers on the Government irrigation projects that the human side of the problem has not been sufficiently appreciated by the Reclamation Service.
Moreover, present methods of administration fail to differentiate properly between the engineering and administrative phases of the reclamation work.
The Reclamation Service is naturally and necessarily concerned chiefly with engineering, planning, and construction, and I can not speak too highly of the character and qualifications of the general force which has this important work in charge.
Its success has been demonstrated in many ways.
It has worked out new and untried problems under adverse conditions.
The most convincing proof of its success is the widespread and growing demand for new Government projects all over the West.
Everywhere the demand is that the Government shall undertake new projects or make extensive additions to old ones.
In many places the promoters and settlers upon private irrigation projects are eager to have the Government take them over.
The general prosperity of the projects already undertaken is apparent.
Only 338 homesteads open to entry now remain unentered on the 29 projects thus far undertaken.
With the amendments to the law which I have suggested, I believe that all of these projects will become prosperous and their settlers generally happy and contented.
Those will fail who do not possess the essentials necessary for success, but such failures can never be prevented.
We should aid the unfortunate in every proper way, but merely sentimental laxity with the shiftless and incompetent can only work disaster to the public at large and to the individual settlers whose industry and ability entitle them to the substantial reward which awaits those who really reclaim the desert.
What is needed is wise administrative ability in those who are put in charge of the reclamation projects after they are opened for entry.
The Reclamation Service has long recognized this and has endeavored to fill the positions of irrigation manager in the various projects by the appointment of men of administrative rather than distinctly engineering ability.
Nevertheless, after the project is opened for entry it is necessary for a considerable period of time to have the irrigation works operated by engineers so that latent defects may be discovered and remedied and the works fitted to the conditions of actual operation.
One of the most serious phases of our entire reclamation work is the disposition of the surplus waters which now frequently damage or even ruin portions of the irrigated district through seepage.
The problem thus presented is one calling for the very highest engineering skill, and I have directed the Reclamation Service to devote its principal energies to remedying the unfortunate conditions thus created.
I mention it here chiefly to illustrate the necessity for continued engineering supervision of an irrigation district even after it is opened for entry.
Government and the settlers than have heretofore existed and will add in many ways to the efficiency of the Reclamation Service.
One thing which should be immediately done, however, is to turn over to the Reclamation Service the collection of the payments due the Government for the water charges so that they may be handled immediately upon the projects themselves and the funds be transferred to their proper depositories.
The present law requires these charges to be collected by the local land offices, which are often not sufficiently near or in touch with the reclamation projects to make effective cooperation possible.
The result is delay and duplication of work and frequent misunderstandings between the project superintendent and the nearest land officials.
It is a division of work and of responsibility for which there is no adequate justification, and, as both the Commissioner of the General Land Office and the Director of the Reclamation Service recommend that these collections be transferred as above suggested, I earnestly urge appropriate action by Congress.
The considerations above mentioned with respect to residence and cultivation of land entries under irrigation projects would apply with little less force to homestead entries in general, provided all of our public lands were classified and then administered or disposed of in accordance with their real character under the classification.
Too much emphasis has heretofore been put upon the maintenance of nominal residence for the full five years and too little upon the continuous and progressive cultivation of the land.
No land should be opened to homestead entry except that which is really suitable for homes and then the homemaker should be aided in every proper way.
Agricultural land should not be classified as timber land simply because it has on it some trees of secondary importance; but one of the abuses of the homestead law has been the entry under it of land chiefly valuable for its timber.
The purpose has not been agricultural settlement but timber exploitation.
This should no longer be permitted.
Where timber land will be valuable for agricultural uses after the timber is cut, the Government should dispose of the timber as timber and should open the land to homestead entry only aftér the timber has been removed.
Where timber land will not-be adapted for future agricultural uses, but can be reforested, it should be retained by the Government for this purpose.
The fact that purchases must now be made in the Appalachian Mountains by the National Forest Reservation Commission shows how unwise it is for the Government to dispose of such lands to private individuals.
Public lands can now be withdrawn from entry for purposes of classification, but after they are classified they can not be appropriately administered in accordance with the classification.
If the statutes can be altered to secure proper administration under the classification principle, it would seem entirely safe and on the whole wise to relieve the homesteader of the requirement that he should live upon his homestead during the first two years after entry, provided during that period he shall cultivate a substantial and fixed proportion of his land and during the three following years shall increase this cultivation and maintain his actual residence upon the land.
This system would aid the genuine homesteader and diminish the present abuses of the homestead law.
It is sometimes urged that the homesteader should be permitted to secure his title after three years from the date of entry without other change in the present homestead law.
This, however, would not properly meet the real situation as it would neither relieve the entryman of the obligation to reside on his land during the first two years after entry, nor would it ensure the actual progressive cultivation of a definite and substantial proportion of the ground.
The commutation laws should be repealed.
They have been largely utilized in obtaining valuable timber land under the guise of homestead entry.
Some practical and legal method should be found for definitely limiting the time within which such scrip as military bounties, soldiers' additional homesteads, etc., may be located and lands acquired thereunder.
Few, if any, of the intended beneficiaries of this scrip now hold it or have received adequate consideration from those to whom they have sold.
It adds greatly to the difficulties of administration and should be retired as soon as possible.
The timber and stone act should be immediately repealed, and also the act authorizing the cutting of timber on mineral lands.
Those acts hold out a constant invitation to abuse and to mere exploitation of the kind I have described.
The excuse for their continuance would be removed if the Secretary of the Interior were empowered to sell timber from the public lands outside of the national forests separate from the land on which the timber stands, and also to permit near-by settlers, prospectors, and miners to have use of small quantities of timber, either for a nominal charge or without any charge whatever under appropriate restrictions.
It is the insistence upon keeping on the statute books such laws as the timber and stone act and those authorizing the cutting of timber on mineral lands which necessitates the adoption of restrictive legislation or administrative regulations that hamper real settlement and development.
If we can frankly adopt and put into force laws which will absolutely prevent mere exploitation, we can far more safely enact liberal laws and regulations to encourage legitimate development.
The public range can not be properly administered under the existing law.
It should be leased for grazing purposes under the broad administrative discretion of the Secretary of the Interior, so that the leases can be adapted to actual conditions and the legitimate interests of the sheep and cattle men.
At present the range itself is being destroyed, and both sheep and cattle men are coming more and more to the conviction that their own interests will be better subserved by a leasing law.
In fact, the enlarged application of the leasing principle to the public domain generally will, in my judgment, more effectively promote development and protect the public interest than the present system.
Certainly coal, oil, gas, asphalt, nitrate, and phosphate lands can be more appropriately developed by leasehold than by the present system of classification and sale of the fee which prevails with respect to coal.
Many of the Western States have recognized and are acting upon this principle.
These applications of the leasing system are stated more in detail in connection with affairs in Alaska, but principles which are economically sound in Alaska should be economically sound elsewhere, due allowance being made for the different stages of development.
Our mining laws should be thoroughly revised, and particularly the use of the power of attorney should be abolished or greatly curtailed and safeguarded.
At present there is no limitation whatever upon the number of claims which can be entered by a single man as attorney for others.
I find among those who are personally and financially interested in mining development an increasing conviction that this should no longer be permitted.
The advocacy of a definite limitation to the number of claims which can be entered by any one person as attorney for others is almost universal, and many believe that the entire power of attorney principle should be eliminated from the law.
The surveying regulations relating to mining claims should be greatly simplified and should then be strictly enforced.
I renew the recommendation made by my predecessor that notice of mining locations should be recorded in the local land offices.
I also recommend earnestly the abolition of the law of the apex.
It should not be allowed to gain any further foothold in the public domain and it should be abolished now before it has been extended any further in Alaska.
It is unsound in principle and leads to constant and expensive litigation.
The comprehensive application of the proposed repeal to the public lands outside of Alaska has been opposed in some quarters upon the ground that the greater portion of the mineral areas in these lands have already been entered, but I see no reason, however, why this should deter us from abolishing the law of the apex without prejudice to the existing rights which have been acquired under it.
The general mining laws should be amended by the addition of a provision requiring final entry and payment to be made upon all mineral and mill-site locations within a fixed period after date of location of the claims, exclusive of the time covered by bona fide pending adverse claims or protests.
This will be in harmony with other laws relating to the acquisition of the title to public lands which almost without exception, provide that after the performance of certain acts by claimants they must, within a prescribed period, apply for patent and make the payments required by law for the lands sought.
If mineral locators were required within a specified time to come forward with their applications for patent, the burden would be upon them to show the validity of their claims, by limitation many invalid claims would lapse, and where the claims are bona fide it would tend to incite the owners to a more diligent development thereof and a more careful compliance with the terms of the law.
The present law making deposits of mineral oils in the public domain subject to location and entry under the placer mining laws (act of Feb. 11, 1897; 29 Stat., 526) is unsatisfactory, from the standpoint of both the individual and the Government.
It does not afford protection to the bona fide explorer while he is engaged in the expensive operation of discovering and exploiting the deposits, which in most instances lie far beneath the surface.
When oil is discovered there is no adequate return to the Government and no legislative provision insuring legitimate development and preventing monopoly.
I therefore suggest that the present law should be repealed and a law enacted providing for the leasing of such deposits, the law to contain provision for the protection of prospectors during an exploration period preliminary to the leasing of the lands after the discovery of oil therein.
I also recommend the enactment of legislation to permit the disposition of the surface of lands containing, or believed to contain, deposits of oil, under appropriate agricultural land laws, reserving to the United States for future disposition the deposits of oil therein.
That all lands withdrawn under the provisions of this act shall at all times be open to exploration, discovery, occupation, and purchase under the mining laws of the United States, so far as the same apply to minerals other than coal, oil, gas, and phosphates.
The purpose of this provision is said to be the continuation of the right to mine the metalliferous minerals on withdrawn lands.
Instead of saying this, however, the act permits the mining of all minerals "other than coal, oil, gas, and phosphates."
This leaves no adequate protection for withdrawals of land valuable as potash or nitrates, which should be held by the Nation for the future use of its agriculturalinterests.
Attempts have even been made to secure title to withdrawn lands for the mining of sand and gravel.
While these entries have been rejected, more difficult questions arise in connection with claims for the mining of stone and gypsum.
Such entries open the way to serious abuse, especialiy when attempted on land withdrawn for important public purposes like water-power sites or storage reservoirs.
That all lands withdrawn under the provisions of this act shall at all times be open to exploration, discovery, occupation, and purchase under the mining laws of the United States, so far as the same apply to metalliferous minerals: Provided, That the rights of any person, etc.
The present laws relating to water power are hopelessly inadequate.
The protection of the public interest is supposed to be accomplished by the statutory provision that permits for the development of water power shall be revocable at any time at the will of the administrative officials.
This is thoroughly unsound both in principle and in practice.
Many of those who would be willing to invest capital in the legitimate development of water power, but who wish to have the security which legitimate development rightfully demands, are unwilling to risk their investment on a tenure revocable at discretion.
The result is that such capital as is invested in water-power development under Federal permit claims to be entitled to extraordinary returns on account of the extraordinary risk theoretically involved.
At the same time the investors having once spent their money, proceed largely, if not entirely, upon the assumption that there is, in fact, no such risk as the revocable nature of the permit would imply.
They assume, and properly assume, that the Government not only would not confiscate the investment, but that it will treat the investor fairly in any future readjustment of the terms of its grant.
The result of the whole matter is that we have far less development than would be possible under a proper system and the development which we do have proceeds under what seems a legitimate excuse for exacting a larger return than should be necessary.
It requires no elaborate argument to demonstrate that the substitution of water power for coal consumption is a clear public gain.
Coal can be burned but once and in the process the greater portion of its potential energy is wasted by the imperfect methods and machinery now employed.
The supply of falling water is perpetually renewed by natural forces and is wasted chiefly by nonuse.
The whole subject of water-power development and control should, in my judgment, receive the immediate consideration of Congress, and constructive legislation should be adopted without further delay.
The limited powers of the Federal Government restrict its interest in this subject to power sites of two kinds—those upon the public domain and those on navigable streams.
Some doubts have been expressed as to the authority of Congress to control the latter effectively.
I do not think that these doubts are justified.
I believe the Federal Government has adequate constitutional power to control water-power development both in navigable streams and upon the public domain and to exact compensation and to impose proper conditions in either case.
It is also apparent that the Federal Government can act more effectively than the States in many cases, and that this will be increasingly true as long-distance transmission and the yoking together of distant sources of water power not only justify but require the extension of Federal regulation over hydro-electric enterprises as agencies of interstate commerce.
Many of our most important streams are interstate and some international in character.
The States themselves have called and are calling upon the Federal Government to improve and to protect these streams.
When such protection and improvement develops water power or adds to the value of water power already existing, there can be no sufficient reason adduced why the cost of the protection and the improvement should not be repaid in whole or in part out of the values thus created, nor can there be any adequate reason why the Federal Government should pay the cost of this improvement merely to turn over the revenues to the States to be used for other purposes than water development.
Both on navigable streams and on the public domain the Federal Government will be more and more called upon to make expenditures for the protection of the watersheds and of the streams themselves.
This expense should not be borne wholly by the general taxpayers if the expenditure produces special local benefits of the kind described.
On the other hand, the development of water power, especially where it is sold in the form of electrical energy for lighting, heating, traction, and general power purposes, gives to the community where it is consumed a very necessary and important interest in the prices at which the electric energy is sold and in the character of the service.
The regulation of both prices and service should, as a general rule, be committed to the State and to its agencies delegated for that purpose.
The locality in which the water power is developed also has, on its part, a legitimate interest in the application of any rental which may be exacted for such development.
It is frequently said that power-site rentals must, in the last analysis, increase the price of power paid by consumers and thus be drawn from the local community.
Two reasons why it is not true, even of a public utility, are suggested.
In the first place there are frequently two localities—the producing and the consuming one—which are not identical.
Electricity generated at a point in the national forests of the Sierras might be consumed either in San Francisco or Los Angeles.
The rentals now paid for this development by the hydro-electric companies go in part to the support of schools and roads in the counties where the forests lie and in part to the Federal Treasury as a partial offset to the expense of maintaining the national forest.
It is substantially true to say that the water-power revenue is expended in the mountains where the power is developed.
Should this benefit be taken entirely from the mountain communities and bestowed upon the cities in the form of cheaper electric power?
This conflict between the interests of the producing and consuming communities is destined to increase as better knowledge and improved apparatus give a longer and longer radius of high-tension electric transmission.
But even if the interests of the producing and consuming communities were identical, a reduction or abolition of water-power rentals could not, as a general rule, result in lower prices for electric energy.
This is due to the fact that electricity is generated not only by water power, but also, and still more extensively, by steam power.
There are very few communities where water power is, even approximately, the sole generating agent.
The public can not, as a practical matter, fix one price for electricity generated by water power and another price in the same locality for the same commodity generated by steam.
To do this where hydro-electric energy can not supply the whole demand would give a great and unjust advantage to an arbitrarily chosen and favored class of consumers.
Now, steam is generally the more costly producing agent and therefore the price of electricity generated by water power is, in any locality, normally fixed by and but little lower than the price of electricity generated by steam power.
Public regulation may reduce these two prices together, but the minimum limit of such reduction must be that price at which a well-equipped and well-managed steam plant could earn a proper return.
This minimum limit is generally well above a fair return on the actual cost of water-power development.
The difference goes to the hydro-electric corporation, unless retained for the public by rentals or taxes paid into the public treasury and expended for public purposes.
No correct or permanent solution of the water-power question can be reached until the interests of the State and of the Nation have been reconciled and coordinated, and this can now be done.
The Federal Government should not part with any of its constitutional powers.
Their exercise is certain in the future to become essential to the protection of the public interest.
At the same time, it should not interfere with the State or local control except as the public interest may demand.
Permission for the development of water power on navigable streams and from nonnavigable streams on the public domain should be granted by the Federal Government only on the payment to it of rentals which should be readjusted at periodic intervals of no longer than a decade under general provisions which will protect the interests of the investor and of the public.
This compensation should always be reasonable and should generally be small in the case of new and experimental enterprises.
As a general principle, the revenues derived in this way should be devoted to waterway improvement, with special care for the river system and watershed of the stream from which the revenues are derived.
It is increasingly clear that proper development and protection of stream flow for all purposes, including those of navigation, domestic use, irrigation, and power require that the stream and its branches from source to mouth should be regarded as essentially a unit.
This, indeed, is one of the reasons why the Federal Government is the most appropriate agency, if not the only available agency, for the comprehensive development of our waterways.
Logically, the revenues derived from water power may belong to the Nation for its general use, but it would seem that national and local interests can best be reconciled by devoting these revenues to local improvements so far as such improvements are necessary or wise.
Such a use removes one of the principal objections to Federal control.
The water-power permits issued by the Federal Government should also expressly provide that the permittee, by the acceptance of the grant, agrees to comply with such reasonable regulations of his rates and service as may be prescribed by the State or the appropriate State agency delegated for this purpose.
Such a provision as this may technically not be necessary in many cases, as the use of water power for local public utilities usually requires State or local consent to the occupation of public streets and highways for its effective distribution, which gives a basis for local regulation, but the insertion of this provision in the Federal permit will remove any possible doubt.
It should be so worded as to indicate that the Federal Government, without parting with any power it may possess in this regard, has adopted the general policy of delegating the function of regulation in all cases not interstate in character to the State and local authorities so long as these authorities protect the public interest.
Such a system as I have suggested will result in a certain degree of automatic control of water-power permits in the public interest, for when the period of readjustment of the compensation arrives the Federal Government will naturally inquire into the condition of the grant, and if the grantee has been furnishinggood service at reasonable rates and making only reasonable profits there will, ordinarily, be no occasion for increasing the compensation.
If, on the other hand, for any reason whatever the local authorities have been lax and the grantee has been permitted to make an unconscionable profit, the Federal Government can increase its compensation and secure for the public in this way its proper share.
In the exercise of this right, as in all of the terms of the grant, the interests of the grantee should not only be amply protected, but should be treated with liberality, so that the interest of the public may be promoted by the vigorous development of our water power.
My purpose, however, is not to discuss the details of a water-power grant, but to point out that there is no necessary conflict between State and Nation in a rightly considered water-power policy and to urge the prompt adoption of such a policy and the passage of the necessary legislation.
There is also a pressing need for some fundamental reorganization in the General Land Office itself.
The mass of administrative work which that office is called upon to handle requires the very highest degree of efficiency in its organization and personnel.
The present system fails to take into consideration either the quantity of the work or the importance of the interests intrusted to its employees.
This is especially true in the higher grades in the service, which now are clearly underpaid for work requiring the highest degree of technical skill and personal integrity.
Men are paid comparatively small clerical salaries for work involving property interests of immense value and also matters of smaller financial importance but of the most serious consequence to individual claimants.
These salaries should be increased so that they will at least approximate proper compensation for the character of work required.
There is also another fundamental item which should be given immediate attention.
The distribution of the public domain for actual settlement and development is properly and necessarily an administrative function.
It can not be transferred to the courts for adjudication upon the facts arising in each individual case.
Questions of administration or of policy connected therewith must remain in the hands of the administrative force.
At the same time in the interest of fair dealing toward the individual claimants their claims should not be finally passed upon solely by those who investigate and report upon charges of fraud or noncompliance with the statutes.
To prevent this the General Land Office has sought to differentiate between the executive and the quasi-judicial functions which it exercises.
This effort would be aided by sufficient appropriations to justify an increase of the membership and the pay of the Board of Law Review so that that board can be given the dignity and ability of a distinctively quasi-judicial tribunal with the jurisdiction and duty to determine the legal questions and issues of fact involved in contested claims under the administrative supervision of the Commissioner of the General Land Office.
The right of appeal to the Secretary of the Interior should remain as at present, but the appropriations for the Office of the Assistant Attorney General for the Department should be increased to provide for a greater number of specially qualified assistants to be assigned to these appeals and to original quasi-judicial proceedings before the Secretary.
There should, of course, be preserved the existing right of recourse to the courts to obtain their construction of the law in cases where the issue involved is purely one of law and not of fact.
If the quasi-judicial force of the Department and of the General Land Office is strengthened as suggested, I am sure that the conflicting interests of the claimants and of the Government will be more carefully and correctly considered and decided than is now possible.
The business of the Department will be expedited and all those who have contested claims before the Department for adjudication will be better satisfied.
There are twelve national parks, embracing over 4,500,000 acres, which have been set apart from time to time by Congress for the recreation of the people of the Nation.
While public interest in, and use of, these reservations is steadily increasing, as shown by the growing number of visitors, adequate provision has not been made for their efficient administration and sufficient appropriations have not been made for their proper care and development.
At present, each of these parks is a separate and distinct unit for administrative purposes.
The only general supervision which is possible is that obtained by referring matters relating to the national parks to the same officials in the office of the Secretary of the Interior.
Separate appropriations are made for each park and the employment of a common supervising and directing force is impossible.
Many of the problems in park management are the same throughout all of the national parks and a great gain would be obtained and substantial economies could be effected if the national parks and reservations were grouped together under a single administrative bureau.
Bills to create a bureau of national parks have heretofore been introduced in Congress, and in my judgment they should immediately receive careful consideration so that proper legislation for this purpose may be enacted.
Adequate appropriation should also be made for the development of these pleasure grounds of the people, especially through the construction of roads and trails, and their proper care and maintenance.
In several of the national parks there are large private holdings which should be acquired by the Government.
I earnestly recommend the enactment of legislation authorizing the retirement of employees who, after long and faithful service, are disabled by age or infirmity from the efficient performance of their duties.
Moreover, those of technical or superior administrative ability are and must continue to be paid smaller salaries than they would command in private employment.
It is therefore impossible for them to acquire financial independence or make due provision for old age, either by way of profits or by way of savings from their salaries.
Considerations of humanity and justice might well be urged against the dismissal of employees who have given the years of their strength to faithful and efficient public service and against their assignment to the lower grades of menial or clerical duties as an alternative to dismissal.
But I prefer to put the matter on other and more selfish grounds.
The Government simply can not afford not to retire these employees with due and honorable provision for their old age, and this for two reasons.
In the first place, many able and energetic men serve the Government at salaries far below the commercial standard for like services.
They choose to do so because the public service satisfies their best and highest ideals of personal integrity and professional achievement.
Such men are continually forced out of the service by the necessity of making due provision for themselves and their families before old age comes upon them.
If the Government would insure them against this peril it could continue to employ them at salaries far less than a private corporation would be compelled to pay.
Every consideration of economy and sound business policy requires that their services should be retained on terms so favorable to the Government.
The loss, taken in the mass, is irreparable, for the system operates as a survival of the unfittest by continually drawing off the more energetic and abler men, leaving a larger and larger proportion of the inefficient in the public service.
In the second place, the Government is paying much if not most of the cost of a proper retirement system through the inevitable relative inefficiency of the present plan.
Not only are superanuated employees dropped to and retained in the lower grades because of sympathy yielding to personal or political pressure, but in the higher grades, from which the rank and file of the service inevitably derives its spirit and tone, there is a tendency to retain men who have lost the alertness and enthusiasm essential to the highest efficiency of their own work, and still more essential for inspiring in and requiring of their subordinates such alertness and enthusiasm.
Not only do they thus fail to make the positive contribution to the general efficiency of the service which is due from men in their position, but they have a negative effect in the same direction by blocking the avenues of promotion and legitimate ambition.
The men below them not only fail to receive the proper stimulus of precept and example, but are at the same time deprived of the hope of promotion which ought to be the reward of efficient service.
This condition is now becoming apparent.
It has been delayed by the fact that the widespread application of the principle of permanency in the public service goes back less than one generation, and by the further fact that the industrial and social problems of recent years have forced the Government into new fields of activity and thus compelled the organization of new bureaus and departments.
These new administrative units have been largely recruited from young men who are still in the prime of life.
Many of the older bureaus and departments have from similar causes largely increased their personnel, recruiting them chiefly from young men.
This sudden expansion of governmental activity has postponed and mitigated the worst evils inherent in the present system; but sudden expansion can not continue indefinitely.
We must face and provide for normal conditions of growth.
Under such conditions general efficiency in the public service is impossible without due provision for the retirement of aged employees.
This is attested by the experience and practice of foreign governments, which have long had a permanent civil service, and by that of large railroad and commercial corporations in our own country.
On June 25, 1910, in a special message you invited the attention of Congress to the situation along the lower Colorado River as then understood.
Conditions appeared to be such that unless prompt and vigorous steps were taken a very large loss in land values to the people of the Imperial Valley would result.
The suggestion was made that a suitable sum be placed at your disposal to meet this emergency.
ByresolutionapprovedJune25,1910,Congress appropriated$1,000,000 for the purpose of protecting the lives and property interests of the citizens in the Imperial Valley.
To the Secretary of the Interior was delegated the supervision of the work.
A detailed investigation of the physical conditions on the ground was made by a member of the Mississippi River Commission, who was subsequently employed to supervise the work.
The preliminary report submitted by him, after thorough consideration, was approved and immediate steps taken looking to the actual construction of the project in accordance with the approved plans which it was believed would result in returning the Colorado River to its old channel.
Delays in the completion of the necessary arrangements with the Government of Mexico were encountered, and a successful consummation of the project was imperiled by the rapidly approaching flood season, which rendered the work hazardous.
The situation was further complicated by the disturbed political conditions in Mexico, as the result of which labor conditions on the project were greatly demoralized.
After determined efforts the break at Abejas River was successfully closed and levees on the west bank of the Colorado for a considerable distance north and south of the Abejas were constructed.
The early summer floods again broke through at the Abejas, jeopardized the permanency of the work and ultimately resulted in considerable damage to the levees.
The essential part of the damaged portions is readily susceptible of repair during the present low-water season, and such repair is believed to be vital to the interests of the people of Imperial Valley.
This work is now being done.
By your direction I convened a board of persons interested in and familiar with conditions along the Colorado River to make a careful study of the work accomplished and to suggest plans for future operations.
The board recommends that the work be continued along certain lines and is of the'opinion that to meet the present emergencies the sum of at least $1,000,000 should be provided.
The systematic treatment of the river is a problem to be worked out in connection with the Government of Mexico, and the board suggests the creation of an International Colorado River Commission, to be composed of Mexican and American engineers, with ample authority to investigate and report to their respective Governments a basis for the final adjustment of all questions affecting the use and control of the waters of the Colorado.
I heartily concur in this recommendation.
The problem is one of great magnitude and moment.
The interests of the Government of the United States are such as, in my opinion, justify the early consideration of the entire subject by Congress.
Any provision for future operations along the Colorado River which Congress may see fit to make should authorize the expenditure of any portion of such fund within the limits of the Republic of Mexico in accordance with agreements heretofore or hereafter made with that Government.
1) Report of J. A. Ockerson of May 20, 1911.
2) Copy of letter of Secretary of Interior, dated June 1, creating board.
3) Report of board, dated June 7, 1911.
4) Statement of physical and related facts accompanying report of June 7, 1911.
I call special attention to the congested condition of the buildings occupied by this Department and to the necessarily decreased efficiency of the clerical force because of overcrowding.
Three of the bureaus of this Department—the Geological Survey, the Bureau of Mines, and the Reclamation Service—are located in rented quarters at an annual combined rental of $52,800.
Good administration would seem to indicate that provision should be made for these bureaus to be housed in Government-owned buildings.
The Pension Office and the Office of Indian Affairs in the Pension Office Building, the General Land Office and the Bureau of Education in the old Post Office Department building, and the Office of the Secretary and the Patent Office in the Patent Office Building are located in Governmentowned buildings.
Each of the above branches of this Department has accumulated and is constantly accumulating records of priceless value to the Government.
In some, notably the Geological Survey, the Patent Office, the Office of the Secretary, the General Land Office, and the Office of Indian Affairs, these records have accumulated to such an extent that it is beginning to be a grave question how to provide for future accumulations, and those now existing are crowded in every available space—in corridors, attics, workrooms, basements, and subbasements-constantly exposed to accumulating dust, dampness, and improper handling, to say nothing of the ever-existent grave danger from fire and consequent total destruction.
There should be provided at the earliest practicable date a properly constructed fireproof central filing place for the records of this Department or a hall of records for the departmental service in the District of Columbia generally.
The most congested condition with respect to the clerical force occurs in what is known as the Patent Office Building, housing the Patent Office and the Office of the Secretary.
This Department was organized and created by the act of March 3, 1849 (9 Stat., 395), and among the bureaus transferred to it under the organic act was the Patent Office.
From the time of the Department's organization until 1853 the Department proper (that is, the Office of the Secretary, comprising the Secretary and his staff of assistants and clerical force, which now includes the Office of the Assistant Attorney General for the Interior Department) occupied rooms in a building rented by the Treasury Department.
These quarters appear to have been unsuitable and inadequate, and the Secretary of the Interior in his annual report for 1851 (p. 34, H. R. Ex. Doc. No. 1, 31st Cong., 2d sess.) formally announced to the President and Congress his intention, as soon as the other wing of the Patent Office was completed, to transfer to it the Department proper and the different offices thereto attached, which proposition appears to have received congressional sanction.
33,954 square feet are assigned to the use of the Office of the Secretary (including the Office of the Assistant Attorney General), embracing 266 employees.
When the Patent Office Building was erected it was evidently believed that provision was being made for the growth in volume of business and clerical force of the Patent Office, beyond any possibility of future overcrowding.
The fourth story of this building was architecturally designed to provide an exhibition place for all the models which should accumulate, together with the scientific library.
Before 1893 it became necessary to remove the patent models from the building and devote this space to clerical purposes.
Wooden partitions have been erected in almost the entire space theretofore devoted to exhibition purposes, thereby cutting the space up into small rooms, poorly ventilated, badly lighted, and overcrowded with records, which space has been assigned to the use of various divisions of the Patent Office.
The scientific library, which is on that floor, is so limited architecturally that it has become overcrowded, and it is almost impossible to provide the proper ventilation and to light it satisfactorily.
In this space, under these conditions, it is necessary to provide accommodation for attorneys who from day to day are obliged to examine the records of patents issued or pending.
Every effort has been made to prevent the accumulation of dust by the vacuum process of cleaning, but under existing conditions the practical results have been most unsatisfactory.
Every available foot of space for clerical assistance and the filing of records in the Patent Office has been occupied by them, and I am convinced that the Department is now face to face with the proposition of renting outside quarters for the accommodation of the constantly expanding activities of the Patent Office.
The Patent Office througnout its existence has been self-sustaining, and according to the accounts kept by it has turned into the Treasury a total surplus of approximately $9,000,000.
Attention is invited to the report of Secretary Garfield for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1907, at page 33; to the report of Secretary Ballinger for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1909, at page 33; and also to Secretary Ballinger's report for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1910, at page 49.
Senate document 543, Sixty-first Congress, second session, shows an effort made to obtain relief for this situation by securing an appropriation of $220,000 for the erection of an addition to the Patent Office Building.
This effort failed, and a renewal of the estimate has been submitted with the estimates for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1913 (Book of Estimates, p. 350).
Even though the Office of the Secretary were removed from the Patent Office Building and provided with quarters elsewhere, it would be but a short time until the same condition would again exist, because the overcrowding now existing in the Patent Office, in relieving itself, would extend practically over the entire area now occupied by the Office of the Secretary.
I can not too strongly urge the grave necessity now present that steps be immediately taken to provide a new, modern, properly equipped building for the use of the Patent Office, constructed upon lines which will suffice for its future needs and growth and be a monument to the inventive genius of the American people.
The space provided in such a building for future growth might be used for the priceless records of the other bureaus of the Department of the Interior until other fireproof buildings or a hall of records is provided.
Prior to the abolishment of the division system in the office of the Secretary in April, 1907, the office of the Assistant Attorney General was charged with the adjudication of appeals from the General Land Office and the preparation of opinions on miscellaneous questions of law.
Little by little the scope of its work has been increased until it has included Indian, pension, reclamation, and other matters.
In the six months prior to April 1, 1907, 1,163 matters were disposed of—an average of 269 a month.
In contrast, an average of 1,285 a month marks the work done during the year ended October 1, 1911.
The office was called upon to consider 17,478 matters during that period and disposed of 15,412.
During the corresponding period in 1909 to 1910, 14,399 matters came before the office for consideration, and 14,084 were disposed of—an average of 1,174 a month.
Department and individuals and between this Department and other executive departments of the Government, particularly with the Department of Justice, in relation to litigation; also the examination of bills pending in Congress and the preparation of reports thereon.
Suits in the local courts against the Department are defended by the Assistant Attorney General for this Department.
In the year ended June 30, 1911, 24 cases were disposed of in the Supreme Court of the District, in which the Department was successful in all but one, and this has been reversed on appeal to the court of appeals.
In the latter court the Department submitted and was successful in 12 cases during the year.
In addition to this there were many interlocutory proceedings.
Notwithstanding the great volume of work thus presented to this office for consideration and action, the disposal thereof has proceeded with great care and such dispatch as its importance and difficulties and the number of the force permitted.
The work in the General Land Office during the past year has been energetically pushed.
The majority of the most important lines of work in the office are up to date.
There has been no relaxation in the work of the prosecution of frauds against the United States and the attempted unlawful acquisition of lands.
The closer scrutiny paid to applications under the 'Carey Act" has demanded the devotion of a larger amount of time on the part of the field force to this work.
Not only is an examination made of the land sought to be segregated, but the question of sufficiency of water and practicability of the proposed scheme is looked into.
Every care, by examination in the field, is also being taken that no mineral lands are lost to the United States under school land, railroad, or other grants, providing for the acquisition of agricultural lands only.
There has been a close cooperation between the work of the field force of the General Land Office and the work of the Geological Survey in the classification of lands.
The investigation of coal claims in Alaska is proceeding as rapidly as possible.
A decision has been rendered in the so-called"Cunningham" cases, holding the entries for cancellation.
Hearing has been had in one other group, and examination made on the ground in a large majority of the cases, to see whether or not a mine or mines have been opened in accordance with the provisions of law.
The total number of locations in Alaska coal claims is given as 1,125; the number of applications for patent, 521; number of notices of charges served, 172; number of answers to charges filed, 125; number of expiration notices served, 566; number of answers to expiration notices filed, 90; number of entries yet to be investigated as to good faith, 262.
Up to July, 1911, indictments returned in Alaskan criminal proceedings, affecting coal lands, covered 641 claims out of a total of 1,125 coal claims.
The vexed question of adjustment and adjudication of claims in the Imperial Valley, California, has proceeded very satisfactorily.
This matter, which has been pending for so many years, has been virtually settled.
The total cash receipts from the sale of public lands, including fees and commissions on both original and final entries, for the fiscal year 1911, were $7,245,207.69.
Miscellaneous receipts were as follows: From sales of Indian lands, $2,822,600.71; reclamation water-right charges, $892,414.29; sales of timber in Alaska, depredations on public lands, sales of Government property, and copies of records and plats, $129,704.91, making the aggregate total of cash receipts of the General Land Office for the fiscal year 1911, $11,089,927.60, a decrease of $373,996.46 from the preceding fiscal year.
The total expenses of district land offices and salaries and commissions of registers and receivers, incidental expenses, and expenses of depositing public moneys during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1911, were $870,242, a decrease of $3,395.33.
The aggregate expenditures and estimated liabilities of the public-land service, including expenses of district land offices and surveys, were $3,195,759.38.
The total area of public and Indian land originally entered during the fiscal year 1911 is 17,639,099.54 acres, a decrease of 8,752,169.55 acres as compared with the area entered during the fiscal year 1910.
The area patented during the fiscal year 1911 is 12,272,495 acres, an increase of 1,289,345 acres as compared with the fiscal year 1910.
The number of patents issued during the fiscal year 1911 were 72,189, as against 72,080 for 1910.
During the past year there were approximately 215,300 acres of agricultural lands in national forests opened to settlement and entry in accordance with the provisions of the act of June 11, 1906 (34 Stat., 233).
The Commissioner of the General Land Office, in his annual report, recommends legislation providing for some changes in the administration of his office, and other matters of various kinds.
Some of them have been discussed hereinbefore in this report.
He makes a number of recommendations which should be given careful consideration.
In this way the interests of both the settler and the Government would be better subserved and more expedition attained.
The first year's work under the direct system of surveys has been very successful.
It is estimated that, in a survey of approximately 30,000 miles, the saving to the Government by the direct system, as compared with the contract system, will be about $5 a mile, or in the neighborhood of $150,000.
In addition there is a saving of from one to two years in time in the final approval of the surveys performed.
The so-called "Clark" boundary line between Texas and New Mexico has been retraced and monumented in accordance with the provisions of the resolution passed by Congress February 16, 1911 (36 Stat., 1455).
The work was done economically and efficiently.
The records of the Land Office show that.there is an increasing demand for segregation lists under the Carey Act.
During the last fiscal year there were examined in the neighborhood of 1,650,000 acres of selections by the various States to which the Carey Act applies.
There have already been withdrawn under the act of March 15, 1910 (36 Stat., 237), for Carey Act exploration and survey, 3,500,000 acres.
During the past fiscal year there were approved to States and Territories an area of 316,572.44 acres, of which 299,123.17 acres were school-land selections.
During the year 1911 there were patented on account of railroad and wagon-road grants an area of 1,152,827.77 acres.
During the past fiscal year there were logged under contracts on ceded Chippewa lands 80,005,150 feet of timber, of the value of $572,830.73, as compared with 88,503,880 feet of timber, valued at $553,005.42, during the year 1910.
On September 15, 1910, a sale of pine timber was held at Cass Lake, Minnesota, at which there was sold timber estimated to contain 51,310,000 feet of white pine and 263,475,000 feet of Norway pine, the total amount of the accepted bids being $2,709,330.04, an average price of $8.59 per thousand feet.
This was the largest sale of Chippewa timber yet held.
All of the unsold pine timber on ceded Chippewa lands was offered for sale at Cass Lake, Minnesota, on October 21, 1911.
The price paid for timber on ceded Chippewa lands sold at the different sales is $5,933,242.41.
The scientific investigations of the Survey have been continued along lines similar to those followed in other years and the usual number of contributions have been made to the knowledge of geology and related subjects.
The appropriations for the work of the United States Geological Survey for the fiscal year 1910-11 aggregated $1,477,440.
Classification of public lands.
Among the special features of the year's activities the work in the public-land States should be given first place.
The field investigations and examinations have been more extensive and more detailed, and reports covering a wider range of subjects have been prepared and submitted to the Secretary's Office and to the General Land Office and the Office of Indian Affairs.
The Geological Survey is called on for reports covering lands listed for patent and lands which it is proposed to eliminate from the Indian or forest reservations and throw open for settlement, in order that their mineral or nonmineral character or adaptability for power or irrigation purposes may be determined.
All Carey Act lists are submitted to the survey for a statement as to the sufficiency of the water supply and the adequacy of the proposed plan of irrigation before the lists are approved for segregation.
Coal lands have been classified during the year at an increased rate.
The area appraised as coal land during the fiscal year 1910-11 exceeded that so appraised in the preceding year by 3,000,000 acres; and the area classified as noncoal land during 1910-11 is 2,386,444 acres greater than that so classified in 1909-10.
On the other hand, the average price fixed per acre and the total appraised value are notably less for the last year than for the preceding year.
The difference is due to the large acreage of lignite and low-grade subbituminous coals in eastern Montana and Wyoming appraised at the minimum value fixed by law.
Two great withdrawals of land for determination of its coal character were made during the year-one in the Dakotas and one in Idaho.
The restorations have, during the past fiscal year, been more than offset by the withdrawal of areas indicated as coal bearing by new information or by a study of data already at hand.
However, in Colorado, Montana, and Wyoming, where the field work was concentrated during the season of 1910, the restorations far outbalance the withdrawals.
It is probable that the withdrawn area has reached its maximum this year and will steadily decrease hereafter.
During the year 630,604 acres in California and Wyoming were withdrawn from entry to be examined for oil, and 1,232,719 acres in the same States, shown by field examination to be non-oil lands, were restored, making the withdrawals for oil outstanding June 30, 1911, 3,970,429 acres in eight States and Territories.
In addition all oil lands in Alaska, comprising an unknown area, were withdrawn during the year.
In the early part of the fiscal year the outstanding withdrawals of phosphate land made by the Secretary of the Interior were ratified by the President under the act of June 25, 1910.
A deposit of phosphate rock in southwestern Montana, similar in character to the deposits of Utah, Idaho, and Wyoming, and at the same geologic horizon, was discovered by the survey.
This discovery is important not only because of the quantity of phosphate found, but because it indicates the possibility that the deposits of phosphate rock are distributed over a much wider territory than had formerly been supposed.
The area withdrawn as a result of this discovery comprises 33,950 acres, which, with withdrawals in Florida and Utah, make a total of 65,589 acres withdrawn during the year.
Field examinations in Idaho resulted in the restoration of 149,929 acres, leaving in phosphate withdrawals June 30, 1911, a total of 2,399,416 acres.
The completion of the classification of lands within the Northern Pacific Railroad grant in Montana and Idaho provided for in the sundry civil act of June 25, 1910, was made by the Survey.
Work of the year resulted in the classification of 288,465 acres.
The work of classifying the public lands with relation to their value for water-power development has followed the general plan pursued in previous years.
On July 2, 1910, the earlier withdrawals, amounting to 1,454,499 acres, were ratified and continued by the President.
As a result of field investigations, 143,555 acres included in withdrawals were determined to be without value for power purposes and were restored to the public domain -and 204,460 acres were included in new withdrawals, the total area withdrawn at the close of the fiscal year amounting to 1,515,423 acres.
Eight hundred and fifty-one applications for right of way across the public lands for railroads, canals, ditches, and reservoirs for irrigation, mining, and municipal supply and power development have been passed on by the Survey.
Thirty-one segregation lists prepared under the Carey Act have been referred during the year to the Survey for report.
The projects represented by eight of these lists were determined to have sufficient water supply for reclaiming the lands considered.
Examination of 18 applications showed that under the plan of irrigation proposed by the State the projects contemplated would have an insufficient water supply, and reports were made accordingly.
At the close of the fiscal year three applications were awaiting a detailed statement by the applicants of the plan of reclamation proposed, and two were under consideration.
The designation of non-irrigable areas as subject to entry under the enlarged-homestead act has called for an increasing amount of field investigation.
By the act of Congress of June 17, 1910, the provisions of the original act, somewhat modified, were extended to the State of Idaho, and a large area in Idaho has been opened to such entry.
The greater part of the investigations and designations under the enlargedhomestead act has been made on account of petitions for action on specific tracts.
Two hundred and forty-eight petitions were received and 162 were acted upon.
At the close of the year 137 petitions were pending, most of them awaiting reports on uncompleted field examinations.
There is hereto appended (p. 75) tabular statements showing progress of coal classification and valuation, oil land withdrawals, phosphate land withdrawals, power site withdrawals, designations under the enlarged homestead act in the various States and Territories, and metalliferous classification of Northern Pacific Railroad grant lands in Montana and Idaho.
Geologic Branch.
Geologic surveys and investigations were continued in 39 States and Territories by a force of 129 geologists.
Over 76 per cent of the appropriation was expended in the 16 States and Territories containing the large areas of public lands.
Systematic detailed surveys of important mining districts were continued in Colorado, Utah, Nevada, California, Idaho, Montana, and Arizona, and general geologic and paleontologic investigations were conducted in all parts of the country.
In Alaska 12 field parties covered 13,815 square miles by reconnoissance topographic surveys and 36 square miles by detailed topographic surveys.
Detailed geologic surveys were made of 321 square miles and geologic reconnoissance surveys of 8,635 square miles.
Considerable time was also spent in studying special problems connected with the mineral deposits.
The investigation of the water supply in placer districts covered an area of approximately 6,500 square miles, and included 69 gauging stations maintained and 429 measurements of stream volumes.
Fifteen of the 30 mining districts of Alaska which are being developed were visited by members of the staff.
The subdivisional survey of public lands in Alaska was begun.
The work accomplished in the short season after the appropriation became available included two astronomical determinations of latitude, longitude, and azimuth, measurement of a base line and establishment of a system of triangulation, the survey of 108 miles of meridian and base lines and township extensions, with some section lines.
During the fiscal year the work of the Mineral Resources Division consisted of the preparation of reports on mineral resources of the United States for the calendar years 1909 and 1910.
The statistics for 1909 were collected in cooperation with the Bureau of the Census.
The field work of collecting the statistics was done by the Bureau of the Census through personal visits of a large force of agents, and it was thought that this plan would greatly expedite the work.
Experience showed, however, that it took very much longer to get the data in this way than it would have taken by correspondence, the usual method pursued by the Survey.
Topographic Branch.
The total new area topographically mapped was 23,272 square miles, making the total area to date in the United States 1,131,037 square miles, or about 37 per cent of the entire country.
In addition 6,460 square miles of revision or resurvey were completed, making the total area of actual surveys for the season 29,732 square miles.
Topographic surveys were also carried on in Hawaii, the area mapped during the fiscal year being 224 square miles.
The field force included 145 geographers and topographers with 68 temporary technical assistants.
Water Resources Branch.
The increase of $50,000 in the appropriation for investigations of water resources permitted a considerable extension of this work during the fiscal year, although it was necessary, in order to perform important public-land classification work, to allot 82 per cent of the total appropriation for work west of the one-hundredth meridian.
The investigation of water-power sites, rights of way, etc., on the public lands was first performed by the engineers of the division of surface waters in connection with their measurements of stream flow.
This is now assigned to a new division of water utilization.
At the end of the year the total number of stream-gauging stations maintained was 1,105.
In addition to the foregoing, records ready for publication were received at the end of the year from private parties for about 100 stations.
Underground waters were studied in California, Arizona, and New Mexico.
Examinations under the Weeks Act.
The act approved March 1, 1911, which provides for the acquisition of land for the purpose of conserving the navigability of navigable streams, imposed a new duty on the Geological Survey.
Section 6 of the law provides for an examination by the Geological Survey of land whose purchase is under consideration and the submission of a report based thereon to the Secretary of Agriculture "showing that the control of such lands will promote or protect the navigation of streams on whose watersheds they lie."
This work was prosecuted in Georgia, Tennessee, and New Hampshire in May and June, resulting in the submission of reports favoring the acquisition of lands in two localities before the end of the fiscal year.
These reports covered tracts in Fannin and Union Counties, Georgia, and in Blount and Sevier Counties, Tennessee, comprising 31,377 and 58,213 acres, respectively.
Publications Branch.
The Survey's success in reaching the public with the results of its scientific work may be measured by the distribution of its publications.
1,208,797, an increase of 6 per cent over the corresponding figures for 1910.
An even larger percentage of increase is shown in the number of letters received containing remittances for such publications as are sold, while the receipts for topographic maps increased about 10 per cent.
The total distribution of topographic maps, which includes congressional distribution, exchanges, and issue for departmental use, as well as the half million maps sold, increased 15 per cent.
The total distribution to the public of books and maps is equivalent to more than 99 per cent of the number of copies received during the year from the Government Printing Office and the Survey's engraving and printing division.
The total publications included 136 volumes, 91 topographic maps, and 5 geologic folios.
Administrative Branch.
The mails showed increases over the business of the preceding year.
The roll of Survey members holding secretarial appointments numbered at the close of the fiscal year 862 persons, compared with 958 the year before.
The principal change was the transfer of employees to the Bureau of Standards and the Bureau of Mines at the beginning of the year.
The Survey library now contains 86,000 books, 100,000 pamphlets, and about 100,000 maps, and the collection is restricted to publications bearing upon the scientific work of the Bureau.
The act of Congress approved June 17, 1902, known as the "reclamation act,"set apart as a fund for the reclamation of arid lands all moneys received from the sale of public lands in certain of the Western States and Territories, excepting the 5 per cent of the proceeds of such sales set aside by law for educational and other purposes.
The actual receipts from this source to June 30, 1910, were $65,584,801.32, and the estimated total receipts to June 30, 1911 including $213,998.57 from sale of town-site lots, are $71,717,990.16.
The net investment of this fund in reclamation works on June 30, 1911, amounted to $60,940,834.08.
The act requires the Secretary of the Interior to determine and return to the reclamation fund the estimated cost of construction, and entrymen and private landowners receiving water from reclamation projects are therefore required to contribute their proportion of the cost of construction, operation, and maintenance of the project wherein their lands are situated.
Total................
In addition, sales of water to towns and cities, leases of power developed in projects, rentals for irrigating water, miscellaneous services and sales, etc., have produced an additional revenue of $3,288,719.07, which, under the respective laws authorizing these transactions, is credited as a reduction of the cost of the projects from whence the receipts are derived.
In addition, there had been invested in secondary projects, June 30, 1911, $586,988.94; in town-site development, $12,997.05; in Indian irrigation (reimbursable), $317,392.23; and for general expenses, $34,297.40, making a grand total of $60,940,834.08.
In view of the immense areas of land included, the magnitude and expense of the engineering work necessary to provide for their reclamation, and of the importance to the waiting settler and landowner that water be applied to the land and reclamation effected as soon as possible, the efforts of the Department have been directed toward the completion of projects already undertaken rather than the search for or undertaking of new projects.
Summary of results of reclamation work, June 30, 1902, to June 30, 1911.
The Bureau of Mines was established by an act of Congress approved May 16, 1910 (36 Stat., 369), and effective July 1, 1910.
Its main object is to aid in lessening the loss of life and waste of resources in the mining, quarrying, metallurgical, and other mineral industries of the country.
The enabling act not only outlined the Bureau's duties, but transferred to it from the Geological Survey the work of analyzing and testing coals, lignites, and other mineral fuel substances, and investigating the causes of and means of preventing mine explosions.
The headquarters of the Bureau were established in Washington, D. C., on Eighth and G Streets Northwest.
Its director was appointed September 3, 1910.
The investigative work of the Bureau during this first year of its existence has related mainly to two subjects: The study of fuels belonging to or used by the Government and inquiry into the causes and means of prevention of mine accidents.
The first of these, for which Congress made an appropriation of $100,000, has had to do primarily with the purchase, for the use of the Government, of coal, aggregating in cost about $8,000,000; the most efficient methods of using this coal at the various heating, power, and lighting plants of the Government and on board Government ships; and the safest and most efficient methods of storing coal at naval stations, army posts, etc.
In addition to the large number of furnace-fuel tests that this work involved, more than 10,000 samples of coal were analyzed in the laboratories of the Bureau.
Investigations relating both to the efficient storage of coal and to the causes and prevention of spontaneous combustion of coal stored in bins or in the bunkers of ships have been conducted by the Bureau in the navy yards at Key West, Norfolk, and Portsmouth and on the Isthmus of Panama.
The fuel investigations have also included the testing and analyzing of a large number of samples of fuel oil and the preparation of specifications for use by the Government in the purchase of both oil and coal for fuel purposes.
The investigations into the causes and means of prevention of mine accidents have been extended as rapidly as circumstances would permit, but so far have not progressed to the needs of the coalmining industry.
Their chief aim has been to determine the causes of mine explosions; to make safer the use of explosives and electricity in mines; and to reduce the risks through falls of roof, the use of open lights, and other mining conditions.
In carrying on these investigations the engineers of the Bureau have used every variety of laboratory equipment available; they have examined the coal mines in many parts of the United States; and they have opened near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, a small mine, where experiments are conducted to determine, under working conditions, how gas and dust explosions are caused and how such explosions may be prevented.
Early in the examinations of mine disasters it was found necessary to provide in the different important coal fields facilities for use by the engineers of the Bureau in entering mines in which disasters had occurred while these mines were still full of poisonous explosive gases, in order that the examinations might be made while the evidences of the disaster were still fresh.
Such prompt examinations are also useful in rescuing entombed miners.
To meet this immediate need, and with a view to the development of future agencies, there have been established by the Bureau six mine-rescue or minesafety stations, one each at Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Knoxville, Tennessee; Birmingham, Alabama; McAlester, Oklahoma; Urbana, Illinois; and Seattle, Washington.
There have also been purchased seven mine-safety cars, which have been equipped as far as practicable with mine-rescue and fire-fighting apparatus.
These seven cars have headquarters as follows: One each at Billings, Montana; Trinidad, Colorado; Evansville, Indiana; Huntington, West Virginia; Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; and Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania; and one at Rock Springs, Wyoming, and Salt Lake City, Utah.
Each one of these cars has been moving from point to point, carrying a mining engineer and two experienced miners.
With a view to recommending proper regulations to prevent accidents in American mining, quarrying, metallurgical, and other mineral industries, it has been necessary to make a study of the laws, rules, and regulations existing for this purpose in other important mining countries.
This work is now well under way.
Notwithstanding the newness of the work and the many preliminary difficulties in the way, the progress made in behalf of greater safety in mining has been gratifying.
The Bureau is gradually winning the hearty cooperation of mine workers, mine owners, State mine inspectors, and manufacturers of explosives and mine equipment.
In coal mines black powder is rapidly giving place to safer explosives; safety lamps and other appliances are being increasingly used; improvements in electrical installations are under investigation; mine explosions are being better understood and are becoming less frequent; mine safety demonstrations, in connection with the work of the stations and cars, have been witnessed and participated in by more than 100,000 miners; over 14,000 miners have received some training in rescue and first-aid methods; and more than 500 sets of mine rescue equipment have been installed at the larger coal mines located in different parts of the country.
There are some urgent needs in connection with the continuance and extension of this work.
Two or three additional mine safety cars are needed, and the work of all the cars should be continued throughout the entire year.
The investigations looking to the prevention of accidents should be extended to include metal mines, quarries, and metallurgical plants.
There are 1,500,000 men associated with these hazardous occupations who need to be reached and enlisted inthis movement for greater safety, and there should be no unnecessary delays in doing this.
The testing of explosives, the fees from which go to the miscellaneous receipts of the Treasury, should be more adequately provided for, in order that such testing may be kept current.
The statistical data concerning accidents in the mining, quarrying, and metallurgical industries have been far from complete in the past, and there have always been serious delays in their collection and publication.
In many parts of the country no such statistics are collected, but the assembling of the data is essential to the formulation of intelligent plans for preventing mine accidents.
There is, therefore, serious need that the Bureau of Mines be empowered to collect and publish statistical data with a degree of thoroughness commensurate with the importance of the subject.
There is also serious need for the enlargement of the work of the Bureau to include a thorough investigation into various branches of the mining industry, with a view to lessening the waste of essential mineral resources.
Such investigations would unquestionably prove beneficial to the country.
The results of carefully conducted inquiries show that the present losses in coal mining approximate 250,000,000 tons of coal per annum; and that the waste in metal mining and metallurgical industries ranges from 10 to 50 per cent of the total possible production.
This waste of mineral products—many of them destroyed or lost beyond the possibility of future recovery—means a serious drain on the Nation's supply.
In dealing with mineral resources, in contrast to rainfall, forests, or agricultural products, it should be understood that of mineral wealth the Nation has only one supply, which, when exhausted, it can not replace.
The buildings and grounds at Pittsburgh now occupied by the Bureau of Mines for its investigations are inadequate for its needs, unsuited to its purposes, and are held subject to the wishes and needs of another department of the Government.
This situation should be remedied in a manner commensurate with the importance of the work that the Bureau is required to do.
The Indians in the United States number slightly more than 323,000, of whom about one-third are members of the Five Civilized Tribes in Oklahoma.
All are in process of absorption with the general mass of American citizenship.
When the process is complete with respect to any individual Indian he will have lost his tribal status, received in severalty his share of the tribal property, and been freed of all restrictions in dealing with it.
He then has the same status as any other citizen and the guardianship of the Federal Government over him is at an end.
The Indian Service is engaged in the work of helping the Indians to fit themselves for American citizenship and in preserving and developing their property until they are able to take full charge of it.
This work calls for administrative business ability, knowledge of practical sociological movements, and effective sympathy.
The personal interests under the care of the service are of the greatest importance and are mainly concerned with three subjects—health and morals, industrial training, and general education.
The property interests involved are of great value and complexity, including lands allotted to the Indians in severalty and held by them under restrictions which in effect make the Government the guardian of the Indian.
The unallotted Indian lands are in part agricultural and in part consist of undeveloped forests, minerals, water power, and other natural resources which involve the general social and legal problems presented by like resources on the public domain, together with peculiar difficulties due to the beneficial ownership of the Indians.
Health and morals.
The Indian Service is earnestly endeavoring to improve living conditions and to prevent disease among the Indians.
More than 52 gatherings of Indians and service employees for instruction in hygienic living have been held during the past year, with an aggregate attendance of more than 10,000.
Such subjects as ventilation, disposal of garbage, care of milk, water supply, the prevention of tuberculosis and trachoma are considered.
The service is endeavoring whenever new buildings are erected to see that they are built in conformity with modern ideas of sanitation.
Eighty-eight field matrons are employed to work among the homes of the Indians.
Their work has proved very effective in reducing infant mortality, and in helping the children to sound health.
Vigorous efforts are being made to stamp out existing disease.
One hundred physicians give their whole time to schools and agencies, and are assisted by 60 physicians who are under contract to give a part of their time to attendance upon Indians.
The four sanitoria for tubercular patients have been enlarged, and the hospital for trachoma at Phoenix, Arizona, continued.
The urgent necessity for the health propaganda is patent from returns of the physicians; they report 961 deaths from tuberculosis under their notice, attendance upon over 16,000 cases of tuberculosis, and treatment of 7,400 cases of trachoma, a disease which three years ago was practically unrecognized.
In the past year 1,473 cases of persons charged with selling liquor to Indians, or introducing it into the Indian country, were disposed of.
One thousand one hundred and sixty-eight convictions resulted, 265 dismissals, 6 disagreements of the jury, and there were but 34 acquittals.
There is a steadily increasing tendency on the part of local authorities to assist the officers of the Government in the work of suppressing this liquor traffic.
Industry.
Industrially the Indians are making much progress, particularly in farming.
Reports from all parts of the field show that Indians who had not cultivated land have begun to farm, that Indian farmers are extending the acreage they work, and that they are raising larger and more diversified crops than before.
The commissioner reports that during the year Indians farming for themselves had under cultivation at least 700,000 acres of land.
At 22 reservations demonstration farms were used that Indians might have practical illustration of what they can expect to do with their land.
Apart from farming, Indians all over the country are entering gradually into ordinary industrial activities.
During the past year Indians in Arizona and New Mexico were paid wages amounting to $260,000.
Two thousand of the 6,000 regular employees in the Indian Service are themselves Indians.
Education.
The work of the Indian schools is largely industrial.
Each boy or girl spends half of each day in farming, in machine shops, in the barns, or in the laundry, sewing room, or kitchen.
This plan is carried out not only at boarding schools, but also at the 223 day schools maintained.
One of the results is that it usually takes an Indian child two years to do the class-room work of an ordinary school year, but it is believed that the increase in industrial knowledge more than compensates for this slowness.
It has been so well demonstrated that in cases where the Indian is capable of being educated with white children he profits from contact with them, that the service has made every effort to increase the number of Indian children who get an education in white schools, and this past year showed more than 11,000 Indian children so educated.
Careful investigation in the past year has shown that there are some 9,000 Indian children who are not as yet going to any school, but for whom the Indian Service is now trying to provide facilities.
The total number of Indian children in schools of every character during the past year was about 39,800, showing an increase over the former year of about 2,000.
The approximate value of school and agency plants is $8,500,000.
In the fiscal year a total of $785,000 was spent for repairs and new construction.
Property.
Allotment of Indian lands in severalty has continued.
During the past year approximately 2,000,000 acres were allotted to 13,000 Indians.
The act of June 25, 1910 (36 Stat., 855), requiring the Secretary of the Interior to ascertain the heirs of deceased allottees and their competency has greatly increased the work of the Indian Office.
Many allotments are now of 20 years' standing, and through difficulty in obtaining reliable testimony questions of fact have become hard to solve.
During the year the heirs of 800 deceased allottees have been ascertained.
The question of the extent to which leases of allotments should be permitted involves difficult questions.
Only for the relatively small class of allottees who are incapacitated for farming or other work is leasing advisable.
During the year the sale of 340,000 acres was considered by the Indian Office, and 150,000 acres were sold for a total of almost $2,500,000, an average of $16 an acre.
There are some $10,000,000 on deposit in banks throughout the country to the credit of individual Indians, but only subject to disbursement under the supervision of the Indian Service.
Able-bodied Indians who can get work are not allowed to use their money for ordinary expenses, but are liberally encouraged to use it for building houses, buying stock and farm implements, and generally improving their lands.
Protection of Indians against fraud.
Most of the long-pending suits to annul deeds of their allotted lands made by the Mexican Kickapoo were settled in the Indians' favor.
Out of 75 allotments 69 are to be restored with mesne profits, and the Government will use its influence to secure the return of such consideration as the Indians had received.
Similar settlements are expected in the remaining six cases.
Since the close of the fiscal year prosecutions in Seminole County, Oklahoma, for frauds against minor and full-blood Indians have resulted in the conviction of 5 of the 6 principal defendants and their sentence to the State pentientiary for terms of from 7 to 14 years, and recently 21 additional indictments were returned against 7 individuals.
In McCurtain County, Oklahoma, concerted efforts by State, Federal, and tribal officials resulted in an investigation of probate matters that brought about the resignation of the county judge and the recovery for Indian minors of over 4,100 acres of land and about $65,000; furthermore, State officials have secured an agreement by which three of the largest purchasers are to submit to a special board of arbitration the titles to all lands acquired from Indian minors through the local probate court.
As the outcome of 207 suits involving town lots fraudulently acquired in the Creek Nation $85,000 have been recovered, together with 94 lots worth about $60,000.
Twenty-five suits are still pending.
On the White Earth Reservation in Minnesota vigorous action has been taken to annul deeds unlawfully procured from full-blood and minor Indians and to punish the guilty persons.
In the fiscal year 901 suits in equity were filed and the total number will be 1,086.
Complete success in these suits will mean the recovery of 142,000 acres of land valued at over $2,000,000 and timber estimated to be worth $1,755,000 on behalf of more than 1,700 Indians, forming almost 34 per cent of the White Earth allottees.
Irrigation and drainage.
For the year 1911 Congress appropriated slightly in excess of $1,300,000, all but $259,000 of which was made reimbursable to the United States, for irrigating and draining Indian lands.
In the State of Washington the Indian Service is very economically draining 30,000 acres of swamped land.
In the course of newirrigation construction under this appropriation the Indian Service during the year provided facilities for irrigating about 25,000 acres and through the use of other funds it placed 7,300 acres under ditch Furthermore, the Reclamation Service has had under construction for the Indian Service four extensive projects; the Pima project in Arizona, the Blackfeet, Flathead, and Fort Peck projects in Montana.
Altogether, more than 300,000 acres of Indian land have been placed under ditch at a cost of about $5,000,000.
The bulk of the money appropriated by Congress for this irrigation is, under the various statutes, to be reimbursed when the lands are in successful cultivation.
In constructing irrigation works, care is taken to employ Indian labor as much as is possible.
Only a small portion of the acreage placed under ditch has as yet been cultivated by the Indians.
There is need of persistent effort to persuade the Indians to use the irrigation facilities provided for them.
Timber.
The timber on Indian land is now estimated at 34 billion feet, worth approximately $76,000,000.
The work of taking proper care of this timber and disposing of the mature trees is furnishing employment for a very considerable number of Indians, as well as increasing the revenue of various tribes and thus furnishing means for development of the Indian lands.
In the past fiscal year no large sales were made.
The two most extensive logging operations continued under contracts were at the Bad River Reservation, Wisconsin, where 84,000,000 feet were cut, yielding $503,000, and upon the ceded Chippewa lands in Minnesota, where 80,000,000 feet were cut, yielding $578,000.
The Neopit lumbering and milling project on the Menominee Reservation, in Wisconsin, for the first time showed a clear profit $11,200; the total receipts from sales of manufactured lumber were $424,000.
On an average 205 Menominees, slightly in excess of 38 per cent of the male members of the tribe over 18 years of age, were employed, together with 56 Indians of other tribes.
Thus the project has become an important school of industry for the Indians.
Much progress has been made in the matter of closing out the tribal affairs of each of the Five Civilized Tribes.
The work of enrollment of citizens and allotment of lands has been practically finished.
In the Cherokee Nation some deeds are yet to be delivered, and there remain small amounts of surplus lands which are now being offered for sale.
There is also still pending litigation affecting the claims of some 5,600 newborn Cherokees, and another case involving the rights of about 1,720 freedmen who claim to be entitled to enrollment.
Until these suits are disposed of it will be impossible to complete the closing out of the affairs of the Cherokee Nation.
In the Creek Nation there are also some deeds yet to be delivered and some surplus lands yet to be sold, which it is hoped to close out very shortly.
Under the Creek agreement, each citizen was entitled to the allotment of land at the appraised value of $1,040.
The land actually subject to allotment fell short of this valuation to the amount, in all, of $6,913,291.
The funds and resources of the Creek Nation fall far short of this sum.
It will therefore be impossible to close out the affairs of the Creek Nation until additional legislation can be had.
In the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations, the distribution of funds to equalize allotments has been continued during the fiscal year.
Beside the necessity for completing this, there are still four matters to be disposed of.
There are 1,142,071 acres of unallotted lands not reserved or segregated which are now being offered for sale at public auction.
There are 1,333,324 acres of land reserved from allotment on account of timber.
The timber on this land has been reestimated and appraised, and regulations for offering the land and timber for sale at auction are now almost completed.
There are also 445,000 acres of segregated coal and asphalt lands in the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations, considerable portions of which are under coal and asphalt leases.
The nations are anxious to have these lands disposed of so that the proceeds may be divided.
On this subject the Department has made reports to you and to Congress.
Nothing can be done by the Department until appropriate legislation is enacted.
There have also been reserved from allotment about 16 sections of matured timber.
These lands have been repeatedly offered for sale, but no bid has ever been received equal to the appraised value.
If the lands are to be disposed of, apparently either lower bids must be accepted or the Department must be authorized to sell the lands upon credit.
The establishment of district agents to assist in handling the affairs of restricted members of the Five Civilized Tribes has proven of the greatest benefit both to the Indians concerned and to the Department.
The work of these agents has made it possible for the Department to perform its work both more efficiently and more promptly, and I believe that the questions affecting individual Indians are now being thoroughly well handled.
More than 20,000 suits brought to set aside conveyances of allotted land on the ground that the Indians were incompetent to convey are still pending, awaiting the decision of a case in the United States Supreme Court, which has been submitted and which it is expected will soon be decided.
In the meanwhile, however, equitable settlements have been reached in a large number of such cases, and the work of settling is steadily progressing.
A great deal of work has been done, largely with the aid of the district agents, in protecting the rights of minor Indians who have suffered from negligent and, in some cases, dishonest guardians.
Much land and large sums of money have already been recovered.
At the beginning of the fiscal year ended June 30, 1911, there were 921,083 pensioners on the roll.
There were added thereto during the year 26,200, made up of original allowances, restorations, and renewals.
There were dropped therefrom 55,185, occasioned by death, remarriage, minors attaining the age of 16 years, failure to claim for three years, and all other causes, making a net reduction in the roll of 28,985, and leaving the total number on the roll at the close of the year of all classes 892,098, of whom 570,050 were soldiers and sailors, 321,642 were widows and dependents, and 406 were Army nurses.
The amount expended for pensions during the year was $157,325,160.35, a decrease as compared with the previous year of $2,648,895.73.
The cost of administration in connection with the adjudication of claims and the payment of pensions was $2,517,127.06, a reduction in the running expenses of the Bureau and agencies in one year of $140,546.80.
This is the smallest amount paid in any one year for such administration for 29 years.
The appropriations for the current expenses of the Bureau of Pensions and agencies for the fiscal year 1912 show a reduction of $629,650 as compared with similar appropriations for 1909.
There was disbursed for pensions from July 1, 1790, to June 30, 1865, $96,445,444.23.
From July 1, 1865, to June 30, 1911, the total disbursements for pensions were $4,133,936,285.93.
The expenses and cost of maintenance for the same period were $120,879,861.74, making a total of disbursements since July 1, 1865, of $4,254,816,147.67.
At the beginning of the year the number of applications pending of all kinds was 47,295.
At the close of the year there were pending 36,793 applications, exclusive of a large number placed in the abandoned files.
The total number of applications filed during the year was 120,814.
There were admitted during the year 92,274 claims; rejected, 30,980; adjudicated where no benefits were derived other than those rejected, 1,065; making the total number of claims of all classes adjudicated 124,319.
Allowances of accrued pension were made in 20,618 cases, being issues for payment in cases of deceased pensioners from date of last payment to date of death.
There have been granted since 1861 by special acts 35,987 pensions, of which number 22,323 are now on the roll with an annual face value of $6,611,357.
Only a part of this amount, however, is properly chargeable to special acts, as most of the beneficiaries had been previously pensioned under the general laws at lower rates.
During the third session of the Sixty-first Congress 3,586 persons were included in special acts.
The largest number of pensioners on the roll at the close of any fiscal year was on June 30, 1902, when the total was 999,446.
There has been a net decrease of more than 100,000 in the last six years, and the number is now less than at any time since 1892.
Since the passage of the act of March 3, 1899, providing for division of pensions of resident pensioners of the United States who shall desert their wives or minor childern, or who are inmates of National or State soldiers' and sailors' homes, 13,423 claims have been filed thereunder, 7,209 of which have been allowed and 5,987 rejected, leaving 227 pending.
Three bounty land warrants were issued during the year, granting 480 acres of land.
The total number of such warrants issued to the close of the fiscal year 1911 is 598,685, granting 68,791,550 acres.
On June 30, 1911, there were also pending 1,427 claims for expenses of last sickness and burial of deceased pensioners.
There were disposed of during the year 7,574 claims, of which number 5,808 were allowed, 1,166 disallowed, and 600 abandoned.
There were 59 new cases presented to the Department of Justice on account of offenses against the pension laws, and indictments found in 57 cases.
There were 53 cases brought to trial during the year, in 51 of which convictions were secured.
Only three of these cases were against persons who had rendered military or naval service.
At the close of the year there were 109 cases pending in the hands of United States attorneys.
Two civil suits were instituted; one was disposed of and a judgment for $538.54 obtained, and one dismissed by reason of a heavy fine being imposed upon the defendant in a criminal case.
There was recovered $2,407.94.
As a matter of historical interest it is noted that the last pensioner of the Revolutionary War died during the past year.
The last surviving pensioned soldier of that war died in 1869, and the last widow pensioner of that war died in 1906.
The last surviving pensioned soldier of the War of 1812 died in 1905.
There are now 279 widows of that war on the roll.
The law now requires each pensioner to present a voucher to the pension agent, executed after the pension has become due, before a check may be issued in payment thereof.
This system is very expensive to the Government as well as to the pensioner.
The Commissioner of Pensions, in response to a provision contained in the last appropriation act directing him to formulate a simplified plan for the payment of pensions, recommends that discretionary authority shall be granted whereby pensions may be paid without vouchers.
The plan recommended provides for payment by check mailed to the last-known address of the payee.
Postmasters are to be required to return the check for cancellation if the pensioner has died or remarried if a widow.
The unpaid pension to the date of death of the pensioner will then be disposed of in accordance with the law, which provides specifically for the payment of accrued pension.
The plan also provides that postmasters shall be required to report promptly to the proper office the death of any pensioner or the remarriage if a widow, in order that checks may not be issued in such cases.
The check to be used will contain a provision to the effect that it is void if the payee shall have died or remarried if a widow prior to date of issue.
It will be payable only when personally indorsed in ink by the payee, in the presence of two responsible witnesses, who shall certify to the identity of the payee with the pensioner named in the check and pension certificate.
The plan further provides a penalty for forgery in the indorsement of the check, receiving payment of check upon a forged indorsement, or receiving payment of pension for any period subsequent to reenlistment, remarriage, or termination of period of dependence.
Under the plan proposed checks would be prepared and ready for mailing on the 4th of the payment month, many pensioners receiving their checks on that date.
The pensioners will be saved the expense of the execution of pension vouchers and the delay often due to the return of faulty vouchers for correction.
It is estimated that the cost to the pensioners in the execution of their vouchers is nearly $1,000,000 per annum.
The plan proposed will save to the Government the expense of printing, preparing, and mailing about 4,000,000 vouchers and the furnishing of 4,000,000 envelopes each year in which to return the vouchers for payment.
The Government will likewise be saved the expense of employing a large number of temporary clerks at the agencies during each quarterly payment.
The plan recommended by the commissioner shows that great care has been observed in working out the details to insure its successful operation.
As it is shown to be along the line of economy and efficiency in the public service and will undoubtedly be greatly to the advantage of the pensioners, the same meets with my most hearty approval.
In 186 cases the Pension Office was reversed, and in 118 cases the Commissioner of Pensions reported that upon reconsideration the adverse action taken by the Bureau was receded from and asked permission to allow appellants' contention.
The Department, after considering such cases, decided that the action proposed by the Bureau was warranted under the law and the evidence, and the papers therein were returned to the Bureau for final action and favorable adjudication.
There were also during the year returned to the Bureau for further action and report 118 cases for the reason that upon review it was found that additional and material evidence had been filed which had not been considered by the Bureau, or that a special examination or another medical examination was thought necessary, or for various reasons the claims had not been properly adjudicated.
At the close of the year there were 12 of such cases pending, which are included in the total number of pending appeals as shown by the table.
Although there is a material increase in the number of appeals left pending and undisposed of at the end of the last fiscal year, and the total number finally disposed of by the board during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1910, largely exceeded the total number disposed of during the last fiscal year, this is fully accounted for by the reduction of the working force of the board and a comparison shows that the average number of cases disposed of per member during the last year was greater than during the preceding year.
The provisions of the legislative, executive, and judicial appropriation act, approved March 4, 1911, having abolished the Board of Pension Appeals and transferred the duties theretofore performed by it to the office of the Assistant Attorney General for the Department of the Interior, the present report shows the final work of the board and the termination of its labors.
The figures shown by the foregoing tabulated statements demonstrate that the rapid falling off in the number of pension cases presented to the Department on appeal which was anticipated when the legislation above referred to was enacted has not been realized, and the fact that there has been a steady increase during the past year in the number of cases left pending and undisposed of at the close of each month, and a gradual falling behind in the docket notwithstanding the individual output of work by the members and employees of the board has markedly increased, would suggest that this work can not be successfully accomplished with less than the present working force.
I would, therefore, recommend that the Board of Pension Appeals be reestablished at the earliest possible date with at least the same working force provided for said board by the appropriation act for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1911.
Provision might be made, as heretofore, that any vacancies occurring on the board by death, resignation, or otherwise should not be filled, thereby anticipating the decrease in the number of appeals taken that may be expected in a few years.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 1911, there were received 65,154 applications for mechanical patents, 1,315 applications for designs, 206 applications for reissues, 6,857 applications for trade-marks, 879 applications for labels, and 266 applications for prints.
There were 34,428 patents granted, including reissues and designs, and 3,791 trade-marks, 576 labels, and 181 prints were registered.
The number of patents that expired was 22,546.
The number of allowed applications which were by operation of law forfeited for nonpayment of the final fees was 7,098.
The total receipts of the office were $1,987,778.58; the total expenditures were $1,957,001.85; and the net surplus of receipts over expenditures was $30,776.73.
The total net surplus for all years of receipts over expenditures of all kinds (including salaries of the force) is now $7,029,004.73.
This surplus covered into the Treasury represents the net earnings of the Bureau, and it has all been paid by the inventors.
The commissioner calls attention to the great need for legislation providing for the elimination of one of the appeals within the Patent Office.
The commissioner states that, under the present law, appeals are considered twice by the tribunals within the office, which is not only a duplication of work, thereby causing great delay in the prosecution of applications, but an additional and unnecessary burden of expense to inventors in the matter of appeals and attorneys' fees.
He also recommends legislation requiring the filing ofphotographic copies of drawings to accompany applications for patents for the purpose of more fully safeguarding the records of the office from unauthorized changes and reducing the chances of attempted fraud during the prosecution of the application.
I concur in the commissioner's recommendation for legislation to authorize him to issue certificates of correction in certain cases where mistakes have been made by the office or by the Public Printer; also for provision by law that applications shall be completed and prepared for examination within six months after filing of the application.
The commissioner urgently recommends that provision be made for more room for housing the United States Patent Office.
The present structure is not fireproof and is filled with tons of inflammable material, comprising the secret archives of the office, which, if destroyed, would work untold damage to the commercial interests of the country.
The District of Columbia fire department officials have pronounced the building unsafe as to fire, and the engineers of the War Department have said that the walls should be lightened of their load.
The commissioner suggests that a suitable building be rented for the Patent Office, to be used until the present building could be thoroughly remodeled, and if thought desirable when that is done the bureaus which are now in rented quarters, such as the Geological Survey, the Reclamation Service, and the Bureau of Mines, could be housed in the remodeled present building and a new building erected to accommodate the annually increasing force and volume of business of the Patent Office while that bureau was occupying temporary quarters.
He urges that the Patent Office be given immediate and special relief and that part, at least, of the $7,000,000 in excess of the expenditures of the Patent Office be used to furnish larger and better quarters, with modern facilities for the force, which would then be in a position to accomplish the best possible results in the work for which the inventors pay the total cost.
We have no national system of education.
The several States have their own systems, and it has been and is the policy of the Federal Government not to interfere in any way with their schools, public or private; but it has been just as clearly its policy to foster education in all the States, not only by appropriations of money and lands, but in other ways not contrary to the accepted theory of the relation of the Federal and State Governments.
For this purpose nearly half a century ago the Bureau of Education was established and attached to the Department of the Interior for the purpose of "collecting such statistics and facts as shall show the condition and progress of education in the several States and Territories and of diffusing such information respecting the organization and management of schools and school systems and methods of teaching as shall aid the people of the United States in the establishment and maintenance of efficient school systems, and otherwise promote the cause of education throughout the country."
From year to year this Bureau has published statistical reports and many valuable studies of various problems of education, by the help of which school officers and teachers in each of the States have been enabled to know the progress of education in other States and throughout the world, and legislatures have been able to consider educational measures in the light of the experience of other States and the world at large.
Much more than half the children in the United States live under rural conditions in small towns, villages, and open country.
All their education must be had in the rural schools.
While the schools in the great cities are constantly the subject of study, there is no means of studying the comparative methods and development of rural schools in different communities except through the Bureau of Education.
I believe the work of the Bureau should, therefore, be especially directed to this end, and that it should be afforded men and means sufficient to enable it to make such study of the needs of rural schools as will be a help to all parts of the country.
The problems of the rural school are admitted to be the most difficult of all school problems, but this Bureau has in the past been able to give very little direct help toward this solution.
There is great need in the Bureau for a comparatively large group of competent men and women giving their entire time and energies to these problems, with freedom, under the direction of the commissioner, to study them directly or indirectly wherever they can be studied to best advantage, prepare bulletins on the various phases of these problems for the general information of the people, to cooperate with national, State, and local committees constituted for their study by governments and various organizations and societies, and to go to any part of the country to give direct and specific assistance whenever needed.
Such a division in the Bureau might in a very few years add much to the effectiveness of all country schools.
Over all the world the demand for industrial or vocational education is growing.
In this country teachers and laymen in urban and rural communities alike are demanding that the schools shall do something to prepare the masses of boys and girls for effective service in some industrial occupation, fit them to make a living, and to contribute their part to the Commonwealth.
How this shall be done and in what kind of schools is still uncertain.
Experiments of many kinds have been tried in many places.
Much money has been spent on these experiments and much more will be spent more or less wisely.
I believe the Bureau of Education can render very valuable service in this connection, and for that purpose it should have a group of competent specialists and assistants to study the various phases of the problem; bring together and digest the work and reports of societies, committees, and commissions; help toward the formulation of fundamental principles; and assist State, city, and county boards of supervisors in working out their practical application.
Twenty million or more children and young people in the United States spend a good portion of their time in school every year.
The indoor sedentary life required by the work and discipline of the school is more or less unnatural for childhood and youth, and unless the conditions under which the school work is done are intelligently controlled there is constant danger that the health of the pupils may be injured, their vitality lowered, and their happiness and their value as citizens diminished.
The country is fundamentally concerned in the health of its future citizens and should give to it no less attention than it gives to its live stock.
To this end the Division of School Hygiene and Sanitation recently established in the Bureau of Education should be strengthened by the addition of a sufficient number of competent assistants and clerks to enable it to do its work effectively, studying principles of school sanitation, working out plans for their application, awakening interest in the subject among school officers, teachers, and patrons throughout the country, and assisting them in the care and health of the children in the schools.
The increase of the interest throughout the country in secondary and higher education has been greater even than in elementary education.
Appropriations for colleges, universities, technical schools, and normal schools for the training of teachers have increasednearly 200 per cent in the past decade, and the increase in appropriations for the agricultural and mechanical colleges has been still larger.
With this increase in interest and expenditures has come an increase in demands on the Division of Higher Education in this Bureau, and it should be strengthened immediately by the addition of specialists in normal-school education for the training of teachers.
There is particular need for a specialist in agricultural education, who may give his time to the agricultural and mechanical colleges for negroes in the Southern States and help them to a better use of the funds they receive from the Government.
Because of lack of some such intelligent supervision and help many of these schools are failing to accomplish the full purpose for which the Federal funds are appropriated.
Because of the peculiar nature of the work which this Bureau has to do it is especially important that the Commissioner of Education and the heads of the various divisions should be enabled to visit schools in all parts of the country, attend meetings of educational associations, confer with school officers and teachers, and make the Bureau more directly useful.
For this purpose there should be liberal appropriations for traveling expenses, and an assistant commissioner should be provided to carry on the routine duties of the office during the absences of the commissioner.
The Bureau should be able to gather full and accurate statistics in regard to education and to publish them promptly.
The recent increase in the number, size, and kinds of schools makes this a very difficult task and there is need of radical revision in the method of doing it.
This can be done, it is believed, with little additional cost if the recommended enlargements in the Bureau are made.
The Bureau of Education now has one of the most valuable and complete libraries on education in the world, and it should be made more serviceable not only to the Bureau itself but also to students of education everywhere.
To students and investigators in all phases of education it should become a chief source of information, and all of its material should be made easily accessible to them.
For this purpose there should be employed a man well versed in the theory and practice of education, whose services would be at the disposal of such students and who might assist them in their studies and investigations.
During the year ended June 30, 1911, there were maintained 81 public schools for natives of Alaska, with an enrollment of 3,810 and an average daily attendance of 1,692.
This average attendance is much lower than it should be.
There is need of a law requiring the children of natives of Alaska between the ages of 6 and 15 to attend school at all times when the families of such children are in a village having a school.
The appropriation for their education should be increased from $200,000 to $248,000, so that more attention may be given to instruction in sanitation and industries.
The experience of the Bureau of Education in endeavoring through its employees to furnish medical relief to the natives of Alaska demonstrated the desirability of authoritative study of the prevalence of disease among the natives of Alaska and of the means for its prevention.
During the summer of 1911 Dr. Milton H. Foster, detailed from the Public Health and Marine-Hospital Service, made a thorough investigation of the sanitary conditions among the natives of southern Alaska.
As the result of his investigations, Dr. Foster recommended the following measures, which require action on the part of Congress: (1) The establishment of a sanitarium for cases of pulmonary tuberculosis requiring hospital treatment; (2) the establishment of a home for destitute blind and crippled natives; (3) authority for the Surgeon General of the United States Public Health and Marine-Hospital Service to appoint one of the officers of that service to act as commissioner of public health for Alaska.
The reindeer in Alaska are being gradually turned over to the natives and they now own about 55 per cent of the total number, while the Government now owns only 14 per cent.
36 are cared for entirely by natives, whose net income therefrom during the year 1909-10 was $24,656.09.
During the past year 40 reindeer were delivered to the Department of Commerce and Labor for use in stocking St. Paul and St. George Islands in Bering Sea.
It is hereby ordered that on and after May 1, 1909, all official communications or reports from and to executive officers of the Territories and territorial possessions of the United States, viz, Arizona, Hawaii, New Mexico, Porto Rico, Alaska, Samoa, and Guam, and all official communications or reports relating to territorial matters from and to all executive officers of the United States stationed in such Territories and territorial possessions shall be transmitted directly to the heads of the departments of the Government as provided by law, and in all cases where the acts of Congress do not specifically designate the department to which reports shall be transmitted the same shall be forwarded to the Secretary of the Interior in such manner and under such regulations as he may prescribe.
By Executive order dated July 15, 1909, Porto Rico was transferred to the Insular Bureau of the War Department.
Conditions in Alaska call for immediate action by Congress.
Its proper administration and development can not be accomplished under existing laws.
These laws neither promote development nor protect the public interest.
After a careful examination of official reports and other publications, and a personal visit to the Territory during the past summer, I had occasion to present the opinions thus formed before the American Mining Congress at Chicago on September 27, 1911.
The general policy outlined in that address had been discussed with you and you have since given public approval to its specific recommendations.
With some modifications and with a map of Alaska indicating its present mineral development this address has been reprinted as Bulletin 36 of the Bureau of Mines and has received such general publicity that I do not deem it necessary to restate in detail the views therein expressed.
It is available for all those who are interested in its suggestions.
First.
The construction by the Federal Government of a central trunk-line railroad from tidewater to the Tanana and the Yukon.
Second.
The passage of a liberal but carefully guarded leasing law for the development of its mineral resources, and especially of its coal lands.
Third.
The reservation of a sufficient amount of these coal lands to provide for the future needs of the Navy, and the mining of this coal by the Government for this purpose.
Fourth.
More liberal appropriations for aids to navigation, such as lights and buoys.
Fifth.
More liberal appropriations for the construction of roads and trails.
Sixth.
The adoption of a form of territorial government better adapted to its remote situation and peculiar local conditions.
In the address to which reference has been made the advantages of and the justification for a Government railroad in Alaska were fully discussed, and the opinion was expressed that the Government should take over and complete the construction of the so-called Alaska Central or Alaska Northern Railroad, leading from Seward, on Resurrection Bay, through the Matanuska coal field to the Tanana and the Yukon.
Since then the official representatives of the present owners of this railroad have definitely stated their willingness to turn it over to the Federal Government at a fair valuation to be appropriately determined.
The Department of Agriculture has also furnished a statement of the results of its experimental work at Rampart and at Fairbanks, showing the agricultural probabilities of these northerly portions of the Yukon and the Tanana Valleys.
The letter containing this statement is reprinted as an exhibit to this report.
As a result of 10 years' active work this Department believes in the possibility of developing an agriculture for Alaska that will be comparable with that of northern Europe, where conditións are somewhat similar, such as in parts of Norway, Sweden, Finland, and Russia.
It is believed that agriculture will supplement any other industry that may be developed in Alaska, and it is possible that ultimately oats and barley can be grown in sufficient quantity to supply not only local demands but a surplus for exportation.