Sir: My last annual report contained a number of suggestions and recommendations of changes in legislation and in administrative methods affecting the Department of the Interior.
I am pleased to be able to report that substantial progress has been made in both of these directions.
I regret that, largely through failure of appropriate legislation, it has not been possible to accomplish more.
In view of the existing political and legislative conditions, it did not seem desirable during the past year to press further the suggestions made in my last annual report with regard to comprehensive departmental reorganization.
At the request of chairmen of committees of Congress and of other members most of the other suggestions and recommendations in my previous report were embodied in definite bills drafted in the Department and afterward introduced either in the Senate or House of Representatives, and some of the most important measures have now been enacted into law.
Some conception of the legislative work affecting the Department of the Interior may be formed from considering the fact that more than one thousand reports on pending bills have been made up to this time by the Department to the present Congress.
While some of these reports were formal, many of them were of great importance and difficulty and many of the bills were considered at committee hearings attended personally by the Secretary or other representatives of this Department.
My previous report pointed out that the chief function of the Department of the Interior has been, generally speaking, the administration and disposition of the lands and natural resources held directly or in trust by the Nation.
It called attention to the lack of adequate laws for the proper administration and disposition of these lands and natural resources, especially as they are embraced within the public domain.
Its principal recommendation was that all of our public lands should be classified according to their respective characteristics and appropriate uses, and that they should then be administered or disposed of in accordance with their real characteristics under the classification.
This suggestion of comprehensive land classification and of administration based upon such classification met with much approval upon the part of individual Members of Congress and others, but the subject was given no serious consideration at the last session, and I earnestly renew my recommendation with respect to it.
The existing statutes attempt to recognize in a very general and ineffective way the fundamental differences between the different classes of agricultural land still remaining in the public domain.
Nevertheless, land adapted to dry farming, land adapted to ordinary cultivation without irrigation, and land requiring irrigation each presents differences in method of cultivation and admits of appropriate differences in the rules with regard to residence, which the present system is not flexible enough adequately to recognize.
Greater difficulties, however, are found in the present laws or lack of laws with regard to other parts of the public domain, especially our timber lands, our grazing lands, our water-power and reservoir sites, and our lands containing coal, oil, gas, asphalt, potash, nitrates, and phosphate.
There is quite general misapprehension as to the scope and effect of the act under which these important classes of lands and their resources are now withdrawn from entry under the ordinary homestead or mining laws.
The Withdrawal Act, as amended at the last session of Congress in accordance with the recommendations of this Department, furnishes adequate authority for the withdrawal of such lands and resources"for water-power sites, irrigation, classification of lands, or other public purposes."
The difficulty is that once withdrawn and classified such lands can not be restored to entry under laws which wili promote development, prevent mere exploitation, and protect the public interest.
Partial exceptions to this general statement exist with respect to coal lands, which can be classified and, after a valuation has been placed upon them by the Geological Survey, are made subject to public entry upon payment of the valuation.
Water-power sites can be developed under revocable permits.
Lands suitable for reservoir sites and for irrigation can be withdrawn for the use of irrigation projects under the Reclamation laws or the Carey Act.
Useful as are these methods of development after withdrawal, they do not adequately cover the field or permit appropriate development even of these particular kinds of lands, and the remaining classes of lands above noted are practically without any statutory provision for their appropriate development and use.
Oil, gas, asphalt, potash, nitrate, and phosphate lands once withdrawn must remain locked up unless opened to exploitation under the general mining laws applicable to and intended for metalliferous minerals or placer deposits.
My previous report pointed out that"it is the conviction that exploitation under the guise of development has not been effectively prevented, which has led to the great public movement for the conservation of our national resources," and that "if we can frankly adopt and put into force laws which will absolutely prevent mere exploitation, we can far more safely enact liberal laws and regulations to encourage legitimate development."
To this end specific recommendations were made for laws which should be adopted even if Congress were not prepared to authorize a comprehensive classification policy.
The chief of these recommendations were probably the adoption of constructive legislation with respect to water-power development and control and the comprehensive application of the leasing system to the development of'our public coal, oil, gas, asphalt, nitrate, potash, and phosphate lands, with appropriate provision for the protection of prospectors during a reasonable exploration period preliminary to the leasing of the land.
It was pointed out that the enlarged application of the leasing principle to the public domain generally would more effectively promote development and protect the public interest than the present system, especially as applied to lands of the classes just mentioned.
It was earnestly recommended that laws should be enacted which would permit the Government to sell the mature timber upon the public domain and thereafter to open to homestead entry such portions of the land as are available for agricultural uses, retaining and reforesting in Government hands the land upon which timber can be raised, but which is not adapted for future agricultural uses.
Vast tracts of this latter sort are now being purchased in the Appalachian Mountains by the National Forest Reservation Commission to protect navigable streams and prevent disastrous soil erosion.
It is inexcusable to permit public lands of this character to be acquired now by private interests, when we are spending public moneys to buy just such lands elsewhere, and may have to repurchase in the future the very lands from which the Government is now parting.
If statutes are enacted to provide for such classification and disposition of timber, it is evident that the Timber and Stone Act will be superseded and should be repealed, as should also be repealed the act of June 3, 1878, authorizing the cutting of timber on mineral lands, and the act of March 3, 1891, whereby provision is made for the issuance by this Department of permits for the cutting of timber on nonmineral lands.
The adoption of a grazing lease law for the public range was also urged for the protection of the range itself from impending destruction and for the protection of the legitimate interests of both the sheep and the cattle owners.
While these general recommendations have not been adopted and the country must still wait for a comprehensive classification policy for the public domain, some progress has in fact been made in this general direction.
One of the most important recommendations made in my previous report was the amendment of the homestead law so as to reduce the period required for actual residence, provided the reduction was accompanied by definite requirements as to the actual and progressive cultivation and improvement of the ground.
The specific recommendation was that the homestead settler should be excused from the necessity of residing upon his land during the first two years after entry, provided he substituted for residence during that period the improvement and cultivation of a substantial portion of the ground, to be followed by actual residence and progressive cultivation during the remaining three years of the established five-year homestead period.
I am still of the opinion that this recommendation, based as it was upon personal examination of conditions in certain portions of the public-land States, and upon conferences and correspondence with actual settlers, would have better met many of the existing conditions than the statute which was in fact adopted.
Nevertheless, Congress preferred to reduce the homestead period to three years and to excuse the settler from residence during not more than five months of each of these years; and as a result of the interchange of views between the congressional committees and the Department the act as passed (June 6, 1912) was made to conform to the important fundamental principles discussed in my previous report.
It met the approval of this Department and was signed by you.
It established the general rule requiring definite and progressive cultivation, and at the same time it gives to the Secretary of the Interior the power to reduce these requiremnts where the character and condition of the land justify such action.
The Department is thus enabled to make the laws and the administrative regulations more nearly fit actual conditons as they exist, so that these regulations may be just as strict in the prevention of nonresident exploitation as they are liberal in the encouragement of the bona fide settler.
The law is being administered in this spirit and for this purpose and should prove of great benefit in the further development of the public-land States.
General legislation permitting the disposition under the agricultural-land laws of the surface of lands believed to contain deposits of oil and gas was not enacted as recommended, but a statute permitting such entries upon public lands in Utah was passed.
The serious defect in the Withdrawal Act of June 25, 1910, which was pointed out in the last annual report of this Department, has been cured by the adoption of the amendment there recommended, so that lands withdrawn for important public purposes like water-power sites or storage reservoirs can no longer be entered under the mining laws of the United States, except so far as these laws apply to metalliferous minerals.
Potash and nitrate withdrawaIs are also thus protected.
The homestead comimutation law has not been repealed, and no limitation has been fixed within which such scrip as military bounty, soldiers" additional homesteads, etc., may be located and lands acquired thereunder.
This should be done.
Among my recommendations of legislation affecting the Reclamation Service were: That title should pass to the settler in advance of full payment of his share of the construction cost, with reservation of a lien to secure ultimate full payment; and that the duty of collecting such payments should be transferred from the General Land Office to the Reclamation Service.
Both changes were effected by the act of August 9, 1912 (37 Stat., 265), providing for patents on reclamation entries.
This statute embodied, with slight modifications, parts of a bill to amend the reclamation law which was drafted in the Department and introduced in both Houses (S. 6272 and H. R. 20490).
Under it a homestead settler, who has performed the duty of residence (3 years), reclamation and cultivation (half the area of his entry), and has paid all sums then due the United States on account of his land or water right, may have a patent forthwith, whereas hitherto he would have had to wait until he had also paid all the 10 annual installments of the building charge.
Under the new statute he gets a marketable title quickly, and the unpaid balance of his share of the cost of the works becomes a first lien on his land.
He can therefore mortgage it, subject to the Government's lien, and thus obtain the capital necessary to develop it.
The private land owner who buys a water right from the Reclamation Service is put upon exactly the same footing as the homestead entryman with respect to marketable title, reclamation, and cultivation.
The lien of the Government is enforceable by sale, and 8 per cent per annum is chargeable upon all sums in default.
Dues for operation and maintenance charges are expressly covered by the security of the Government's lien.
Pending full payment of the building charges the holdings of water-right purchasers for private lands and of entrymen and patentees of public lands are restricted to one farm unit, with provision for the forfeiture of any excess.
Desert-land entries embraced within reclamation projects and securing water from the project works are placed on a like footing by a clause in the deficiency appropriation act of August 26, 1912 (37 Stat., 610).
The act of July 24, 1912 (37 Stat., 200), authorizing the partial assignment of desert-land entries in reclamation projects and requiring such assignments to conform to farm units established by the Department on the application of the entryman, still further harmonizes the status of homestead entrymen and desert-land entrymen within reclamation projects.
The fourth section of the said act of August 9, 1912, authorizes the designation of bonded fiscal agents or officers of the Reclamation Service to collect the water charges hitherto payable to the receivers of the local land offices, which are often not sufficiently near or in touch with the reclamation projects to make effective cooperation with the project officials possible.
Much administrative improvement will certainly result from the adoption of these recommendations by Congress.
As already noted, it has thus far been impossible to secure serious attention in Congress for the passage of a comprehensive leasing law for coal, oil, and the other minerals heretofore mentioned.
Much encouragement, however, is to be found in the favorable consideration by the Senate Committee on Public Lands of the bill for the leasing of coal lands in the Territory of Alaska, which was in part the result of conferences between representatives of the American Mining Congress and the Department of the Interior.
This bill was favorably reported to the Senate, but too late in the session to secure the consideration necessary for its passage.
It is earnestly to be hoped that a bill of this character will be enacted at the present session of Congress.
Meanwhile, however, the passage of Private Resolution No. 4 has enabled the Department of the Interior to make a practical application of the leasing system to coal lands in the State of Wyoming.
In May, 1909, indictments were returned in the United States court for the district of Wyoming charging certain persons with conspiracy to defraud the United States by the attempted unlawful acquisition of coal lands in the Lander, Wyoming, district, amounting to 9,500 acres, included in 32 coal cash entries.
Most of the persons indicted were residents of the State of New York.
The Owl Creek Coal Company was one of the corporations connected with the transaction.
The General Land Office directed proceedings against the entries with a view to the cancellation thereof.
The local land office at Lander, by a decision rendered in June, 1910, held these entries for cancellation.
This decision was, on appeal, affirmed by the Commissioner of the General Land Office on February 13, 1911.
On appeal to the Department this decision was affirmed, and all of these entries have now been canceled.
While the cancellation proceedings were pending two bills were filed in the United States court in Wyoming praying an injunction to restrain the mining of coal upon the lands involved in the litigation pending the determination thereof.
The Government was successful in both of these suits, but upon stipulation the court allowed the defendants to continue their mining operations upon the payment of a royalty of 61 cents per ton on all coal mined.
By Private Resolution No. 4, approved August 1, 1912, the Secretary of the Interior was authorized by Congress to allow the Owl Creek Coal Company to continue the operation of the mine or mines upon any of the lands embraced in these entries upon such conditions and under such rules and regulations as he might prescribe.
The conditions, rules, and regulations thus authorized were prescribed in the form of a lease, which was executed for and on behalf of the United States and the Owl Creek Coal Company on the 29th day of August, 1912.
Term.
The lease is made for a period of 10 years from date of execution (Aug. 29, 1912), and gives the lessee a preferential right of renewal for successive five-year periods up to a total of 30 years from date of execution.
Estate.
The lessee is given the right and privilege of mining and extracting the coal and of disposing of the same, subject to the terms of the lease.
Acreage.
The tract embraced in the lease comprises 2,480 acres of the 9,500 acres involved.
Rental.
The lessee is to pay rent at the rate of $1 an acre, or $2,480 annually, in advance, payable on the 1st of July of each year.
This rental is to be credited upon royalties due under the lease for coal mined during the year, for which rent is so paid in advance, or, in the discretion of the Secretary, upon royalties due for succeeding years.
Royalty.
The lessee is to pay a royalty on each ton of 2,000 pounds run of mine, as follows: Six and one-half cents per ton for the first five years, 8 cents per ton for the second five years.
The royalty payable thereafter is to be fixed at the beginning of each subsequent five-year period for which the lease is renewable.
The lease provides that the royalties due shall be payable in three installments, as follows: On or before February 1, for all coal mined during the months of October, November, and December; on or before May 1, for all coal mined during the months of January, February, and March; on or before November 1, for all coal mined during the months of April, May, June, July, August, and September.
Operating conditions.
The lessee agrees to conduct all mining operations in accordance with the regulations of the Secretary of the Interior, and subject to the examination and inspection of the Federal Bureau of Mines, and to comply with all directions of that bureau for the prevention of unnecessary waste of the coal, the safeguarding of the lives of miners and employees, and the efficient operation of the mine.
Removal of property.
The lessee is given the right to place upon the property certain necessary personal property for use in the operation of the mine, such as buildings, structures, and machinery, and the further right to remove, upon the expiration or forfeiture of the lease, all such property belonging to it, except buildings, structures, and mine timbers and supports in place, provided that in the removal no injury is done to the realty or the mine, so that it can again be equipped for mining operations.
Assignment of the lease or any interest therein is prohibited.
The lessee is given the right to use the surface of the leased land for necessary purposes in connection with the conduct of mining operations.
Forfeiture provisions.
The Secretary of the Interior has the right to forfeit the lease upon the lessee's failure to comply with its terms and conditions, including the nonpayment of rents and royalties when due, after giving proper and reasonable notice.
Forfeiture shall not be enforced because of cessation of work caused by strikes, loss of buildings or machinery through fire or unavoidable accidents; but the happening of any such event is not to excuse the payment of rents or royalties due or prevent a forfeiture for a failure to pay the same.
The thorough revision of our mining laws which was recommended was seriously discussed, but definite action has not been taken.
Meanwhile, however, the recommendation that the use of the power of attorney for making mining locations should be curtailed and safeguarded has been carried out by the passage of a statute limiting the number of placer-mining claims which may be located in Alaska by power of attorney, fixing the maximum area of such claims hereafter located by associations at 40 acres, and requiring a minimun of $100 worth of labor to be done upon every placer-mining claim in said Territory annually until a patent has been issued therefor (act of Aug. 1, 1912; 37 Stat., 242).
Action has not been taken with regard to the recording of notices of mining locations and requiring mineral locators to come forward with their applications for patent within a specified time; nor has action been taken to abolish the law of the apex without prejudice to existing rights.
These matters should receive prompt consideration even if a comprehensive revision of our mining laws is not now undertaken.
It is becoming increasingly evident that the lode-mining law needs changes in one respect, at least.
The law at present does not provide for the creation of any rights in supposedly mineral land, except by the issuance of patents, and in that regard Congress has provided that a patent can follow only on a legal location and has said“but no location of a mining claim shall be made until the discovery of the vein or lode within the limits of the claim located.
As long as Congress desires to adhere to the policy at present embodied in statute law of disposing of mineral land absolutely, the law quoted above tends fairly well to the development of mineral properties where the ore can be discovered at or near the surface of the ground, but it seems to be ill calculated for a district where, as is the case notably in some of the copper-mining districts, the ore lies at depths of hundreds and sometimes thousands of feet.
The expense of actual discovery of the vein or lode within the limits of any particular claim in such cases involves deep exploration, either by drilling or by the sinking of a shaft from the surface, or the extension of a tunnel into the claim.
Either of these operations may involve great expense, and it has been repeatedly urged on the Department that investors are reluctant to spend the money required without further assurance than the law as it reads at present can give them.
On this ground the Department has been strenuously pressed to so construe the law as not to require an actual discovery of the lode which is supposed to exist within each claim, but to patent the claims upon evidence of the existence of mineral at or near the surface wholly disconnected with the supposed lodes below and of no value in itself either present or prospective, it having been further urged that in these cases it was a matter of geological inference that ore bodies did exist far below the surface.
It is obviously the duty of the Department to carry into effect the intention of Congress expressed in statutory form.
Congress having said that no lode claim should be patented without discovery of the vein or lode, within the limits of the claim, it would be an evident usurpation of power for this Department to patent lode-mining claims without proof of actual discovery.
The frequently repeated assertions that the recent rulings of the Department have overturned interpretations placed upon the law for thirty years seem utterly without foundation, as is pointed out in the recent departmental decisions.
On the contrary, had the Department decided that it could dispense with actual discovery it would have cverturned the practically unanimous holdings both of courts and of the Department ever since the enactment of the lode-mining law.
Doubtless in some cases claims have been patented where there was little or no proof of actual discovery, but the patenting of such claims is evidently to be laid to a misapprehension of the facts by employees of the Land Office, and not to a misconstruction of law by the Department.
It seems, however, possible by a change in the law to keep in force the policy of the Government expressed in the mining law of rewarding the actual discoverer of valuable veins, while at the same time giving such protection during the work preliminary to actual discovery as would make it possible for capital to invest, taking no more risk than that inherent in the question whether there is or is not in fact valuable mineral in the place where it is sought.
I suggest that the law should be amended so as to give a prospector, for a term of years, an exclusive right of possession and of prospecting within a limited area of land.
In case actual discovery were made within the time given, patent would issue.
The prospector should be obliged to perform a reasonable amount of work during the existence of the permit in order to make evident his good faith in attempting to find mineral within the limits of the claim.
He should, however, be given the right, by proper proceedings, to settle disputed questions of intervening claims, both in case of conflict with other mineral claims and also cases of conflict with agricultural claimants, so that he might at the earliest possible moment know whether or not his title would be absolutely clear upon his making discovery.
The only alternative suggested to this plan, apart from the evidently impossible one of accepting as evidence of discovery something which is clearly not such evidence, would be for Congress to amend the law so as to permit the issuance of patents to mining claims upon proof of the existence of valuable mineral within the claims by geological inference.
The objections to this are many.
In the first place, it is evident that no geological inference can be absolutely sure.
This is particularly clear in the case of copper deposits at great depth, for it was admitted in oral argument before the Department in a case where a large number of claims were applied for, that it was impossible for the claimants to state that there was in fact any copper ore at all under the surface of any particular claim; all that they asserted that they could be sure of was that somewhere beneath the surface of the large number of claims there was a large amount of such ore.
Another objection of perhaps much greater weight is that to substitute geological inference for the actual discovery of the vein or lode as required by the present law is to give to the geologist, or the man financially able to employ skillful geologists the reward which it has been the policy of the law up to now to extend to the prospector or actual discoverer.
It would also follow that a wealthy man could, without any actual development of the mineral resources of the country, obtain patents for and thus monopolize large districts of valuable mineral land.
As pointed out in my previous report, the whole development of Alaska is waiting largely upon the passage of suitable legislation for the development of its transportation facilities and of its coal lands.
First.
The construction by the Federal Government of a central trunk line railroad from tidewater through the Matanuska coal fields to the Tanana or Yukon Rivers.
Second.
The passage of a liberal but carefully guarded leasing law for the development of its mineral resources and especially its coal lands.
Third.
The reservation of a sufficient amount of these coal lands to provide for future needs of the Navy and the mining of this coal by the Government for this purpose.
Fourth.
More liberal appropriations for aids to navigation, such as lights and buoys.
Fifth.
More liberal appropriations for the construction of roads and trails.
Sixth.
The adoption of a form of Territorial government better adapted to its remote situation and peculiar local conditions.
The sixth and last of these recommendations is the only one which Congress has actually put into effect.
A Territorial legislature with limited jurisdiction has been created for the Territory and will undoubtedly give its attention to many measures of local relief, for which bills were drafted in this Department and urged upon the last session of Congress, but were not passed.
These bills related to such matters as the protection of the public health, the registration of marriages, births, and deaths; the supervision of banks; and other similar subjects.
The appropriations for the improvement of navigation and for the construction of roads and trails were not increased by Congress as they should have been.
On the other hand, substantial progress has been made in the consideration of the needs of the Territory for the construction of railroads and for the mining by the Government of coal for the use of the Navy.
A Government railroad has not been authorized, but a provision was inserted in the Territorial government bill authorizing the appointment of a commission consisting of an Army engineer, a Navy engineer, a representative of the Geological Survey, and a civil engineer who has had practical experience in the construction and operation of railroads, but who has not been connected with any of the roads in Alaska.
This commission was promptly appointed and proceeded to Alaska, where it has remained as long as the season would permit, engaged in a personal examination of the Territory with a view to making to the present session of Congress as comprehnsive a report as possible within the available time.
Following my annual report and after a personal visit to Panama, I presented before the appropriate committees of Congress the suggestion that much valuable railroad material and equipment was being released from further use in the construction of the Panama Canal and would be available for utilization in Alaska.
The suggestion is supported by officials at Panama and by many others and seems worthy of careful consideration by Congress at the earliest possible date, so that this material and equipment shall not be sacrificed at forced sale when it would have a far greater value for use in Alaska.
The Navy Department is pressing for prompt consideration its urgent need of adequate coal reserves on the Pacific coast and especially in Alaska.
It secured from the last Congress an appropriation of $75,000 for mining and testing Alaska coal.
This work was undertaken by the Department of the Interior through the agency of the Bureau of Mines.
It was hoped that some investigation of the Matanuska coal fields for this purpose would be possible, but the season was so far advanced when the appropriation became available that work was necessarily confined to the Bering field, where a coal mine has been opened and coal for experimental use by the Navy under practical working conditions is being mined and transported to tide water.
This work will furnish a practical test not only of the coal itself, but of the conditions under which Alaskan coal must actually be mined and made available for use.
The Alaska coal-leasing bill which was favorably reported by the Senate Committee on Public Lands, has the support of a part, at least, of the entrymen whose claims are still in controversy with the Government.
It proposes to give all of the entrymen interested in still pending entries, who are not involved in pending criminal proceedings or have not been found guilty of criminal acts in connection with their claims, a preference right to lease the lands in which they are respectively interested.
During the year progress has been made in the disposition of these claims.
The Cunningham claims and many others have been definitely canceled.
Investigation of the remainig claims is practically completed, and they are all being set for hearing and disposition at the earliest practicable dates.
For some time action was postponed in those claims which were involved in criminal proceedings for the reason that it was thought to be fairer to the entrymen and to the Government to allow the criminal cases to be disposed of before action on the civil side.
Some objection to this course has, however, developed among the entrymen, and the delays met with in getting the criminal suits to trial have led the Department to push for hearings in all of the pending claims so that the civil rights of the parties may be determined as promptly as possible.
At the same time the criminal cases are being expedited and set for trial so that the innocence or guilt of the defendants may be promptly and definitely determined.
There is no more important subject now pending before Congress and the country than the adoption of a definite and comprehensive water-power policy, both with regard to streams upon the public domain and navigable streams not on the public domain.
My previous report presented at some length the present views of this Department and urged that the whole subject of water-power development and control should receive the immediate consideration of Congress to the end that constructive legislation should be adopted without unnecessary delay.
During the past year the subject has received much attention in Congress and elsewhere.
The hearings before the National Waterways Commission were especially important and resulted in a unanimous report¹ which marks at least a definite step forward toward a constructive water-power policy.
Bills have been introduced providing for the definite adoption of such a policy with respect to public lands.
The passage of two bills by Congress authorizing dams in certain navigable streams and the discussions over these bills and over the forceful messages in which you vetoed them have clearly pointed out the necessity for amendment of the General Dam Act and have suggested the amendments which would be appropriate.
It is earnestly hoped that legislation will be promptly adopted with respect to both of these branches of water-power development which will encourage vigorous development without the sacrifice of public interests.
When it became apparent that Congress was not likely to act with respect to water-power sites upon the public domain, a series of conferences was arranged between the representatives of the Department of Agriculture and the Department of the Interior for the purpose of drafting a comprehensive revision of the regulations of these two departments with respect to permits for water-power development in the national forests and on the public domain generally.
The revised regulations were put into effect by the Department of the Interior on August 24, 1912, so that their effect might be carefully considered by those who are interested in water-power development; and on November 18, 1912, a largely attended conference with representatives of important water-power interests and of the State conservation, water, and railroad commissioners of California was held in the office of the Secretary of the Interior for the purpose of discussing the relations between the State and National Governments with respect to water power, and especially of considering such modifications in the laws and regulations as might be suggested in order to coordinate the functions of the Nation and the States and make the regulations, whether state or national, sufficiently liberal to encourage vigorous development and at the same time to protect adequately the public interests.
The conference demonstrated the feasibility of effective cooperation for the reconciliation or adjustment of the different interests, state and national, public and private.
Many helpful suggestions were made, which are now under consideration.
The fundamental purpose of a rightly considered water-power policy is the encouragement and stimulation of the development and use of this great natural resource for the benefit of the public and along lines which will protect and promote the public interest.
Its object is development, but development for the benefit of the public.
The first public interest is that the water power shall be developed and utilized, but some forms of development and utilization are obviously better calculated to promote the public interest than are other forms.
It is therefore essential that we should determine what form of development will best promote the public interest.
Our present economic and social institutions are based upon the theory that the welfare of the community is to be promoted largely through the opportunities of personal gain offered to the individual members of the community.
It is through these opportunities of personal advantage that we expect to stimulate the ambition and the energies of private individuals whose activities in the mass promote the welfare of the community and advance the prosperity and the happiness of the people as a whole.
So far as government itself does not undertake the development of water power it is therefore necessary and desirable that we shall offer to those private interests which do undertake its development a sufficient opportunity for profit and a sufficient protection of their investment to secure the largest measure of development for which there is a present market, or for which a market can profitably be created.
It must be equally apparent, however, that to the extent to which we offer an unnecessary inducement we are depriving the community of the very benefits upon which the present theories of industrial society depend.
We are failing to obtain for the community the advantage on account of which we offer to the individual the opportunity for private gain.
It is true that it would be a mistake to undertake too nice an adjustment of the public and the private interests involved and that the benefit of every real doubt should be given to the private investor and developer so that we may make sure that he is given a sufficient inducement to undertake the enterprise.
At the same time it is not every investment of capital in such enterprises that must be completely protected; it is not every such enterprise that should be assured a profitable operation.
If there is no risk incurred by unwise investment or inefficient management, there will be no adequate incentive for wise investment and efficient management.
Above all we must make certain that those who receive special privileges connected with water-power development shall in fact proceed by appropriate degrees and within appropriate times to develop the available water power to its highest capacity, having due regard to the possibilities of marketing the product.
We must make certain that the electric energy thus created shall be made available to the community in appropriate ways at appropriate prices.
If it is not to be used for the benefit of the community, but is to be devoted directly to the private purposes and personal advantage of the permittee, some method must be found by which the public will receive its share of the profit which the permittee may make over and above that which is a necessary and reasonable inducement for his investment.
There must be appropriate provisions in the permit or in the law under which the permit is issued for the effective enforcement of such conditions as are essential to the public interest.
The theory of our present law in these particulars appears to be that the only way in which the public interest can properly be protected is by providing that the permit may be revoked at any time by the official who grants it.
My previous report discussed at some length the reasons why this theory neither promotes development nor protects the public interest in an effective manner.
Instead of meeting directly and adequately the important economic questions involved; instead of attempting to state the essential conditions which should be asserted for the protection and benefit of the public; instead of fully authorizing the officials who grant these permits to limit and define these conditions so that the permit may be revoked only for a breach of the conditions thus established by the statute or by official regulations, our present law seeks to avoid this responsibility by making the permit revocable at any time and without specific reason.
So long as this provision in the law was not regarded seriously it offered little obstacle to development in the then limited ranges of hydro-electric enterprise and long-distance transmission.
To-day, however, the revocable feature of the existing law is a serious and unjustifiable obstacle to the development and utilization of one of the Nation's greatest natural resources.
It should be stricken out of the law, but it should be stricken out only if there are inserted in its place statutory provisions which will define or authorize the appropriate executive agency to define by regulations the conditions and limitations upon which the permit is issued and for a breach of which it shall be canceled.
We must adjust two classes of relations and interests.
We must adjust the relations and interests of the Nation and the States; we must adjust the relations and the interests of the public and the permittee.
These adjustments are not without difficulties, but they are entirely practicable, and the general lines upon which they should be accomplished are clearly apparent.
It would seem to be axiomatic that where any governmental agency, whether State or Federal, owns or controls a natural resource that agency should take such steps and adopt such policies as will insure that this natural resource is being utilized for the benefit of the community.
If the particular agency, State or Federal, is called upon to expend moneys for the protection or improvement of the resource and the resource itself can, without detriment to the community, be made to produce revenues out of which such expenditures can be paid, this course should be adopted.
The proposition thus laid down seems to be conceded, reluctantly in some cases but freely in others, by those who are interested in water-power development.
As a rule also they concede further that if water power is being developed and used directly by the permittee for its own financial profit and not as a public utility, the particular governmental agency issuing the permit can and should require the payment of such substantial compensation as the facts in any given case may warrant.
Upon the other hand, however, they vigorously contend that much, if not most, of the water-power development upon navigable streams and upon the public domain is, in fact, in the nature of a public utility, in that it is devoted to the generation of electric current which is sold by the permittee for general consumption by the public for light, heat, or power.
They now state frankly that this development should be treated as a regulated public monopoly.
Some of them.contend that for this reason no compensation whatever should be exacted by the Government which grants the permit, but on the other hand those private interests whose representatives are really candid are prepared to admit that public regulation of these utilities is, generally speaking, not yet efficient, and that to the extent to which it fails to be efficient the Government is justified in exacting compensation.
They admit further that for the purpose of keeping control of the situation and upon broad general principles of public policy the Government is justified in imposing a nominal compensation even in cases where public regulation appears to be reasonably effective, and that provision for periodic readjustment of this compensation will be a useful check in securing such efficient regulation.
Indeed, the only controversy of importance appears to be whether the Federal Government or the States shall control the granting of water-power permits and shall collect the compensation.
So far as concerns water-power concessions upon streams which are not navigable, the Federal Government is directly concerned to-day only where the application is for the use of some portion of the Federal domain.
The important question is whether the Federal Government should retain its control over such power sites and upon what conditions the concession shall be issued.
The suggestion is made frequently by those who are in one way or another representing either present or future investment in waterpower development that such power sites and their control should be turned over to the respective States in which they are situated.
It is suggested that in some way or other a failure to do this is a usurpation of Federal power and an unfair discrimination against the Western States.
It is interesting, however, to note that the ordinary citizens of these States—are not at all concerned over Federal usurpation or unjust treatment.
They recognize that the Federal Government has full legal power to dispose of the public domain as wise policy may direct.
They do not fear Federal usurpation, but seek Federal cooperation in supplementing State and local powers, so that the natural resources shall be utilized for the public benefit primarily of the locality in which these resources are situated, and thus ultimately for the benefit of the Nation as a whole.
They suspect that the real purpose of those who urge the turning over of the Federal domain to the States is that they may escape the longer and the stronger arm of the Federal Government and may take advantage of the more limited resources and governmental facilities of the individual States.
While some States have undoubtedly wisely conserved certain of the lands and natural resources turned over to them by the Nation, the story has too often been the acquisition of these lands and resources by special interests or individuals without adequate recognition of the public interest.
There is no policy which it would be wise for any State to adopt with respect to these matters in the adoption and enforcement of which it can not be supplemented and assisted rather than retarded by the retention in Federal hands of the powers and the property now held by the Nation.
It is precisely this policy of practical cooperation which should be put into effect.
There is no real conflict between the Nation and the States upon this subject.
In fact, there can be no real solution of these aspects of the problem until the interests and the functions of the Nation and the States are coordinated and they are working together for the same essential ends.
In general all of the streams which are susceptible of water-power development are also of great importance for domestic use, for irrigation, or for navigation.
All of them depend to some degree upon protection and aid of some kind and from some source for one or more of these uses.
Increasingly that source tends to be the Nation and not the States.
Theoretically the States can develop and protect the streams and the watersheds of the streams within their respective borders, and if these streams are interstate in character the States affected can unite in plans and expenditures for their joint protection and development.
Practically, however, the tendency is increasingly in the direction of Federal action upon such matters.
Some of the individual States are developing effective policies of water conservation, but it is the Federal Government after all which is called upon to make the chief expenditures for the development of navigation and for the protection of the forest cover around the sources and along the watersheds of both navigable and nonnavigable streams.
It is the Federal Government which will be asked to build the reservoirs in which to impound the flood waters at their source so that devastation may be prevented and stream flow be made regular and beneficent.
It is the Federal Government which has established and is maintaining the forest reserves by withdrawing appropriate areas on the public domain and purchasing other areas in the Appalachian and other mountains of the Eastern States.
The States which are jointly interested in the disposition and development of interstate waters not only do not cooperate with each other, but are in fact antagonistic.
No better illustration of this can be found than in the present attitude of State officials and some citizens of Colorado toward the utilization of the waters of the Rio Grande for the irrigation project in Texas and New Mexico authorized by Congress partly for the benefit of these States but largely in settlement of an international controversy with Mexico.
If, then, the Nation is to perform these important functions; if it is to make these expenditures; if it is to be the arbiter and harmonizer of conflicting State interests, there would seem to be every reason why the Nation should retain the fullest measure of control necessary or appropriate to enable it to perform these functions effectively.
This is none the less true because in exercising these functions the chief and controlling purpose of the Nation should be to promote the interests of the States and local communities directly affected rather than to utilize its powers for the purpose of increasing Federal revenue.
Where the exercise of these functions develops water power or adds to the value of water power already existing, there can be no sufficient reason adduced why the cost of the protection and the improvement should not be repaid in whole or in part out of the values thus created, nor can there be any adequate reason why the Federal Government should pay the cost of such protection and improvement merely to turn over the revenues to the States or local communities to be used for other purposes than water-power development.
Federal expenditures of this character should not be borne wholly by the general taxpayers of the Nation if the expenditures produce special local benefits of the kind described.
It is true that much of the hydro-electric energy developed under Federal permit will be sold to local communities and their inhabitants for general lighting, heating, and power purposes, and that the local communities affected are therefore vitally concerned in the character of the service rendered by the permittee and in the charges for this service.
The improvement of long-distance transmission will tend to change this local interest into an interest interstate in character, and this change will lead to the necessary assertion of the Federal power over interstate commerce, as has been the case in the field of railroad enterprise, but until that time comes, and except as it does come, it should be a fundamental principle of Federal water-power policy to relegate to the States and their delegated agencies, whether such agencies be the local municipalities or the public-utility commissions, the important function of regulating the service and the rates of hydro-electric public utilities.
It should equally be a feature of Federal policy to utilize the revenues derived from water-power permits solely for the purposes of water development, thus returning to the local communities, not by any nice adjustment of particular expenditures to particular receipts, but as a general policy, the contributions which these communities may directly or indirectly make to the Federal Treasury.
Where the local community is efficiently regulating the rates and services of these permittees, the Federal charge should be nominal in amount, but it should be susceptible of periodic readjustment, so that official inquiry may be made into the extent to which local regulation is efficient, and if for any reason such regulation is not effective, and the permittee is enjoying an unconscionable profit, this profit may be diminished by appropriate increases of the Federal charge.
Such a policy can in no way injuriously affect the legitimate interests of the private investor or the local community.
The streams of the United States are acquiring increased value with the increase in settlement and density of population in both the East and the West.
Navigation, power, and irrigation are uses recognized by statute, yet with the increased dependence upon stream utilization more attention will be paid by public and private enterprise to the various means of economizing and conserving streams in order that the uniformity and regularity of their flow, and consequently their usefulness, may be increased.
The act of 1897 authorizing the creation of forest reserves in the West states as one object of such reservation the regulation of stream flow through the favorable effect upon streams of the maintenance of unbroken forest areas on their headwaters.
Perhaps the most definite legislative recognition of the principle of stream conservation is contained in the so-called Weeks Forest Reserve Act (36 Stat., 961).
This law appropriates the sum of $11,000,000 for the purchase of lands upon the headwaters of navigable rivers within the United States for the stated purpose of conserving navigability.
The administrative officers of the Government have kept full pace with the legislative officers in their recognition of the necessity of taking action to protect the potential usefulness of our streams by fostering constructive development, and to this end have used the powers given them by Congress.
For example, under the Withdrawal Act of June 25, 1910, lands whose greatest value is for their use in the development of water powers or in the making of irrigation reservoirs have been reserved from other disposition as far as authorized in said act and are preserved for such power or irrigation use.
In pursuit of the same policy the Government has reserved lands suitable for reclamation under the Carey Act in order that they may be put to such use.
In general, the destruction of the natural cover of forest or underbrush at the headwaters of streams increases the high-water flow, decreases the low-water flow, increases destructive erosion and accompanying silt deposition, and so interferes with all the uses of the stream which are valuable to the public, such as navigation, irrigation, and power.
This fact, which has been the subject of considerable discussion, has been clearly established by the recent investigations of the Geological Survey in the White Mountains in connection with the administration of the Weeks Act.
The theory of the Weeks Act is that the preservation of natural cover on the headwaters of streams tends to maintain the navigability of these streams, and under this act lands are now being purchased in the eastern part of the country.
There are, however, areas of western lands whose situation in relation to the headwaters of streams valuable for power and irrigation is precisely the same as that of the lands now being purchased under the Weeks Act in the East in regard to streams there valuable for navigation.
The fact that the Government, in pursuit of the wise policy of promoting the regularity of stream flow, is now buying lands in the eastern part of the country, the title to which should never have passed from the public, necessarily shows that public lands in the West in a similar situation should be retained by the Government in order that the streams whose headwaters they protect may be made as useful as possible.
Many such lands are at present so retained in national forests.
I am informed, however, that there exist areas of public lands on the headwaters of streams in the West, and particularly in the arid Southwest, which should be withdrawn from entry because if their acquisition by private interests is permitted the usual destructive effects will follow.
Careless cultivation, brush fires, or overgrazing will result in the destruction of the natural cover; erosion will become effective; the destructive power of floods will be increased; the lowwater flow will be decreased; stream channels will be filled with débris; reservoirs upon them will become clogged; irrigation effected by their use will be decreased; and such power values as they may have will be greatly reduced.
Such lands should be withdrawn in orcer to protect headwaters of streams and to prevent the necessity of future governmental expenditures in the West under the authority of the Weeks Act or some similar legislation of the kind represented by the purchases now being made of headwater lands in the Appalachian region.
It is not proposed to include lands whose value for other purposes is greater than their value to the community for stream protection, and it is not anticipated that the areas thus withdrawn would be large or widely distributed.
The type of reserve thus suggested may be similar to that created directly by congressional action by the act approved February 20, 1909 (35 Stat., 641).
This law withdrew from the public domain and erected into a permanent reserve certain unoccupied lands in the San Bernardino Valley, California, that were worthless except for use in connection with the restoration and conservation of underground water supplies needed for the support of the highly profitable horticultural communities centered about Riverside.
The Department has knowledge of other areas of public lands which bear a comparable relation to communities dependent upon irrigation and to power enterprises, and it is my conviction that these lands should be withheld from private acquisition until Congress shall have had opportunity to consider the desirability of erecting from them permanent reserves like that in the San Bernardino Valley.
Ample authority exists for the proposed action in the Withdrawal Act (36 Stat., 847), by which the President is authorized to withdraw temporarily any public lands and to reserve them"for water-power sites, irrigation, classification of lands, or other public purposes to be specified in the orders of withdrawal."
The action which it is proposed to take, namely, the reservation of lands at the headwaters of streams for the protection of those streams for public use, is clearly a public purpose, and is therefore authorized by the law.
Rarely would the new type of withdrawal affect valuable forest lands, although frequently it might be necessary or desirable to include scattered timber.
On this account and because of the provision in section 2 of the Withdrawal Act prohibiting the creation of additional forest reserves in certain States therein named it is desirable that Congress should pass specific legislation recognizing that this prohibition does not apply to the reservation of lands at the headwaters of streams for the protection of those streams for appropriate public uses, whether these uses be irrigation, navigation, or power development, or the preservation of the waters for municipal or domestic purposes.
Ten years have now elapsed since the passage of the Newlands (or Reclamation) Act of June 17, 1902.
That statute and the subsequent legislation which has grown out of it may be regarded as one of the largest and most immediate applications of the policy which has since become known under the name"conservation of natural resources."
Its purpose was the use of national funds to reclaim arid lands and secure their subdivision into small holdings, tilled by the owners thereof residing thereon, who were to repay the cost in not exceeding 10 annual installments.
The act by its terms included private as well as public lands, and the maximum holding of either which could take water from the Government works was fixed at 160 acres, while the Secretary of the Interior was given authority to require subdivision into holdings of lesser area if the same were sufficient for the support of a family.
Such a direct (though reimbursable) use of public funds for the benefit of property held or to be acquired by private parties (owners or homestead settlers) was a novelty, and the proposal met with strong opposition in Congress.
It was denounced as socialistic, and Members from the Eastern States prophesied that the settlers would repudiate their obligations to repay the construction cost and would obtain relief therefrom through political action.
On the other hand, it was convincingly urged that the great and permanent development of the arid country could not safely be intrusted to private enterprise alone and was beyond the financial ability of the several Western States.
The bill was passed in the belief that the pledge of public and private faith involved in it would not be violated.
Its aim was the wide and permanent diffusion of wealth and of the benefits of the natural resources of fertile land and water among a large number of persons, and its success must be judged upon this basis, not by the accumulation of large fortunes in the hands of a few.
The novelty, magnitude, and inherent difficulty of the experiment demanded that the administrative officers be intrusted with large discretion and responsibility.
Therefore, the Secretary of the Interior was given very large and sweeping powers by the act.
It appropriates the proceeds received from time to time from publicland sales in the Western States (less 5 per cent) for the irrigation of arid lands therein, and constitutes them into a special fund called the reclamation fund.
These receipts, up to June 30, 1912, have amounted to about $77,000,000, to which should be added $20,- 000,000 authorized by the reclamation bond act of June 25, 1910.
The total amount expendable under the act has therefore been in the neighborhood of $100,000,000, and with respect to this expenditure the Secretary of the Interior was given full discretion.
He was also authorized to withdraw from entry public lands needed for the construction of irrigation works, and from all but homestead entry public lands to be irrigated from such works, to make contracts for such construction, to acquire land for the same purpose by purchase and condemnation, to fix the limit of area (not exceeding 160 acres) necessary, in his judgment, for the support of a family and limit the area of entries accordingly, to estimate the cost of the works, and fix by public notice the charge per acre to be paid by settlers in reimbursement thereof.
The act made the water rights acquired under it appurtenant to the land irrigated, made beneficial use of the water the basis, the measure, and the limit of the right thereto, and forbade sales of water rights to private landowners, unless resident upon or in the neighborhood of land for which the right was sold.
The first problems that pressed for solution after the passage of the act were those of engineering and construction.
They have been solved with notable success.
Many of the larger works, as, for example, the Shoshone, Pathfinder, and Roosevelt Dams and the Gunnison Tunnel, take rank among the great engineering achievements of our day; and, while we were not entitled to expect and have not achieved errorless results in the works as a whole, it may be said that they are well designed and carefully built to endure and serve their purpose permanently.
This very merit has given rise to not a little criticism on behalf of the settlers who are to pay for the works, on the ground that the construction cost has been excessive.
No general statement of this sort is justified.
If a proper basis of comparison is taken it is believed that the cost of works built by the Reclamation Service is less than the cost of those of equal magnitude and efficiency constructed by private enterprise.
It must be remembered that when the Reclamation Act was passed practically all of the large projects which could be constructed at low cost had been undertaken by private capital, so that one of the chief arguments for the passage of the act was that the projects remaining to be undertaken were so difficult that no other agency than the National Government could possibly undertake the work.
Many private projects have brought down their apparent construction cost by building unsubstantial structures which must be wholly renewed within a few years, whereas those built by the Reclamation Service under like circumstances will last indefinitely.
It follows that the ultimate construction cost of private projects so built will be very high, though it is disguised in the statistics frequently published.
Moreover, the cost is generally stated as so much per acre of the land irrigated, and the Government estimates have been based upon a careful attempt to secure an adequate supply of water for every acre in the project for nearly every year, whereas many private projects have attempted to cover a much larger acreage with works of the same capacity and thus take chances upon the probability of obtaining water.
This reduces the estimated cost per acre of such private projects, but subjects the farmer to a risk which should not be put upon him and which ultimately will have to be removed by additional construction cost for storage or other new water supply.
The problems confronting the Service are rapidly becoming those of administration rather than engineering.
They concern the use of the works which have been constructed, the distribution of water through them to the settlers, and the realization by the settlers and the public of the benefits intended by the act.
They are human problems and their solution requires the doing of justice in dealing with many thousand farmers and the maintaining of a spirit of cordial cooperation with them.
For this reason, as indicated in my last annual report, the project engineers in charge of the building works are being replaced as rapidly as circumstances warrant by irrigation managers selected not only for their knowledge of the physical methods of operating a project, but largely for their business and executive qualifications.
Undoubtedly some ground for past criticism exists in particular cases, but it must be remembered that among the many thousands of irrigators on the Government projects there must inevitably be a considerable percentage of the unskilled and unfortunate who suffer disappointment, which results in complaints against the officials in charge of the project.
Many of the farmers on the 14,000 farms or more to which water is being delivered are thoroughly qualified for this form of agriculture, but many others have never before practiced irrigation.
Some have come from the cities and are wholly ignorant of country life in general and of arid conditions in particular.
Pioneering on a reclamation project is still pioneering, requiring courage, energy, and resolution to overcome its hardships.
The unsuccessful men are unable to pay their installments of water charges.
This renders their entries or waterright purchases subject to cancellation, a harsh remedy which is not applied if there is good cause to believe that leniency would result in ultimate success.
Such cases are carefully investigated before cancellation is ordered.
In most cases of failure it is found that little, if any, permanent improvements have been made and that the lands were originally taken up for speculative purposes.
In such cases prompt cancellation is effected in order to permit some other settler to enter upon and utilize the land.
The greatest present need of the projects is that of bringing to the reclaimed land the class of settlers who are competent to make use of its opportunities, and of encouraging or stimulating them to produce larger average crop values such as to justify the labor and cost of irrigation.
It is commonly supposed that the difficulty of reclamation work is solved when water is had and the works are completed; on the contrary, this is only the beginning.
Financial or technical questions of building shrink into insignificance compared with the more difficult human problem of dealing with thousands of settlers and of inducing them to take action along lines which will lead to their greatest individual success.
Until the passage of the act of June 25, 1910, the Department was without authority to keep new settlers away from reclamation projects during the time of construction.
Consequently, as soon as a reclamation withdrawal was made, settlers flocked in, took up all the lands, and waited for the construction of the works which were to furnish them water, a process which occupied many years and led to very great complaint on the part of the settlers.
Among them were many so-called"professional pioneers," namely, the more restless members of the community who are always looking for something better beyond the horizon.
They frequently took up the lands in the hope of selling out at an advanced figure after water should have been supplied.
In other words, their purpose was speculative, and the speculation, if successful, would saddle the newcomer purchasing from them with the burden of the profit the speculator had made out of the transaction.
Settlers of this kind neglected to till the soil themselves after water was available, or did as little as possible without endangering their entries, hoping from year to year to dispose of their interest in their farms.
In the meantime thousands of acres of land for which a'large public investment has been made to furnish water are being held out of use because the owner is not ready or able to utilize the ground.
The result is a low average of crop production and the presence of considerable tracts of uncultivated or poorly cultivated fields.
This discourages newcomers and adds to the labor of the men on the ground because a single acre of weeds will furnish seeds enough to injure an entire section of tilled lands.
What is needed is not the relaxation of rules which prevent speculation, but the discriminating encouragement of the man who has actually cultivated his entire holding to the best advantage.
No encouragement should be given to the speculator or inefficient farmer who is trying to hold a piece of Government land out of cultivation in order to gain the unearned value thereof which arises from the toil of others and the expenditure of public money.
From this point of view the objections frequently made to the fixing of a less area than 160 acres as the limit of a single holding, called a "farm unit," which can be patented under the homestead law within a reclamation project, or the acquiring of a water right therefor, are peculiarly without merit.
Many of the settlers who went upon the withdrawn lands before the construction of the works and made entry for 160 acres protest vigorously against being required to conform their entries to farm units of 80 or 40 acres.
These units are fixed in each project at such number of acres as “may reasonably be required for the support of a family," as the statute prescribes. The 160-acre limit prescribed by the general homestead law was based upon the supposition that that area was sufficient for the support of a family on the new lands which could be settled and farmed without irrigation. The public interest demands that the land should be worked by the owners thereof and should support in comfort as many families as possible. The entryman should unquestionably be given the benefit of the doubt. Some farm units may have been made too small; the standard of"reasonable requirements for the support of a family" may have been too low in some instances; but the investigations, the observations, and the actual experience of the Reclamation Service seem to show that these things have not thus far occurred.
To give one entryman 160 acres of public land where 80 is sufficient to support his family makes him a speculator with reference to the excess and enables him to levy tribute upon the settler who ultimately buys it.
The same is true with respect to water rights for private lands in excess of the farm unit area.
The act of August 9, 1912 (37 Stat., 265), already referred to, extends the prohibition as to excess holdings beyond the time when patent is issued and until the"final payment in full of all installments of the building and betterment charges," and provides for forfeiture of such excess.
The said act further discourages speculation by expressly placing upon the purchasers of water rights for private lands the same duty of cultivation and reclamation (one-half the irrigable area before certificate of water-right issues) that was imposed by the original act upon the entrymen of public lands.
Those who desire to hold lands within reclamation projects for speculative sales or for present leases to tenants object to the provisions of the reclamation law which require them to reside on or in the neighborhood of the land for which water right is purchased.
In my judgment, such ownership should not be encouraged and the rule of residence as now construed should not be relaxed.
Nevertheless, as I pointed out in my report of last year, there are good reasons for allowing an irrigator, whether on public or on private lands, to postpone the beginning of his residence until he has had opportunity to put in crops and, if possible, to obtain from the land the means of supporting himself and his family.
For this reason the Department's draft of a bill to amend the reclamation law proposed to remove homestead entries under the reclamation act from the operation of the general homestead law in this respect, to call them by the distinctive name of "reclamation entries," and to allow such a postponement of the establishment of residence until two years after the entry is made.
I am still of the opinion that such is the true solution of the difficulties presented.
The requirements for repayment of the cost of the works by the settlers in not exceeding 10 annual installments have given rise to many complaints.
The schedules of repayment first established made these installments equal, but, as stated in my last report, they have been generally graduated so that they are small during the early years, when the irrigator is subduing his land and making it fit for efficient crop production, and large in the latter part of the 10 years, when it may be supposed that the production will be sufficient to carry the burden.
Some of the objectors have not been satisfied with this concession, but have demanded an amendment of the law which will extend the period of repayment from 15 to 20 years instead of 10.
Much of the agitation for this change has taken place in those projects where the construction cost has not yet been determined and therefore where no annual installments have yet been announced, the water being distributed to such lands as can now be served under an annual rental contract at a price approximately equal to the expense of delivery without regard to the construction cost.
It should be noted that under such circumstances the water user may bring his farm into the fullest productive condition before being required to pay any part of the construction cost whatever, and therefore, that there is less basis there than elsewhere for the proposed lengthening of the reimbursement period.
The chief beneficiaries of such a lengthening would be those men who own extensive tracts of private land within the reclamation project and have been required to sell them in order to secure water rights for them under the restrictions of single holdings above referred to.
Such sales are made on time and partial payments thereon are often required annually.
The purchaser buys the land from the owner and subsequently buys the water right from the Government.
Before the initiation of the project such land was of little or no value, but the prices at which it is now sold without water are frequently very high and give very large speculative profits to the former owners.
A purchaser who is under contract to pay annual installments upon the purchase price of $200 per acre for his land objects to the burden of the installments annually due on the Government water charge, though all such installments taken together may amount to only $50.
In other words, the demand is that the huge speculative profit shall be first paid and that the reimbursement of the Government for the actual cost of the works should be postponed.
This demand is fundamentally vicious and unjust.
It not only diverts to private speculators the benefits of a great enterprise undertaken for the public benefit, but it inevitably postpones the day when the settlers are to take over the management of the works as is contemplated by the Reclamation Act, and it prevents the replenishment of the reclamation fund for the development of other projects.
The public interest demands that the settlers should, as soon as consistent with the return of the Government investment, assume responsibility for their own welfare and relieve the Federal Government from guardianship over them; also that the investment be returned at the earliest practicable moment and the benefits of the act be thus extended throughout the West with the utmost rapidity practicable.
The postponement of payment therefor means local favoritism and large and frequent private profits at the expense of the general public.
In this connection I desire to emphasize the interest of every citizen of the United States, and particularly of every farmer, in the East as well as in the West, in promoting a faithful fulfillment by the settlers on reclamation projects of their obligations to repay to the Government the cost of the works and the cost of operating and maintaining them until they are turned over to such settlers.
Various schemes of Government aid in agricultural development are proposed and have been adopted in other countries.
Many of these proposals, if based on a conservative estimate of the resulting increase in productivity, are fundamentally sound in proportion as, the obligation of repayment is sacredly fulfilled.
Therefore every proposal for the repudiation of any part of the cost of rclamation works, or of the cost of their maintenance and operation, or for the unnecessary postponement of the payment thereof, is a blow struck at agricultural development in every part of the United States.
Let it once be known that the first great experiment in the direct use of Government revenues to aid individual farmers to increased crop production has resulted in the repudiation of their obligations to repay, or even in a formidable attempt to avoid or unnecessarily to postpone payment, then all hope of the continuation of such a beneficent policy, to say nothing of its extension to regions which have not yet felt its benefit, will be at an end.
With my previous annual report I transmitted to you, and you thereafter submitted to Congress, documents giving the details of the work then done along the lower Colorado River in Mexico, under the appropriation of $1,000,000 made by Congress on June 25, 1910, for the purpose of protecting the lives and property interests of the citizens in the Imperial Valley, California.
These documents also included the report of a board convened by your direction to make a careful study of the work accomplished and to suggest plans for future operations.
This board recommended an immediate appropriation to meet emergencies, but such appropriation has not been made.
The work has, therefore, been necessarily confined to such operations as were practicable with an unexpended balance of about $200,000 available during the past year from the appropriation of June 25, 1910.
It was decided to restore the levee north of the Abejas River and raise the Volcano Lake levee so as to prevent the flow of the Colorado River at flood stages from reaching Imperial Valley by way of New River.
A patrol was kept on the levee north of the Abejas River until the floods of 1911 had subsided.
About 14 per cent of the yardage of the levee was lost by the flood of 1911.
No further damage was done during the flood of 1912.
In December, 1911, the levee north of the Abejas River was repaired and brush tappoons along the river base were constructed.
The railway which had been built to carry material to the site of the dam for the closure of the Abejas break was taken up and the steel returned to the Southern Pacific Company, by which it had been furnished.
The enlargement of Volcano Lake levee was begun on January 14, 1912.
The work consisted of raising the levee 4 feet with earth and adding a paving of rock on the water side thereof to protect the earthen slope from erosion.
The levee has a crown of 12 feet and side slopes of 1 on 2.
It has a length of about 8 miles and the work was completed June 2, 1912.
The contractor's equipment was removed and the work finally accepted September 15, 1912.
The total amount expended on the work up to October 31, 1912, was $938,872.74, leaving a balance of $61,127.26 with which to pay outstanding liabilities.
In addition to the work described, further physical investigations and surveys of the delta were made, the results of which will be of service in connection with such further operations as may be provided for.
All of the material and equipment borrowed from the Southern Pacific Company has been returned, and all government property purchased for the work and not used has been disposed of and the funds realized from sales have been accounted for in the usual manner.
The most important feature of the report of the advisory board above referred to was the recommendation that by agreement with the Government of Mexico an international Colorado River Commission should be created, to be composed of Mexican and American engineers with authority to investigate and report to their respective governments a basis for the final adjustment of all questions affecting the use and control of the waters of the Colorado River in which the two countries have a mutual or related interest.
Negotiations for this purpose are now actively in progress with the Government of Mexico, and the Department of State reports that there is every reason to believe that an understanding will be reached and an agreement signed in the near future.
It is of great importance that this should be done.
In further reference to this subject attention is respectfully invited to the message of the President, dated February 2, 1912, transmitting data of this Department, published as House Document No. 504, Sixty-second Congress, second session, and the message of the President, dated June 14, 1912, transmitting a letter from this Department recommending further appropriations for the work, and published as Senate Document No. 846, Sixty-second Congress, second session.
Under the heading "Office of Indian Affairs" I have presented at some length my views of the present administrative conditions in that important branch of the public service and have made certain recommendations for their improvement.
In reporting upon the work of other bureaus of the Department specific recommendations are made upon various matters directly affecting these bureaus, respectively.
The needs of the Patent Office for larger quarters and a new building are presented in connection with its report, but the important records of the other bureaus of this Department should be provided with a properly constructed, fire-proof, central filing place at the earliest practicable date.
A Hall of Records for the entire departmental service in the District of Columbia is an alternative suggestion worthy of careful consideration.
So long as this need is not met in some appropriate way there is constant and real danger of irreparable loss from fire and other causes of destruction.
The events of the last year have confirmed and emphasized the urgent need for a Bureau of National Parks.
Bills for this purpose have been introduced in the present Congress and have been given some attention in committee.
I renew the recommendation made in my last report for the enactment of legislation providing for the retirement and pensioning of civil employees of the Government.
The following table shows the number of matters received and disposed of by the office during the year ending October 1, 1912, but only to the extent of matters formally docketed.
In illustration of the comment that these figures, large as they are, do not fully show the number of matters requiring the attention of this office, a record of that section of the office dealing with Indian matters is significant.
The record referred to was kept during the months of January to June, 1912, to include undocketed as well as the formally docketed matters submitted for action.
While the latter during that period amounted to 8,839, the actual number of matters considered and disposed of was 20,067.
The growth of work in this office is shown in a note accompanying the estimates for the Department and supporting the recommendation for an increase in the force.
Docketed cases and matters received for action were, in the year ending October 1, 1909, 4,755; 1910, 13,301; 1911, 16,609; and 1912, 34,783.
The arrears, October 1, 1911, were 2,066; October 1, 1912, 3,308.
The continued growth in the number of arrears is already embarrassing; and with the present insufficient number of attorneys and with the maintenance of the ratio of increase in the demands upon the office, the arrears must very soon become overwhelming.
Moreover, of the arrears two-thirds involve contested land matters.
This is highly prejudicial to the interests of entrymen under the public-land laws.
It must be apparent to anyone, and experience has taught that it is true, that it is impossible to increase the proper disposition of publicland appeals without increasing the force.
It is proposed elsewhere to relieve this office of the work in pension-appeals matters.
But this will in no manner mitigate the evil of accumulating arrears in public-land matters.
There is but one relief for that, and that requires an increase in the working force.
Aside from the adjudicating duties of the office and the various cther items shown in the above table, the litigation in the local courts is now of such a volume as to require, during term time, from October to July, a large amount of the time of one of the assistant attorneys as well as demanding a great amount of the time of the Assistant Attorney General himself in preparing for and trying the cases in court.
During the year there has been final judgment in the Court of Appeals in 7 cases, in the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia in 11 cases, in all of which the Department was successful.
There is 1 case in the Court of Appeals, argued and submitted, but not yet decided, and 2 cases in the same status in the lower court.
These figures do not, however, include interlocutory matters.
There are still pending in the Court of Appeals 2 cases, in the Supreme Court 22 cases.
In addition to this, attention is called to the fact that in response to requests of committees of Congress for reports on the great mass of bills affecting this Department such reports must be largely prepared in the office of the Assistant Attorney General.
In my annual report for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1911, I called attention to the necessity for increased appropriations for the office of the Assistant Attorney General "to provide for a greater number of specially qualified assistants," and stated that if the force were strengthened as suggested by me"the conflicting interests of the claimants and of the Government would be more carefully and correctly decided than is now possible, and that the business"of that office"will be expedited, and that those who have contested claims before the Department for adjudication will be better satisfied."
Notwithstanding this recommendation, and the further fact that in the estimates for the Department for the past fiscal year a small increase was asked for along the lines suggested by me in my report, Congress not only did nothing with the recommendation, but, indeed, refused to allow the increase asked for in the estimate.
Attorney General could have been had, and the arrears in the disposition of the public-land appeals would be in the process of constant reduction while the cases would receive more extended consideration than now is possible.
The reasons for the recommendation in my last report are even more urgent now than they were then.
The work in the General Land Office during the past year has been brought up to date with a few minor exceptions.
In homestead cases patents are being written within four months from date of proof.
This length of time intervening between the date of proof and the issuance of the patent is not objectionable as it allows time within which to guard against hasty action.
The year 1912 saw the completion of 100 years of existence of the General Land Office as a separate bureau.
At the time of its creation, May 7, 1812, the organization of the Land Office consisted of 10 persons, including the commissioner.
There were 19 district land offices and 1 office of surveyor general.
At the close of the fiscal year 1912 the employees in the field and in the city of Washington numbered 1,417, with 102 district land offices, 13 offices of surveyors general, and 12 field divisions.
The centennial was celebrated by the employees of the office with appropriate exercises.
The work of the field force during the past year has evidenced the high efficiency of that force.
Although the appropriation was reduced by $100,000, which necessitated the reduction of the field force, there were more entries examined and reported upon during the year 1912 than during either of the two prior years when a larger number of agents were employed and a larger appropriation was available.
Examinations in the field are made of Carey Act projects, State selections, railroad selections, townsite cases, timber and stone entries, isolated tracts, forest lieu selections, Indian allotments, water companies in cases of desert-land entries, in addition to cases wherein allegations of fraud are made.
Considerable progress has been made by the field force in the disposition of coal-land investigations in Alaska.
There have been submitted reports on 454 claims during the year, and out of 1,129 coal locations before the General Land Office there are only 199 which have not been investigated; of the latter number, 144 have been either canceled or held for cancellation for failure to submit applications for patent within the time required by law, leaving only 55 pending claims which still require some investigation.
It is expected that during the present field season these remaining claims will be investigated.
During the year adverse proceedings were directed against 188 claims, which brings the total up to 300 on which hearings have been ordered; of this number, 219 are at issue, and every effort will be made during the coming year to dispose of these cases.
Another important work in the field is the California oil land investigations.
There are included in withdrawals in California over 1,500,000 acres containing valuable petroleum deposits.
Of the lands withdrawn approximately 100,000 acres are covered by pending entries and selections.
Much of the remainder is covered by mineral locations of oil, gypsum, and asphaltum.
A number of special agents and mineral inspectors of the field service are devoting almost their entire time to the work of investigating these entries and selections and in assisting the officials of the Department of Justice in suits which have been or are to be instituted for the recovery of title to a large part of these lands to which patents have issued under applications for the lands which alleged that they were nonmineral in character.
The total cash receipts from the sale of public lands, including fees and commissions on both original and final entries, for the fiscal year 1912 were $6,671,718.54.
Miscellaneous receipts were as follows: From sales of Indian lands, $2,284,538.37; reclamation water-right charges, $914,542.31; sales of timber in Alaska, depredations on public lands, sales of Government property, and copies of records and plats, $102,248.78, making the aggregate total of cash receipts of the General Land Office during the fiscal year 1912, $9,973,048, a decrease of $1,116,879.60 from the preceding year.
The total expenses of district land offices for salaries and commissions of registers and receivers, incidental expenses, and expenses of depositing public moneys during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1912, were $850,121.04, a decrease of $20,120.96.
The aggregate expenditures and estimated liabilities of the public-land service, including expenses of district land offices and surveys, were $3,573,692.88, leaving a net balance of $6,399,355.12, including Indian moneys.
The total area of public and Indian land originally entered during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1912, was 14,574,688.82 acres, a decrease of 3,064,410.72 acres as compared with the area entered during the year 1911.
The area patented during the fiscal year was 10,135,475 acres, a decrease of 2,137,020 acres as compared with the fiscal year 1911.
Of this area 5,011,948 acres were patented under the homestead law.
During the past year there were approximately 182,800 acres of agricultural lands in national forests opened to settlement and entry under the act of June 11, 1906 (34 Stat., 233).
The success of the direct system of surveys after the second year's work is manifest.
The expenses attending the execution of surveys under this system have been greatly diminished by the adoption of business methods in the management of the field force and in the matter of supplies; the expenses of equipment of surveying parties in the field are lessened because of a sufficient number of instruments and government-owned animals and wagons now on hand, which were purchased from previous appropriations.
On June 30, 1912, there were 87 parties in the field, and in October the number was increased to 106.
The returns of the survey for the reestablishment of the boundary line between Texas and New Mexico, authorized by the resolution approved February 16, 1911, have been examined in the General Land Office, and the record, duly attested and certified to by the commissioners on the part of the Government and Texas, has been submitted for your approval.
A request has been made, however, that some controverted questions be further considered before you approve the survey.
The number and acreage of applications for segregation filed under the Carey Act during the past year show a marked decrease from the preceding year, due principally, it is thought, to the fact that the easiest and cheapest projects were naturally taken up first and that the field of operation is becoming more restricted.
As a result of the practice of thoroughly investigating applications under this act, fewer merely speculative projects will be presented to the States or will be submitted by the States to the Department.
During the year 1912 applications for but 184,697.39 acres were filed.
Applications aggregating 97,917 acres were approved.
In applications under the act of March 15, 1910 (36 Stat., 237), 1,416,474.04 acres were applied for, applications involving 593,189.28 acres were rejected, 214,211.62 acres were withdrawn, and 1,064,572.89 acres were restored upon the expiration of the year granted by the act or upon relinquishment.
During the past fiscal year there were approved to the States and Territories an area of 181,280.62 acres, of which 147,988.16 acres were school-land selections.
During the fiscal year 1912 there were patented on account of railroad and wagon-road grants an area of 25,393.87 acres.
This is considerably less than the area patented in 1911, on account of the suspension of the issuance of patents pending decision as to whether the patent should contain a mineral-exclusion clause.
During the past fiscal year there were logged under contracts on ceded Chippewa lands 102,245,370 feet of timber, of the value of $878,717.39, as compared with 80,005,150 feet, valued at $572,830.73, during 1911.
On October 21, 1911, a sale of pine timber on ceded Chippewa lands, Minnesota, was held at Cass Lake, Minnesota.
This timber was offered at previous sales, but not sold for want of bidders.
Bids were accepted for 4,815,000 feet of white pine and 2,016,000 feet of Norway pine, the total price being $34,524.74, an average of $5.06 per thousand feet.
The price paid for timber on ceded Chippewa lands sold at the different sales is $6,811,968.70.
Since the last annual report of the Commissioner of the General Land Office the most important legislation enacted affecting the public-land service was the act approved June 6, 1912 (37 Stat., 123), commonly called the"three-year homestead bill."
At this time it is too early to predict results of this legislation, but it will undoubtedly increase the work in the General Land Office during the coming year in the examination of proofs which will be submitted under the new law.
An act of Congress was approved April 30, 1912 (37 Stat., 105), whereby the privileges of the act of June 22, 1910 (36 Stat., 583), are extended to the several States, thus permitting the States to select in satisfaction of grants for educational or other purposes lands withdrawn or classified as coal lands (subject to the coal reservation).
In his annual report for the year 1912 the Commissioner of the General Land Office again calls attention to the inadequacy of the salaries paid to the higher employees of the Land Office, and renews his recommendation for a readjustment, so that a substantial increase may be made in the salaries of those who perform the higher grades of work in that office.
Legislation of this kind would result in relieving the commissioner of a great deal of the detail in passing upon and signing decisions and letters of an important character.
It would give him more time to devote to the important executive duties which devolve upon him.
This would obviate a long trip from the land to the local office and put the homesteader to no greater expense than he is put to under the present conditions.
It would also save considerable time now consumed in investigations made subsequent to the offering of proof.
At present, if a witness resides outside of the county in which hearing is held, his testimony must be taken by deposition.
Considerable confusion relative to the adjustment of fees of witnesses arises under the present law, which will be obviated by the suggested amendment.
The General Land Office is still in receipt of frequent complaints of hardships suffered by persons who have sought to enter public lands by reason of deception on the part of persons to whom payments were made to secure for them locations.
Legislation of this character is desired for the protection of the honest home seeker against the methods employed by unscrupulous locators.
The scientific investigations of the survey have been continued along lines similar to those followed in other years, and the usual number of contributions have been made to the knowledge of geology and related subjects.
The appropriations for the work of the United States Geological Survey for the fiscal year 1912 aggregated $1,507,920.
While the appropriations made directly for survey work show an increase of cnly $30,480 over those of 1911, there was a notable increase in the amount of work done by the field service.
The funds available through cooperation with other Federal bureaus and with the States amounted in 1912 to 27 per cent of the direct appropriations and showed an increase of 42 per cent over cooperative funds of the preceding year.
This increase in the field work involved a large increase in the work of the Washington office, to which was added the greatly increased service rendered the Secretary's office, the General Land Office, and the Office of Indian Affairs in connection with public-land administration.
Although the practical economic work of the survey has greatly increased during the year, the investigations which have been steadily carried forward have yielded some noteworthy scientific results, and important contributions, based on long-term studies, have been made to the knowledge of geology and related sciences.
The present rented quarters of the Geological Survey are wholly inadequate and unadapted to its needs.
Scientific data, including unpublished maps and detailed stream gauging records and other material produced at an estimated cost of nearly $5,000,000, but of a much greater possible value to the Government, and in part irreplaceable, are in constant danger of destruction by fire, while the noisy location, poor light, dirty conditions, and congestion in the building are limitations on economy and efficiency which seriously hamper all efforts for better administration.
The crowded and insanitary condition which prevails can be described without exaggeration as in large part comparable to a sweatshop.
The large amount and the high class cf scientific production that is expected and required of the Geological Survey, as well as the danger to invaluable public records, demand a remedying of these conditions which shall bring the survey quarters more nearly in accord with modern office requirements.
In this work, wholly economic in character, the highest results are possible only where there is full knowledge of the scientific data pertaining to the public domain and its resources.
The land classification board of the survey draws heavily and constantly not only upon the results of current scientific investigation, but upon the conclusions of the geologists and engineers who have contributed to the survey's published and unpublished data during the past 30 years.
On May 1, 1912, the land classification board was formally recognized as having the rank of an independent branch within the Geological Survey.
The increasing amount and the more exacting character of the work of land classification are indications of the awakened interest in a businesslike administration of the public domain.
To encourage development and at the same time to enforce wise utilization by preventing partial or wasteful use is to protect the public interest.
With the different values of the land made known by adequate examination, the highest use can be determined and provided for in so far as the statutes are in accord with economic law.
Under the Withdrawal Act of June 25, 1910, the Geological Survey recommended during the year more than one and one-fifth million acres of oil reserves and almost one and one-third million acres of phosphate reserves, based on geologic data, and more than one-third million acres of waterpower sites and 60,000 acres of irrigation-reservoir sites, based upon hydrographic and topographic surveys, and 86,000 acres of public water reserves essential to the control of the public grazing lands.
As regards the classification of coal lands, the year has been notable in that for the first time the acreage classified and restored has much exceeded that withdrawn for classification, so that at the end of the year there was a substantial reduction in the area of outstanding land withdrawals.
More than 800,000 acres were classified as coal land and valued at nearly $15,000,000, while nearly 14,000,000 acres were classified as noncoal lands.
Tables will be found in the appendix.)
Geologic surveys and investigations were continued in 40 States by a force of 109 geologists.
Fifty-nine per cent of the appropriation was expended in the public-land States.
Systematic detailed surveys of mining districts were continued in Colorado, Arizona, Utah, Idaho, Montana, Oregon, and Nevada, and general and detailed geologic and paleontologic investigations were conducted in all parts of the country.
A large amount of geologic work was done in the coal fields of the public-land States.
In Alaska 13 field parties covered 14,460 square miles by reconnaissance topographic surveys, and 246 miles by detailed topographic surveys.
Reconnaissance geologic surveys were made of 10,550 square miles and detailed geologic surveys of 496 square miles.
In addition 8,000 square miles were covered by exploratory geologic surveys, and investigations of the water supply in placer districts covered approximately 8,000 square miles, including 68 steam-gauging stations and 309 measurements of stream volume.
Twelve of the 30 mining districts of Alaska which are being developed were visited.
The work of the Mineral Resources Division consisted in the preparation of the reports on the mineral resources of the United States for the calendar years 1910 and 1911.
The volumes, prepared under the direction of geologists who have specialized in the subjects treated by them, have under this treatment come to be a cyclopedia of information concerning the mineral resources of the United States.
Knowledge of the storehouses from which the Nation's future supplies are to be drawn is considered to be of prime importance, of greater value, indeed, than the record of past mining achievements which is presented in the statistical compilations of the report.
Recent volumes have included general maps showing the areas in the United States producing the precious and semiprecious metals, coal, iron, ore, petroleum, natural gas, cement materials, gypsum, salt, and various other minerals.
A special effort has been made during the year to secure prompt returns from the mineral producers, and thus an earlier publication of the separate advance chapters of the report, which has met with gratifying results.
The new area topographically mapped was 28,136 square miles, making the total area surveyed to date in the United States 1,160,396 square miles, or 38 per cent of the entire country.
In addition 5,274 square miles were resurveyed, making the total area of surveys during the year 33,410 square miles.
Topographic surveys were also prosecuted in Hawaii to the extent of 281 square miles.
The topographic field force numbered 161.
In addition 60 technical field assistants were employed during the whole or part of the field season.
With the same appropriation ($150,000) as that of 1911, the scope of the work has been considerably increased, due to the larger amount of cooperative money furnished by certain States, and in the case of New Hampshire by the necessity for intensive hydrometric investigations in the White Mountains under the authority of the Weeks Act.
River gauging stations were at the close of the year being maintained at 1,232 points, exclusive of those in Alaska and Hawaii.
In addition, records were received from 186 stations maintained by private enterprise.
A large amount of work was carried on in the public-land States relating to the classification of the public lands, besides investigations of underground and surface water conditions throughout the country.
Sixty-nine per cent of the appropriation was spent in the public-land States.
Work under this law (act of Mar. 1, 1911) was vigorously prose cuted by the survey in North Carolina, Virginia, West Virginia, Tennessee, South Carolina, Georgia, and New Hampshire, resulting in the submission during the year of 10 favorable reports, covering 1,869,845 acres.
The number of books distributed during the year was 437,637 and the number of maps and geologic folios 688,983, a total of 1,126,620.
Of these, 529,656 maps were sold.
The official mail other than requests for publications shows an increase of approximately 6 per cent over that of the preceding year.
The roll of survey members holding secretarial appointments numbered at the close of the year 880 persons, an increase of 18.
The library received during the year 12,886 books and 1,124 maps.
The act of Congress approved June 17, 1902, known as the "Reclamation Act," creates a fund for the reclamation of arid lands from the moneys received from the sale of public lands in certain of the Western States and Territories, excepting the 5 per cent of the proceeds of such sales set aside by law for educational and other purposes.
The actual receipts from this source to June 30, 1911, were $71,720,349.08, and the estimated total receipts to June 30, 1912 including $229,222.67 from sale of townsite lots, are $77,612,201.41.
The net investment of this fund in reclamation works on June 30, 1912, amounted to $69,858,216.93.
The act requires the Secretary of the Interior to determine, with a view to its return to the reclamation fund, the estimated cost of construction, and entrymen and private landowners receiving water from reclamation projects are therefore required to contribute their proportion of the cost of construction, operation, and maintenance of the project wherein their lands are situated.
The cash receipts from this source to June 30, 1912, were: Building repayments, $2,156,442.75, and operation and maintenance, $877,825.82.
In addition, sales of water to towns and cities, leases of.power developed on the projects, rentals or carrying charges for irrigation water, miscellaneous sales of old material, etc., have produced an additional return of $3,189,275.56.
Reimbursement for work done for the Indian Service amounts to $1,581,236.62.
Under the respective laws authorizing these transactions this amount is credited as a reduction of the cost of the projects.
No new projects have been undertaken since 1906, but prior to that date 25 primary projects had been undertaken, the net investment in which on June 30, 1912, amounted to $68,823,171.56, as shown in the following table.
Included in the above are the expenditures on investigation of various so-called secondary projects or enterprises which have not been found to be such as to warrant immediate undertaking.
There are also in addition certain investments in townsite development, $15,677.85; in Indian irrigation, reimbursable, $306,242.22; and for general expenses, not distributed on June 30, 1912, $32,902.54; making a total of $354,822.61.
Every effort has been directed toward the completion of those projects or portions of projects where the most immediate results can be had in the way of irrigable area.
There are numerous requests for the survey of secondary projects which must be denied primarily because of lack of money to undertake them even if they should be found worthy.
Storage dams built, volume 7,795,346 cubic yards.
Diversion dams built, volume 912,96i cubic yards.
Dikes built, volume 3,553,000 cubic yards, 80 miles.
Bridges built: Number, 2,908; length, 61,300 feet.
Buildings erected: Offices, 70; residences, 379; others, 346; total, 786.
Roads: Miles constructed, 659; railroads built, 44 miles.
Telephone lines: Miles constructed, 2,118; phones in use, 838.
Transmission lines: Constructed, 311 miles.
Material excavated: Class I, 79,790,814 cubic yards; Class II, 6,037,065; Class III, 4,846,402; total, 90,674,381.
Riprap: 377,407 cubic yards; paving, 439,940 square yards.
Cement used: 1,389,555 barrels; concrete in place, 1,157,507 cubic yards.
Cement manufactured by United States: 338,452 barrels.
Pipe laid: Concrete, 395,553 feet; tile, 35,733 feet; steel and iron, 28,483; wood, 171,017; total, 630,786=120 miles.
Flumes built: Concrete, 2,424 feet; steel, 59,207 feet; wood, 303,848 feet; total, 365,479 feet=69 miles.
Public Resolution No. 56, approved August 24, 1912, provides for payment from the reclamation fund, to the extent of $42,000, of claims for labor, supplies, materials, or cash furnished to the contractor or subcontractor and used in the construction of the Corbett Tunnel, a part of the works constructed for the Shoshone reclamation project.
The time fixed by the Department for the presentation of such claims expired November 4, 1912, and the verification of them for certification to the Secretary of the Treasury, as required by the resolution, is now being made.
The amount appropriated by Congress will be insufficient to pay all claims in full.
The general purpose of the Bureau of Mines is to conduct, in behalf of the public welfare, fundamental inquiries and investigations concerning the mining industry.
The two phases of the industry that are of greatest national importance are safety and efficiency safeguarding the lives of the miners and insuring the most efficient development and use of our mineral resources.
Hence, the function of the bureau may be defined as the conducting of inquiries and investigations that have for their purpose the improvement of health conditions and the increase of safety, efficiency, and economic development in the mining, quarrying, metallurgical, and miscellaneous mineral industries of the country.
The act of Congress (36 Stat., 369) that established the bureau not only outlined the bureau's duties but transferred to it from the Geological Survey the work of analyzing and testing coals, lignites, and other mineral fuel substances, and of investigating the causes of and the means of preventing mine explosions.
The investigations conducted by the bureau during the past year have been confined mainly to two groups: The study of fuels belonging to or used by the Government, and inquiry into the causes of accidents in mines and the most feasible means of preventing such accidents.
The first of these groups of investigations, for the conduct of which Congress made an appropriation of $100,000, has had to do primarily with the purchase, for the use of the Government, of coal aggregating in cost about $8.000,000; the most efficient methods of using this coal at the various heating, power, and lighting plants of the Government and on board government ships; and the safest and most efficient methods of storing coal for the Government at power plants, naval stations, and army posts.
In the course of these investigations a large number of steaming tests were made with different coals and, in addition, more than 11,500 samples of coal were analyzed in the laboratories of the bureau.
Investigations relating both to the efficient storage of coal and to the causes and prevention of spontaneous combustion of coal stored in bins or in the bunkers of ships were continued, in cooperation with the Navy Department, at the navy yards at Key West, Norfolk, and Portsmouth, and, in cooperation with the Panama Railroad Company, on the Isthmus of Panama.
In addition to these investigations of coal, the bureau has tested and analyzed a large number of samples of fuel oil in order to determine the suitability of the oils they represented for use as fuel on naval vessels or at government power plants.
The investigations into the causes and means of prevention of mine accidents were continued and extended during the year, but as yet have not progressed to the needs of the coal-mining industry.
The causes of mine explosions and the means of limiting or preventing such explosions, methods of rendering safer the use of explosives and electricity in mines, and the reduction of risk from falls of roof, from mine fires, and from mine cars and locomotives were the more important matters investigated.
In carrying on these investigations the engineers of the bureau carried on laboratory experiments, examined coal mines in many States, and, at a small experimental mine near Pittsburgh, Pa., made tests to determine under working conditions how gas and dust explosions are caused and how such explosions may be limited or prevented.
In order to provide facilities for exploring mines immediately after disasters, while the mines are full of poisonous explosive gases, so that examination may be made while the evidence of a disaster is still fresh, the bureau maintains six safety stations, one each at Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, Knoxville, Tennessee, Birmingham, Alabama, McAlester, Oklahoma, Urbana, Illinois, and Seattle, Washington, and operates seven mine-safety cars.
These cars, equipped as far as practicable with mine-rescue and fire-fighting apparatus, have headquarters as follows: One each at Billings, Montana, Trinidad, Colorado, Evansville, Indiana, Huntington, West Virginia, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania, and one at Rock Springs, Wyoming, and Salt Lake City, Utah.
Each one of these cars moves from point to point, carrying a mining engineer and two experimental miners.
The progress made during the year toward greater safety in mining has been decidedly gratifying.
The bureau continues to win the hearty cooperation of mine workers, mine owners, State mine inspectors, and manufacturers of explosives and mine equipment.
The growth of public sentiment in behalf of greater safety in mining and the voluntary efforts of miners and mine operators to improve conditions are evidenced in many ways.
For the continuance and extension of this work greater facilities should be provided.
One more mine-safety car is needed for the metal-mining districts of Michigan, Minnesota, and Wisconsin, and the work of all the cars should be continued throughout the entire year.
During the past fiscal year, on account of lack of funds, the training facilities of the cars and stations could be operated at only about 50 per cent of maximum effectiveness.
The investigations looking to the prevention of accidents should be extended to include metal mines, quarries, and metallurgical plants.
In the various branches of the mineral industry are 1,500,000 men associated with hazardous occupations, who need to be reached and enlisted in the movement for greater safety, and there should be no unnecessary delays in this.
The statistical data concerning accidents in the mining, quarrying, and metallurgical industries have been far from complete in the past, and there have always been serious delays in their collection and publication.
In many parts of the country no such statistics are collected, but the assembling of the data is essential to the formulation of intelligent plans for preventing mine accidents.
There is, therefore, serious need that the Bureau of Mines be enabled to collect and publish statistical data with a degree of thoroughness commcnsurate with the importance of the subject.
The work of the bureau needs to be enlarged to include investigations into various branches of the mining industry, with a view to lessening the waste of essential mineral resources.
In view of the present great losses in coal mining, and of waste in metal mining and metallurgical industries that ranges from 10 to 50 per cent of the total production, the value of such investigations would unquestionably prove beneficial to the whole country.
In dealing with mineral resources, in contrast to rainfall, forests, or agricultural products, it should be understood that of mineral wealth the Nation has only one supply, which, when exhausted, it can not replace.
Attention is again called to the fact that the buildings and grounds at Pittsburgh now occupied by the Bureau of Mines for its investigations are inadequate for its needs, unsuited to its purposes, and are held subject to the wishes and needs of another department of the Government.
The functions which the Department of the Interior exercises with regard to Indian affairs are among the most important and at the same time the most difficult in the entire Government service.
The difficulties inherent in the problems themselves, considered without reference to outside influences and interferences, are exceedingly great.
They are enormously enhanced by these outside influences and interferences.
If the Indians now living in this country were located in a territory set apart for their exclusive use from which all white men not engaged in the performance of official duties connected with the Indians were absolutely excluded, and if all forms of trading by white men with Indians were strictly prohibited, the problems of administration would tax the wisdom and the executive ability of the most experienced and disinterested men.
Even under such conditions, to care for the Indians and to fit them morally, intellectually, and industrially for future citizenship would be a task of huge proportions.
Under the conditions which in fact prevail this task becomes tremendous.
The Indian is not thus isolated; he can not be thus isolated.
In spite of all disadvantages it is probably best for him that he should not be thus isolated.
Nevertheless, the lack of isolation deprives him of much of the protection which its presence would afford.
It exposes the Indian and the Indians' property to the cupidity of white men, which interferes on every hand and at every turn with the successful and efficient administration of Indian affairs.
The Indian lands which are still under varying degrees of governmental control through the Office of Indian Affairs, are valued at over half a billion dollars.
This property is of every sort and character.
It embraces agricultural lands suitable for cultivation by ordinary methods; lands which must be cultivated by means of irrigation; lands suitable for grazing; timber lands of all sorts; oil lands, gas lands, and asphalt lands; lands containing coal and other minerals, and water-power sites of great potential value.
All of the great and perplexing problems of public policy which confront the Nation in the disposition and development of the public domain press for solution on the Indian Service.
They are problems not merely of the future but of the present, for the Indian's property is being held not merely for future disposition, but is in large part being administered now so that it may produce the revenues for his support and education, and so that through its investment and use he may be taught and may be made a self-reliant and selfsupporting member of the community.
His timber is being sold and cut; his surplus grazing lands are being leased; his coal is being mined; his oil is being pumped; his fields are being irrigated and cultivated.
As rapidly as he can be helped to develop the capacity for self-control and self-support his lands are allotted and his moneys are distributed.
Meanwhile, those who have not yet demonstrated the capacity to protect and support themselves; those who adhere to primitive ideas and modes of life; those who are yet in the early and transitory stages toward industrial civilization; and those whose appetites and desires make them the easy prey of the unscrupulous and the designing must be kept under wise and helpful supervision, and be furnished with such moral, intellectual, and industrial training as their circumstances permit.
The whole problem thus presented is one calling for business and executive ability of the highest order, coupled with sound and farseeing views of public policy and a keen understanding of and deep sympathy with the sociological questions involved on the human side.
It is important that the Nation and especially that Congress shall clearly understand the conditions under which the Department of the Interior is called upon to administer the affairs of its Indian wards.
If all Indians were fully qualified to receive and to manage or control their appropriate shares, and if there were no other questions involved than those relating to the prompt and just distribution of adequate allotments among this number of persons, the task would be one of great importance and difficulty.
When, however, among the persons interested in the property there are many minor children for whom some protection or guardianship would have to be provided, the difficulty of the task is immensely increased.
When, in addition to this.
But even a problem such as is thus finally presented is simple compared with the problem which really faces the Indian Service.
T'he human interests confided to its charge are of even greater complexity and difficulty than are the property interests, and the two are inextricably connected.
We are attempting to adjust a primitive people to the conditions of modern industrial civilization, and we are doing this with all the difficulties inherent in the problem increased a thousandfold by the cupidity and greed of those who are waiting at every turn to acquire the Indian's property and to profit in every possible way by trafficking with him.
Even a superficial examination of the personnel and administrative methods of the Indian Service discloses the fact that its chief defect is in the absence of an adequate staff organization at the head of the service.
It is only necessary to point out that the Commissioner of Indian Affairs receives a salary of $5,000, the assistant commissioner a salary of $3,500, that no other of the assistants or clerks on the statutory roll of the commissioner's office at Washington receives more than $2,250 a year, and that the supervising force thus provided at the head of the service is absolutely unable effectively to direct and check the great mass of important work which must be performed by the field force.
Transactions involving immense sums of money, property of enormous value, and principles of far-reaching consequence must be determined largely upon the recommendations of clerks who are paid from $1,800 to $2,250.
It is surprising that the results are as good as they are upon the whole.
It is not surprising that serious mistakes occur.
What the Indian Service imperatively needs is an increase in the number of first-class men in the responsible directing positions, and this can be obtained only by increasing the number and the compensation of such positions.
An effective force at the head of the service might easily permit a substantial diminution in the lower clerical positions.
If it did not permit such a decrease it would be solely because an improved clerical force of the present size is imperatively required for the proper conduct of the Indian administration.
Under the present system it is most difficult to secure officials of the proper qualifications, and especially to retain in the service those who demonstrate that they possess such qualifications.
Competent and ambitious men soon reach the limit of promotion,and seek employment elsewhere.
There are many excellent employees in the Indian Service, but it is nevertheless broadly true that under existing conditions the Indian Service does not attract the kind of men who are essential to its proper administration.
The very fact that it is so difficult to obtain or keep men of the right sort has led to methods of administration which are not calculated to promote efficiency.
This is especially true of the system of administering punishment and enforcing discipline by shifting men from one position to another rather than by discharging them from the service.
The plea for leniency in punishing dereliction in such cases which comes up from the service again and again is based on the difficulty of filling positions.
There are approximately 6,000 employees in the Indian field service, and the number of positions filled by resignations, transfers, etc., amount to over 4,000 in a single year.
I have heretofore urged upon Congress such changes in the annual appropriations as will enable the Department to establish the policy which the considerations stated make desirable.
If we are to have this problem wisely and efficiently handled, some important changes must be made in the methods and organization of the Indian Office.
The necessity for such changes was forcibly brought to my attention a year ago, and I should then have undertaken a thorough investigation for this purpose if conditions had permitted.
At that time, however, the House Committee on Expenditúres in the Department of the Interior had entered upon a series of hearings or investigations of the previous administration of the Indian Office.
In the hope that this investigation would lead to definite suggestions with regard to the organization and future administration of the office and that some constructive report would be made during the past year, and desiring to avoid even the appearance of seeking to interfere with that investigation or to anticipate that report, I undertook no comprehensive inquiry of my own.
My conclusions have been drawn from participation in and observation of the routine work of the Indian Office.
I regret that the House Committee has made no report and that its investigations have been so largely devoted to specific complaints instigated by persons who have or think they have grievances against the Indian Office or its officials.
Too many of these complaints have obviously been inspired by motives of resentment or of self-interest.
It is important to unearth scandals and discover serious mistakes of judgment on the part of Indian officials, if such scandals or mistakes exist; but what is really needed is a comprehensive inquiry into the methods in vogue in Indian administration, the conditions under which it has been carried on, and the appropriate means to be employed for the improvement of these methods and conditions.
The principal object of Indian administration is to bring the individual Indians as rapidly as possible to a condition where they can be self-supporting and self-reliant and to distribute their property to them as rapidly as this can be brought about, protecting them meanwhile from those who would ruthlessly despoil them of their property and of their moral and physical health for the sake of the ill-gotten gains to be thus derived.
The Office of Indian Affairs can be much better organized and equipped for the accomplishment of this object.
We wish to have the Indian become a self-supporting and selfreliant citizen as rapidly as possible, and in order to accomplish this the individual Indian must have placed upon his shoulders the very largest responsibility for the management of his own property and affairs that can be conferred upon him without overburdening his present powers or making him the prey of the unscrupulous.
To this end the policy of the Department has been to break up the pernicious system of individual rations and to make separate allotments of land to individual Indians as rapidly as possible.
Nevertheless, to allot lands by wholesale or without reasonable precautions would lead only to disaster.
The allottee must have some capacity and some desire to cultivate or appropriately utilize the land allotted to him.
In many instances he has no such desire; in others he has not sufficient training.
During the past year instructions have been issued to utilize to the fullest extent that experience will justify the individual Indian's moneys which are now on deposit in the banks and amount to more than $10,000,000.
The general policy thus adopted was the discontinuance of monthly payments, except in cases of absolute necessity, and the free use of Indian funds by the fully competent Indians entitled to them, while less competent Indians were given increased privileges under official supervision.
The superintendent was authorized to make requests covering the needs of individuals for an entire year instead of sending in numerous requests for individual expenditures.
Issuance of these instructions has been followed by a deluge of requests (numbering about 125 daily) for authority to make payments amounting to a daily average of $20,000.
The work, however, is being handled promptly and is being given close attention with a view to its extension as rapidly as experience will justify.
Similar principles are being applied in passing upon requests to permit Indians to make their own leases.
It is apparent, however, that this policy has its wise and necessary limitations, for it can work only injury to many able-bodied adult Indians to permit them to rent their lands and to live in idleness upon the rentals.
It is the constant effort of the Department to induce the Indians to become agriculturally and industrially self-supporting.
Indian schools are increasingly conducted·upon this principle.
The enrollment in government schools for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1912, was 26,966, an increase of 3,000 pupils; and when the reports for the fiscal year 1912 have been compiled, it is thought that the total number of Indian pupils enrolled in public schools will exceed 14,000.
The total monetary value of the Indian schools is estimated at $12,000,000, and the annual government expenditure for education of Indian children is a little over $4,000,000.
It is, however, the established policy of the Department to turn over to local authorities the education of the Indians as rapidly as conditions will permit, and this has been largely accomplished in some localities.
The conditions, however, will for some time continue to be such as to require the maintenance of many government schools for the education of the Indians in localities where the common schools are not and can not now be made available.
Instruction of both minors and adults in practical agriculture is being given especial attention by increasing the number of experienced farmers doing house-to-house work among the Indians.
This work has also been stimulated greatly through the encouragement of Indian fairs, by the establishment of Indian agricultural societies, and the holding of farmers' institutes on Indian reserves.
More than 30 successful Indian fairs have been held this fall, and in every case reported the fair is said to have had a stimulating effect upon both the amount and quality of farming and stock raising doneby Indians.
Reports with regard to the live-stock industry on the Navajo Reservation and upon some of the other reservations are encouraging.
The agricultural progress in Oklahoma, the Dakotas, and Nebraska has been noteworthy.
This has been accompanied by an increase of prosperity, a rise in the scale of civilization, and a marked decrease in drunkenness.
Unfortunately, upon some reservations the old tribal or communal habits of the Indian and his consequent frequent repugnance toward industrial physical labor have retarded progress of this character.
In other instances the lack of available funds to complete irrigation projects, to purchase agricultural implements, and to make necessary improvements has prevented the economic and social development of Indians who would otherwise have given excellent account of themselves.
The local white communities on or near Indian lands frequently have justifiable grounds for complaint in the fact that these lands are withheld from development and from taxation.
This frequently encourages local sentiment which condones unfair or even illegal methods of separating the Indian from the ownership of such property, and while it furnishes a potent reason why the enforcement of Indian rights frequently can not safely be intrusted to local officials, it makes it all the more imperative that the Indian lands should be opened to general development and especially to local taxation as rapidly as practicable.
In this connection it has been found that Indians who are competent to receive patents in fee often do not apply for these patents because they desire to avoid subjecting their lands to taxation until a sale has actually been made.
The applications for patents have been found in most cases to be connected with contracts of sale already made.
To cure this abuse steps are being taken to issue patents without request to Indians who should have applied for them.
Instructions have recently been issued to superintendents to report all cases of competent Indians who should have patents in fee and have failed to apply for the same.
Substantial progress has been made in expediting the determining of Indian heirships and the issuance of farming and grazing leases; the number of Indians who have the privilege of leasing their lands free of departmental control having been more than doubled since the passage of the act of June 25, 1910.
Copies of such leases, however, must be filed with the superintendent of the reservation and in the Indian Office as a check against fraud.
Practical experience has justified a liberal policy in this matter, and the policy is to increase the number of Indians who are given the leasing privilege just as rapidly as is consistent with the conditions in each individual case.
The special investigation of the sanitary and health conditions among the Indians, the result of which was reported by you to Congress at its last session, sufficiently emphasizes the alarming need of increased appropriations and increased supervision of this work.