Sir: There are many matters of home concern as to which it is my pleasure to report to you, but I would give prominence to that which appeals to me as of largest and most immediate moment—the fuller and freer use of our national resources.
It is, of course, known to you that there exists a feeling in the West that its affairs and needs have not been given that consideration at the hands of the National Government which they merit.
This feeling is not confined to speculators or exploiters.
It is the sentiment of many who are without selfish motive and regard the matter wholly from the standpoint of national growth.
They point to the conditions which obtain in Alaska as unparalleled among people of our aggressive and nation-building stock.
So, too, they are unable to understand why ways have not been found by which the great bodies of coal and oil lands, of phosphate and potash lands, may be developed, and the waters of the mountains made available for the generation of power and the redemption of the desert.
There is one very simple explanation for the existence of this feeling.
We have adventured upon a new policy of administering our affairs and have not developed adequate machinery.
We have called a halt on methods of spoliation which existed, to the great benefit of many, but we have failed to substitute methods, sane, healthful, and progressive, by which the normal enterprise of an ambitious people can make full use of their own resources.
We abruptly closed opportunities to the monopolist, but did not open them to the developer.
I have said that we had put into force a new land policy, which caused dismay and discontent.
Let me explain what I mean by this.
It was, in fact, but a new application of an old policy.
Congress has always been most generous as to the disposition of the national lands.
One can not read our land laws without being struck with the fixed determination which they show that it was wisest to be quit of our lands as quickly as possible.
It might almost be said that the Government regarded its lands as a burden rather than an asset.
We gave generously to our railroads and to the States.
There was land for all, and it was the Government's glad function to distribute it and let those profit who could.
There was no thought then of creating timber barons or cattle kings, or of coal monopoly.
The sooner the land got into hands other than those of the Government the better.
And this generous donor was not so petty as to discriminate between kinds of lands, the uses to which they could be put, or the purposes which those might have who got them.
Land is land, save when it contains minerals; this was roughly the broad principle adopted.
To classify was a task too difficult or not worth while.
The lands would classify themselves when they arrived in individual ownership.
And so the door was opened for monopoly and for fraud.
If the Government did not appreciate the invaluable nature of its assets there were men who did.
Great fortunes were laid in the vast holdings of what had but a short time since been the property of the people.
There was danger that the many still to pour into the West would by necessity become the servitors of a fortunate and early few.
On this discovery our indifference at once took flight.
And so out of the abuse of the Nation's generosity there came a reaction against a policy that was so liberal as to be dangerous.
The Nation wanted home makers, but found its lands drifting into the hands of corporations which were withdrawing them from the market, awaiting a time when lands would be more scarce; it gave opportunity for many competing coal operators and iron manufacturers, but found the sources of raw material centering into a few large holdings; it wished its lands to be cleared of forests to make way for farms, but it found hundreds of consecutive miles reserved from use by the fiat of those who appreciated their worth, and many more miles of watershed despoiled of its needed covering in places where homes were not possible.
A reaction was inevitable.
If lands were to be withdrawn from public service, why might not the Government do the withdrawing itself?
The old philosophy that "land is land"was evidently unfitted to a country where land is sometimes timber and sometimes coal; indeed, where land may mean water—water for tens of thousands of needy neighboring acres.
For the lands of the West differ as men do, in character and condition and degree of usefulness.
We had not recognized this fact when we said"land is land."
Lands fitted for dry farming and lands that must forever lie unused without irrigation; lands that are worthless save for their timber; lands that are rich in grasses and lands that are poor in grasses; lands underlain with the nonprecious minerals essential to industry or agriculture; lands that are invaluable for reservoir or dam sites—these varieties may be multiplied, and each new variety emphasizes the fact that each kind of land has its own future and affords its own opportunity for contributing to the Nation's wealth.
So there has slowly evolved in the public mind the conception of a new policy—that land should be used for that purpose to which it is best fitted, and it should be disposed of by the Government with respect to that use.
To this policy I believe the West is now reconciled.
The West no longer urges a return to the hazards of the "land is land" policy.
But it does ask action.
It is reconciled to the Government making all proper safeguards against monopoly and against the subversion of the spirit of all our land laws, which is in essence that all suitable lands shall go into homes, and all other lands shall be developed for that purpose which shall make them of greatest service.
But it asks that the machinery be promptly established in the law by which the lands may be used.
And this demand is reasonable.
Already Congress has recognized in many ways the appositeness of this policy, but it is for yourself and Congress to further extend this thought into our legislation.
Surely this is not a task that may be adventured upon with recklessness or without respect for the opinions of others.
And the suggestions which shall be made by me are so made in the hope that they will form a basis upon which the constructive mind may work and bring forth a more perfect, a more efficient working plan.
The largest body of unused and neglected land in the United States is Alaska.
It is now nearly half a century since we purchased this territory, and it contains to-day less than 40,000 white inhabitants, less than 1,000 for each year it has been in our possession.
The purchase was made as a means of prctection against the possible aggression of a foreign nation and without the hope that it would be even self-supporting.
In the intervening 46 years we have given it little more than the most casual concern, yet its mines, fisheries, and furs alone have added to our wealth the grand sum of $500,000,000.
For almost a generation it was the rich harvest field of a single company.
Individual fortunes have been made in that country larger than the price paid to Russia for the whole territory.
How rich its waters are we know, because they have been proved; but how rich its lands are in gold and copper, coal and oil, iron and zinc, no one knows.
The prospector has gone far enough, however, to tell us that no other section of our land to-day makes so rich a mineral promise.
And in agriculture the Government itself has demonstrated that it will produce in abundance all that can be raised in the Scandinavian countries, the hardy cereals and vegetables.
It has been estimated that there are 50,000,000 acres of this land that will make homes for a people as sturdy as those of New England.
Whether this is so or not, it would appear that Alaska can be made self-sustaining agriculturally.
This vast and unsurpassed asset lies almost undeveloped.
A territory one-fifth the size of the United States contains less than a thousand miles of anything that can be called a wagon road.
It has a few inconsiderable stretches of railroad which terminate, with one exception, either in the wilderness or at a private industry.
Only the richest of its mines can be worked, and one of its resources of greatest immediate value to the people—its coal lands—lies unworked.
The one constructive thing done by this Government on behalf of Alaska in nearly half a century was the importation of reindeer for the benefit of the Eskimo on the border of the Arctic Ocean.
For the white man we have done nothing—so little, in fact, that to mention what we have done is matter for chagrin and humiliation.
I have thought that perhaps the scandals that have developed in Alaska have been in some part the result of a feeling that it was a No-Man's Land, where the primal instincts and powers were the only law.
This unfortunate condition can not be explained on the ground of the inhospitality of the Alaskan climate.
A careful study of isothermal lines shows that some of southeastern Alaska has a climate more temperate and more equable than that of this city, while much of the greater portion to the north has a kindlier climate than Stockholm or St. Petersburg.
Moreover, our people are not stayed in their quest for homes or wealth by the rigors of a long winter.
The spirit and purpose which brought them from Europe to Virginia and to Massachusetts take them to-day to Montana and Saskatchewan.
The United States lately opened to entry a tract of land in Montana for which there were 46,000 applicants for registration, and only 7,000 of these could be given an opportunity to homestead.
There is more railroad building 500 miles north of the Canadian border than there is for the same distance south of it.
Why has not this land been developed?
The frank answer is that we did not realize until within a few years that it was worth developing.
As soon as we discovered its value as a national asset we became alarmed and drew back, affrighted at the thought that we might lose it, or at least that it would become the property of those who would exploit it without respect to the public interest.
Since then we have been waiting to make up our minds as to what wisely could be done.
We have hesitated and halted out of the very keenness of our -appreciation of what Alaska might become.
It has rather been in compliment to Alaska than in derogation of her value that we have done so little for her in late years.
It was a new land, to be opened under new conditions.
The mistakes made there and here we did not wish to repeat.
But now after a long pause it would seem to be the sense of the people that we shall proceed at once and in a large way to deal with the problem of Alaskan development.
We have withdrawn Alaska from the too aggressive and self-serving exploiter.
What have we to substitute as a safer servant of public interest?
To this question I have given much thought, and my conclusion is that if we are to bring Alaska into the early and full realization of her possibilities we must create a new piece of governmental machinery for the purpose.
We should undertake the work in the spirit and after the method of a great corporation wishing to develop a large territory.
In my judgment the way to deal with the problem of Alaskan resources is to establish a board of directors to have this work in charge.
Into the hands of this board or commission I would give all the national assets in that territory, to be used primarily for her improvement—her lands, fisheries, Indians, Eskimos, seals, forests, mines, waterways, railroads—all that the Nation owns, cares for, controls, or regulates.
Congress should determine in broad outline the policies which this board in a liberal discretion should elaborate and administer, much as is done as to the Philippines.
This board would of course have nothing whatsoever to do with the internal affairs of the organized Territory of Alaska, for it would exercise no powers save such as Congress granted over the property of the United States in Alaska.
1. Such a board could advise Congress as to what should be done, without prejudice, out of a deep national interest and with first-hand knowledge of conditions.
2. Such a board would coordinate the present enterprises of the Government in Alaska.
As it is now, the control of lands is in one department, of forests in another, of roads in another, of fisheries in a fourth, of railroads in still another.
The care of black bear is in one department and of brown bear in another.
3. There can be no satisfactory administration of land laws nor any other laws at a distance of 5,000 miles from the point of action.
Much less is this possible where the two sections of the country are separated by an ocean, and the land calling for attention is closed to the world one-half of the year.
The eye that sees the need should be near the voice that gives the order.
4. Alaska's opening and improvement should be treated as one problem.
Each step in such an administration should be part of a plan, not an isolated act.
We should have a unified and consecutive program, based on immediate knowledge governing this work.
Each line of activity within the Territory should be correlated with all other activities.
The opening of lands and the building of railroads or wagon roads, for instance, should be part of one scheme.
5. Alaska should be developed so far as possible out of her own revenues and resources.
She should have a Federal budget of her own.
Her revenues and expenditures should be presented to Congress on a single sheet.
The funds raised from her lands and fisheries, her furs, her forests, and her mines should be used for the construction of her roads, railroads, telegraph and telephone lines or for any other purpose which would make her resources more quickly available to the world.
I believe it could be shown that Alaska is self-supporting to-day, or, what is more to the point, that by proper taxes and charges imposed upon those who are deriving large return from their enterprise in the Territory, such revenue could be derived as would support a large policy of expansion and improvement.
In short, I would construct the administrative machinery that would most surely lead to a prompt and continuous devélopment of Alaska as a part of the United States upon a plane commensurate with her possibilities industrially, agriculturally, and socially.
The members of such a board appointed by the President would be selected presumably with reference to their fitness for the work to be done.
Each one could be made the administrative and residentiary head of a department or division, so that there might be a commissioner of the Alaskan land office, another commissioner of highways, another, perhaps, commissioner of Indian affairs and fisheries, and so on.
All would sit together, as in the commission form of municipal government, and would work for a common end, the upbuilding of Alaska as an integral and contributing part of the Union.
I apprehend the fear that with such a commission there would be danger of corruption or indifference creeping into its work.
This, however, is incident to the bestowal of all authority.
The commission would not go unchecked, of course, for it must report to the head of some department at Washington, and through that head to Congress, and would be always subject to investigation.
Moreover no method has yet been invented by which dishonesty or poor judgment can be guarded against in public or in private life.
In the end the character and wisdom of the men appointed is the only insurance that can be given against conduct that is foolish or worse.
Alaska should not, in my judgment, be regarded as a mere storehouse of resources upon which the people of the States may draw.
She has the potentialities of a State.
And whatever policy may be adopted should look toward an Alaska of homes, of industries, and of an extended commerce.
I would not have Alaska wait for needed legislation until the merits of such a plan could be passed upon by Congress.
Those things which appeal to me as of immediate necessity upon which independent action may be taken are (1) the construction of railroads in the Territory and (2) the opening of her coal lands.
I have already expressed to Congress my belief that it was wise for the Government itself to undertake the construction and operation of a system of trunk-line railroads in Alaska.
And I am led to this view irrespective of the possibility of private enterprise undertaking such work, although my belief is that no railroads would be privately constructed in Alaska for many years to come excepting as adjuncts to some private enterprise.
Be that as it may, it would seem wise for the Government to undertake this task upon grounds of state.
The rates and the service of such railroads should be fixed with reference to Alaskan development—not with regard to immediate returns.
The charges fixed should be lower for years to come than would justify private investment.
I would build and operate these highways in the same spirit that the counties or the States build wagon roads—not for revenue, but for the general good.
After all, a railroad is little more than an operated wagon road.
In many countries they still call railroad cars"wagons."
Our laws as to railroads are evolved from our old laws as to carriage by wagon.
Our courts speak of railroads as property charged with a public interest and so justify the regulation of their rates.
But no court would justify the imposition of rates made for the purpose for which Alaskan rates should be made—the creation of a commonwealth.
If this is our task, it should be done whole-heartedly and with a consciousness that the dollar spent to-day on an Alaskan railroad will yield no more immediate return on the investment than the dollar spent on the Panama Canal.
These, then, are the persuading reasons for the belief that the Government should undertake to drive from the coast inland one or more lines of railroad: (1) The Government already regards it as its duty to build wagon roads.
Such roads when well built are almost as costly as the construction of a railroad, which is the essential modern means of transportation.
2) There can be no assurance that without surrendering our resources in Alaska private railroads will be built.
3) The opening of this new country demands that the highways of travel and commerce should be made wholly subservient not to private interest but to the upbuilding of this territory, that they may be the real servants of the national purpose.
If it is thought wise to recoup the Government for its original outlay it can be done, at least in part, by following a plan not unknown to our people—by giving a land subsidy to the owners of the road.
Retain in the Government one-half of the land on each side of the railroad until it had appreciated in value by the growth of the lands given to the public.
Thus the Government would subsidize itself and reap some of the benefits accruing to its land from the construction of the road.
Judging by the increase in land values in the newly opened sections of Canada, who could say but that long before the bonds were due the Government would thus have an asset sufficient to meet the original debt?
There seems to me no necessity for barring the way to minor privately owned roads because of the presence of longer systems of publicly owned roads.
The two exist together in other countries.
I would not even apply the principle of the commodities clause of the act to regulate commerce to such roads.
They should be built, however, under governmental supervision, capitalized and operated under the strictest regulation, and be at any time subject to purchase by the Government at their cost, minus depreciation.
It is not necessary to set forth here the extent or character of the coal fields of Alaska.
Neither could I add to your knowledge or that of Congress as to the need for this coal both by the Navy and by the industries and the people of the Pacific coast generally.
There are almost unlimited quantities of a high grade of lignite in the interior which may not stand extended storage or transportation.
This could be converted into electricity at the mouth of the mines and widely distributed for lighting, heat, and power.
Toward the southern coast of the peninsula there are two well-known fields of a high-grade bituminous coal and some anthracite.
These are the fields which have given rise to the troubles with which all are familiar.
These coal fields should be opened not to speculators but to operators.
Those should have these lands who will use them.
None should be opened as a basis for a gamble in future values.
If these premises express a sound public policy, there appears to me but one conclusion that can be reached as to the manner in which they may safely be turned over to the public—under a leasing and royalty system similar to that under which the State of Minnesota leases its ore lands and the States of Montana and Colorado their coal lands.
The tracts opened should be disposed of to those who within a certain time would develop mines and make their product commercially available.
This means that where a railroad is necessary to the operation of a mine the applicant should take a lease so conditioned for a limited period.
Sufficient land should be leased as a body to justify long-continued and economical operation.
As the average.
There has been much dispute between those who favor making a lease for an indeterminate period, dependent alone upon continued operation, and those who believe it wisest to fix a term for the lease, 20, 30, or more years.
This dispute seems to me of much more academic than practical interest.
There should be no disposition to change the lessee.
If a fixed term of lease is decided upon, the original lease should have an assured preferential right to a renewal until the mine is worked out.
So that in the end the fixed term is a reservation of the right on the part of the Government to make new terms at the end of a number of years, a reservation which could be fixed in an indeterminate lease.
A fixed minimum annual royalty would conduce to operation and prevent the holding of lands out of use.
These are matters, however, of regulation upon which much thought should be expended, and the experience of other lands will be found helpful.
If the principle of the homestead law is adopted, and one lease only permitted to any one person or group of persons, and all leases made nontransferable, excepting with the consent of a designated authority, it would seem that monopoly could be prevented.
I would, however add one other precaution—that in each field a large body of the coal land be reserved, so that the public and the Navy might be rendered independent of private supplies if that should become necessary.
The attraction of a leasing system is that it enables an operator to put all of his capital into the promotion of his enterprise, no investment being needed for the purchase of the land.
This makes it possible for the man of comparatively small means to become a coal mine operator.
The lessee is pleased to pay the Government a royalty in lieu of tying up a large amount of capital in the land itself.
There is this further consideration, which those interested in Alaska's future might well consider.
The royalties arising from these mines (as well as from oil) would for a long time be a source of revenue to the Government.
To stimulate the opening of mines all royalty might well be waived for a brief period; later, however, these royalties would be a not inconsiderable addition to the resources available for Alaskan development, for I would think it the wisest policy to give to this new land the full return from her properties to be used in her improvement, at least for many years.
There are many isolated places in Alaska where small mines may be opened to supply a local and small need.
A license to mine a small acreage without any charge whatever on the part of the Government would meet this need.
It might be well at this point to consider the coal land situation in the Western States.
For the policy I have suggested as advisable to apply in Alaska I think the sensible policy to adopt throughout the rest of the country.
We have tried two experiments in the United States as to coal lands.
We allowed our coal lands to slip from us under the old land-is-land policy until we came into the presence of a coal monopoly or a series of such monopolies in various parts of the country.
If this is questioned we may at least say, with exactness, that we realized that we had been putting priceless assets into the hands of a comparatively few far-sighted men for an inconsiderable consideration.
Then we tried the other plan of appraising such properties on a scientific estimate of contents upon which the land is sold.
This is the present plan, and it is really nothing more than a demand for a full but discounted royalty in advance.
It has against it, in my opinion, at least two objections.
It is certainly not for the public interest that our coal deposits shall be opened rapidly and ruthlessly.
We may reforest lands that have been devastated, or feed again into fruitfulness a soil that is starved, but we can not replace the carbon deposits underground once they are removed.
I can not, however, feel that we should sacrifice any present need for fuel or willingly surrender ourselves to a demand for exorbitant prices because of a fear that some day the coal supply may be exhausted.
Already there has been developed a substitute for coal in the flowing stream.
The turbine converts melted snow into heat and light, which can be distributed over a constantly widening area.
I think we have now arrived at that point in scientific achievement which justifies the belief that the wheels of industry will not cease, nor our houses go unlighted or unheated so long as dams may be built upon our streams.
Water will be, indeed already is, the greatest conservator of coal.
We must seek to make use of our coal, the fullest use that society requires.
This principle seems a truism.
But here lies the difficulty.
We wish cheap coal and at the same time a minimum of waste.
We wish society to take the lion's share of the profit and yield no more to the operator than will make his work sufficiently attractive to keep him at it.
In short, we desire competition without waste, a frank impossibility.
Other countries have wrestled with this problem.
Some have gone into Government operation.
But those who are nearest to us in institutions and tendencies have found that in a new country where there must be large development and higher rewards for enterprise, the safest practicable method is to lease the land, the Government taking a modest royalty and retaining some measure of control over operation.
The United States is beginning to appreciate the extent and value of its oil deposits, and for the disposition of these lands no better plan has been suggested than one analogous to that offered as to coal lands.
I would call your attention to the absurdity of applying the placer mining law to the development of petroleum lands.
This law which was based upon the fundamentals of the miners' codes of early days, was passed without thought of the occurrence of other deposits than placer gold.
However, the land department, and later, Congress applied the law to oil lands.
The placer law provides, in the main that no location shall be made without a discovery of valuable minerals on the claim, that the boundaries of the location shall be plainly marked on the ground, that no claim for an individual shall exceed 20 acres or for an association 160 acres, that $100 worth of assessment work must be done each year, and that upon the expenditure of $500 in labor or improvements and upon compliance with certain minor requirements the claimant is entitled to a patent to his claim.
The claimant who has gone upon lands for the purpose of making mineral location, and is engaged in work looking to the discovery of minerals, is protected against adverse agricultural claimants on the ground that the land which he occupies is not vacant and open to settlement.
The extent of his protection against adverse mineral claimants is, however, a matter of serious doubt.
He can not be ousted by the forcible or fraudulent entry of another mineral claimant, but if such adverse claimant enters peaceably, openly, and in good faith, prospects the claim and first discovers minerals, thus perfecting his location, his title is superior and he dispossesses the original occupant.
On the other hand, in some of the fields large areas are held indefinitely by assessment work which makes little pretense of exploring the claims or developing them.
Useless roads which make the claims no easier of access, drilling rigs incapable of reaching the oil sands, building-stone locations where no building stone is to be found, and locations on worthless deposits of gypsum are among the subterfuges adopted to hold possession of lands prospectively valuable for oil.
Thus, where occupancy without discovery is respected, large areas are withheld from exploration and development, and where such occupancy is not respected, the oil prospector must assume undue risk of the loss of his investment prior to discovery.
An objection of equal force to the placer law as applied to petroleum arises from the fact that the mineral is fluid.
It moves underground.
A well on one tract is likely to draw from a neighboring tract.
Thus it becomes necessary for each operator to drill wells along his boundary lines before his neighbors do so.
Otherwise, they will draw off a part of his oil.
He is therefore forced to drill whether it is otherwise to his advantage or not, in order to protect his oil deposits from exhaustion through adjacent wells.
We should, I believe, stimulate the search for oil and protect the prospector.
The Government is withholding from entry certain considerable bodies of land in the belief that they contain oil, when this has not been demonstrated.
It is our practice as soon as there has been a producing well discovered, and sometimes earlier, to withdraw all lands in the neighborhood which, in the opinion of experts, are of similar geological formation.
The lands on which the discovery has been made or upon which exploration has been begun may or may not be included in the withdrawal.
If they are, the law offers to protect the rights so acquired.
I feel, however, that we are not sufficiently rewarding the pioneer.
A plan could readily be evolved by which anyone wishing to prospect for oil on the public lands could obtain a license from the Government to exclusively prospect a large tract of land for a period of time—perhaps two years—and in the event that oil is found in commercial quantities the Government should be paid a royalty fixed in advance.
This method is similar to that by which the Indian lands in Oklahoma have been developed and which has proved of the highest value in bringing capital into this work and insuring large returns to the Indians.
In the Oklahoma case one great corporation, however, was given so large a body of land that after the original discovery it found it profitable to farm out its rights to subsidiary companies.
This might easily be prevented by regulations under which the Government would reserve to itself the adjoining lands.
Indeed, I would not be adverse to granting such a license in unexplored country for, say, four sections of land, and in the event of discovery permitting patent to issue to the discoverer for a full section, the balance of the licensed land to remain in the Government to be leased in small parcels to other parties on a royalty basis under the more advantageous terms that could then be secured.
The United States will need oil for its Navy as well as coal, and probably in increasing quantities as the modern oil-burning or gasburning engines are recognized.
It would be economical to substitute oil for coal for many reasons; to reduce labor cost, to avoid the building and maintenance of colliers, and the purchase and support of coaling stations.
The Diesel engine can, with the fuel carried from the home port, take one of our greatest ships around the world without dependence upon a renewed supply of fuel.
England's adventure in this direction will presumably force other nations into like enterprise, and yet England has no oil fields on which to draw, while we have already the largest producing fuel oil fields in the world, and others are appearing.
Already we know of oil in Alaska, and within a few weeks a fine grade of oil has been found on the Quinaielt Indian Reservation in Washington.
The Indian oil lands we do not own.
They belong to the Indians, and their product must be sold for the Indians' profit.
The one sole reservation of oil lands for governmental use is that in California, over the withdrawal of which litigation is now pending.
Under these conditions it would seem of the highest expediency that the Government make such offers as will induce the proving of our lands, and of these proved lands retain sufficient to make our ships independent of the world and as fully competent as their rivals.
Some years since this department announced the discovery within the United States of a deposit of potash which it was hoped would render our farmers independent, for a time at least, of all other sources.
This deposit still lies unused.
No proper laws have been passed by which it can be put into use.
A common-sense view of the matter would be to treat these lands as it has been suggested we should treat coal lands.
So, too, should our vast deposits of phosphate rock be brought into the world's supply.
We are giving a constantly increasing volume of thought to the scientific methods by which the fertility of our soils may be increased.
And the time is likely to come when the deposited phosphorus in our western lands will be regarded as of almost priceless worth.
Few appreciate how very extensive these deposits are.
We have millions of acres of phosphate lands which are estimated to contain several billion tons of phosphate rock; undoubtedly the world's largest known reserve.
In 1910 the United States produced 52 per cent of the world's output of phosphate rock, and last year over 40 per cent of our product was exported.
It would certainly be well if we could insure the preferential use of this fertilizer on American farms and export it in the form of farm products rater than as raw material.
I am not satisfied with the operation of the homestead law as to the timber lands of the far western lands.
As the law now is, a man may enter upon 160 acres of these lands, and by living a total of 21 months on the land during three years and cultivating at a maximum 20 acres of the land, it becomes his.
He promptly proceeds, if he is wise, to sell it to some lumber company for from $10,000 to $20,000.
The land is allowed to lie for an indefinite period as a part of the company's forest reserve or is logged off, leaving the stumps in the land, and eventually sold for agricultural purposes, if so adapted.
Experience justifies the statement that few men take up these heavily timbered lands under a bona fide attempt to meet the purpose of the law, which, as its name implies, is to convert the public land into homes.
By the investment of a few months' time and a few hundred dollars the homesteader gains a property worth many thousands of dollars.
Yet all the conditions of the law are complied with and patent must issue.
The Government loses the timber and the land and does not gain a real home maker.
Such homesteaders add nothing to the wealth of the Nation.
The law should punish them, in fact, as frauds.
Whether with the connivance of the lumber companies or not, they are the agencies by which the law is defeated and the lands conveyed where it is not intended that they should go.
There is a remedy for this condition of things, and it lies in the selling of the land and the timber separately.
I am beginning to doubt the wisdom of applying the homestead law to any land which has not first been declared fitted for agriculture.
It is now a blanket law which is used to cover a multitude of frauds.
Such legislation would also cure the abuses resulting from the use of certain classes of scrip.
The Great American Desert," as it was designated upon the map some 40 years ago, has become one of the richest portions of our country.
This desert included a variable area, generally all west of the Missouri River to the Sierra Nevada.
To-day it is harvest field, cattle range, mining camp, and orchard—where there is water.
And where there is no water it remains desert.
There are at least four States which can never increase greatly in stable population unless their lands are brought under irrigation.
And in all of the Western States there are tens of thousands and in some millions of acres that will remain waste land, fit only for the poorest cattle range, and much not even for that use, without the expenditure of large sums for reservoirs, dams, canals, and ditches.
That there is not water enough even with the fullest storage to supply the demands of all the arable land can safely be said.
That, however, there is sufficient to care for a large part of this territory and bring it into fruitfulness there is no doubt.
The Government, seeing this condition, undertook to lend itself to the development of these lands by what is known as the Carey Act.
This was a form of cooperative effort in which the Federal Government turned over any required body of lands to a State, which the latter undertook through private enterprise to irrigate.
When to irrigate meant nothing more than to divert a portion of a stream from its bed and convey it by gravity to the desert, this plan was attractive.
But since these simpler methods had to be abandoned as no longer adequate, this act has done little in the promotion of such enterprise.
The successful Carey Act projects are a distinguished few.
Great wrongs to trustful or none-too-wise farmers were done in its name, and the suffering which it caused has made it difficult to make it serviceable, even under the more careful scrutiny of later and more cautious officials.
Because of the magnitude of the money investment required, and appreciative of the need, Congress in 1902 adopted the policy of undertaking irrigation projects of its own.
The moneys received from the sale of public lands—less 5 per cent—went into a reclamation fund, administered by this department.
The result has been the construction of some 25 projects, scattered through all of the arid-land States.
In these the Government has invested approximately $76,000,000.
One of these, a pumping plant in Kansas, is now unused; another, a flood storage system in New Mexico, is only in partial use; both of these, however, represent less than 1 per cent of the total investment.
The others are in operation, and less than 3 per cent of all the land which is served or which we are ready to serve is unoccupied.
This work has been a success.
Soon after taking office I received a number of letters complaining of the Reclamation Service.
To inquire into these complaints I first called a conference in this city of representatives from all the projects and later visited most of those from which most serious complaint had been received.
I can not here review the matters considered or the information gained.
My conclusion was that mistakes had been made by the service, some of which grew out of ambiguities or defects in the law, some out of inexperience, and others out of a misconception of the relationship that should exist between such a governmental service and those with whom it was dealing.
A larger degree of frankness with the farmer on our part and a fuller appreciation of the responsibilities assumed on the part of the farmer will mend much of the feeling that I found.
But there is one matter of great moment to these people which should be corrected by law as soon as possible.
We mistook the ability of the farmer to pay for his water rights.
Ten years was the time given.
His optimism and our own was too great.
That time should be doubled.
This should be done not alone because of the inability of many to meet their obligations to the Government, but because it will prove wise policy to give a free period within which the farmers may more fully use their farms.
They can put their lands to a more profitable use, both to themselves and to the country, by being allowed to cumulate their earnings in the early years and be thus enabled to make investments in stock and machinery which will make for larger profits later.
I feel the keenest sympathy with those upon these projects who are entering into this work of putting the desert into public service.
They are genuine pioneers in a new field of work, on the success of which depends greatly the rescuing of a vast territory.
The enemy of the Government and of the farmer is the land speculator.
He is of two kinds.
Sometimes he is a farmer who does not expect to farm but to sell out at a higher price and go elsewhere.
Generally, however, he is the holder of a large tract of private land within the project, who creates false values and burdens those who buy and attempt to farm with a load of debt which handicaps them in their efforts.
Both of these are hostile to the welfare of the enterprise and tend to destroy the value of the service which the Government is attempting.
But such matters may, I trust, be overcome by new methods of administration.
It is my hope that the Government will find its way to enter with zest upon more works of a similar character.
Not to do this will leave undeveloped much of the most fertile land of the West.
What is to be the future of Arizona and of New Mexico, of Nevada and Utah, of southern Idaho, central Oregon, eastern Washington, much of Montana and Colorado, and more of Wyoming and Nebraska, if the Government does not aid in their development?
Private capital will not, for many years at least, risk undertakings of such magnitude as these States require.
Experience has made the irrigation bond buyer extremely wary.
Within a few weeks the most promising of the great private enterprises in Idaho has met with the misfortune which had befallen so many others in neighboring States.
The most successful irrigation plants are founded on the wrecks of their pioneer exploiters.
The Government has rescued others.
It has been with these projects much as it has been with our western railroads.
They had to descend into the hands of the receiver before they could be resurrected into a new and glorified life.
But where are the funds to come from to carry on such work?
My answer is, From the public lands in these States.
We sell these lands now and the proceeds go into the reclamation fund.
This is the policy of Congress—that we shall for a time use the moneys which the Government derives from the sale of its lands to create new values within the States.
Two years ago the Government went further and set aside $20,000,000, to be used in the completion of the irrigation schemes now under way.
This is an advance by the Government for which it takes what might be termed a mortgage on the moneys which the projects will yield from the sale of water rights.
Why not extend this policy?
The West can use profitably and wisely $100,000,000 in the next 10 years to the advantage of the whole country.
Indeed, without this expenditure the asset which the Government has in its desert lands will lie unused and be of no national value.
The Government will recover all of the money it advances, not to speak of the homes and the values created by its enterprise.
If the Government will place upon a leasing basis these western resources with which we have been dealing, it can have an increased fund for the continuance of this work and an increased assurance of the return of its advances.
Just as I would aim to make Alaska pay in the end out of her own resources for a liberal advance made to her for the opening and improvement of her territory, so should we aim to make these lands of the West bring into being the latent values of the West.
With a little foresight we can transform coal and oil, phosphate and timber, into green fields and electric power Railroads and power plants, street railways and waterworks, are built with 50-year bonds, which rest upon the foundation of their probable earnings.
It is not without precedent in principle or in fact for the United States to improve its own property and for its advances take a mortgage upon the wealth it creates, and in one-half of 50 years we would regain our capital.
Inasmuch as the title to these oil and other lands would remain in the Government and be excluded from State taxation, it would seem to be fair that a certain percentage of the royalties received should go to the States within which the revenues are raised.
Twenty-five per cent might be a minimum, but a higher percentage would seem advisable if the whole might remain for a time in the Government's hands to be used in such cooperative irrigation enterprises as the State might desire, and after such use has been made and the fund replenished, be fully released to the State.
This suggestion of cooperation with the States is not made idly.
I look forward with confidence to a more intimate relationship between the States and the Federal Government in undertaking this work of developing the West.
The mass of the people are sympathetic with the purposes of the Government.
They regard with pride the great engineering works of this service which stand as monuments to the interest of the Nation in their welfare.
So cordial, indeed, is the spirit of the West toward this work that within a few months the State government of Oregon and the Federal Government, through the Reclamation Service, have become partners in several projected irrigation plans, one involving no less than the pumping of water from the Columbia River by electric power generated by the river itself.
A similar cooperative enterprise has been entered upon with the State of Washington.
The plan is that we shall do-the work, supplying one-half the funds and the State onehalf.
This is a tendency which it is well to foster.
For the State will well appreciate the effort of the Nation when it makes like sacrifice itself.
And nothing could more induce to the success of the Nation's effort than to have some local check and interest.
To place at a State's service a large sum gathered from the resources of the public lands within her borders would enable this character of mutual effort to expand.
This can be done if we will retain for national improvement a portion of the national resources.
And this may be done, I believe, with the hearty good will of the people who are chiefly concerned—the people of the West.
One reason stands out demanding the promptest possible action in this matter.
Reservoir sites are few and becoming fewer each succeeding year.
Those that may be had are rising steadily in value.
So valuable, indeed, have some sites become since the institution of the Reclamation Service that projected enterprises are not now regarded as feasible, for the dependent lands which it was intended to irrigate can not make a return sufficient to pay the increased cost.
And let this not be forgotten, that stored water means more than fields of alfalfa, generous orchards, and the homes of hearty husbandmen; it means power for industries, light and heat for town and farm.
These two—irrigation and hydroelectric power—are companions.
One does not think of the one without suggesting the other.
And the magic worked by each is rivaled by its mate.
Electricity is coal and kerosene which need no railroad to transport them.
The significance of these irrigation reservoirs from this point of view is but beginning to be appreciated and will grow greater as the country becomes more thickly populated and factories come to supplement the farms.
And this brings me to the consideration of the Government's policy toward the use of the public lands for reservoir and dam sites.
It is one of the most perplexing problems that engages the mind of the man who wishes to see the West thrive more abundantly.
What is such land worth?
Are we justified in measuring its value by the use to which it is put, or should we yield this strategic resource without compensation?
The country has been aroused too late to save the very richest of these points of vantage.
Private power companies hold the most accessible of these sites under rights of which they can never be deprived.
So much more compelling the reason why we should not yield what remain unwisely.
The temptation to grant generously without condition that which may be put to so beneficent a use must be resisted if we are not to meet a spendthrift's fate At the same time there must surely be a rational way by which capital may be brought into this public service.
The present condition of stagnation does no one good.
Within a generation I believe the people will be as alive to the value of public ownership of hydroelectric power plants as they are to-day to municipally-owned waterworks.
The people not being prepared, however, to proceed to put these lands to their highest use, I am not in favor of keeping them from being utilized by private capital in the public interest.
Because we do not know what is best to be done is not a reason either for doing nothing or for getting rid of the trouble as soon as possible, on the old "land-is-land" policy.
How may the needed advantage be gained for the present and the needs of the future be cared for?
This is the immediate problem.
What may capital reasonably demand?
A fair and attractive return upon its investment yearly and the full return of its capital.
And what may the public served reasonably require?
Good service and fair rates.
Who shall make these rates?
Within the State they must be subject to State regulation; between the States, Federal authority must control.
What return shall the Federal Government have for its lands?
My answer would be, no return whatsoever, provided the plant reverted to the Government without cost at the end of 50 or 60 years, or so much of the plant as was based on the land itself and the improvements directly attached thereto, such as reservoirs, dams, water rights, and rights of way.
For the tangible property of the plant, such as the distributing system and machinery, the Government might well agree to pay an appraised price so as to insure its being maintained and extended during the later years of the life of the franchise.
The right to buy the complete plant at an appraised figure at any time after 20 years would be a further protection and one not burdensome, while for better service it would seem advisable that all plants be permitted, in fact encouraged, to physically combine, just as our railroads are required to couple themselves into through routes and thus make their service continuous and interdependent; but they should not be allowed either to agree as to rates or to merge their capitalization or their identity.
Such plan as is here suggested should be attractive to capital wherever there is bona fide need for such water-power development, for it is definite in its terms and can be made a precise basis for capitalization.
The term of the franchise would be long enough to permit of the amortization of the plant upon such a percentage as would lay no heavy burden upon each year's earnings.
Where a reservoir site is also used for the storage of irrigation waters, the right to which attaches to certain lands which should enjoy that use forever, it could be provided that at the end of the franchise period the Government would either turn over the plant to the water users or the State or otherwise provide for its operation.
I have endeavored herein barely to outline such a constructive program as would meet any reasonable demand and with the least burden place our resources at the service of the people.
It should not be impossible to hearten the hopes of those who live in Alaska or the many who would engage in her development were the doors of opportunity open to them.
And if we can follow some such plan as has been suggested, by which, sensibly and conservatively, the resources of the West may be utilized for her upbuilding and improvement by the fullest recognition of their interdependence, I believe that we would meet the demands of all whose ambition to gain fortune has not closed their eyes to the general good.
This department has to do not alone with general policies but with an infinitude of administrative detail.
Its embarrassments arise out of the large number of matters as to which administrative discretion may be exercised.
I have not sought to present these at this time.
That you may, however, appreciate the scope of this department's activities and read perhaps with greater interest the accompanying outline of the work done by our various bureaus, permit me to note here that we care for the Eskimo in Alaska and for the insane in the District of Columbia; for 324,000 Indians scattered throughout the continent, for whom we hold property in trust approximating in value $1,000,000,000; that the choice beauty spots of our country have been set aside as national parks which are in our care; that we distribute to over 800,000 pensioners, their widows and dependents, a round sum of over $165,000,000 a year; that we issue to inventors of the United States and foreign countries an average of more than 3,000 patents each month; that every miner in the land is interested in those means which we are taking to prevent mine accidents and to more fully realize the mineral wealth of the land; that the schools of the Indians and the national university of the colored people are under our jurisdiction, together with the Hot Springs of Arkansas and the cliff dwellings of Colorado; that the internal economy of the Territory of Hawaii, as well as that of Alaska, fall within the purview of this department; that it is our part to measure the waters of a thousand streams, survey the lands of all the States, and look beneath the surface to see what they contain; that we have still in our care a great body of public land (some 300,000, 000 acres outside of Alaska), out of which each year approximately 60,000 farms are carved; that we have a bureau of education, which should be provided with the equipment by which it may adequately do a great work for the schools, the teachers, and the children of this country, or be abolished.
FRANKLIN K. LANE, Secretary of the Interior.
Attention was called in last year's report to the rapid and enormous increase of work in this office, and figures were submitted showing the cases received and docketed since 19094,755 in the year ended October 1, 1909; 13,301 in 1910; 16,609 in 1911; 34,783 in 1912; and this year, 48,870—an increase of over 1,000 per cent in five years.
In spite of this and the insufficiency in number of attorneys to cope with it, there has been no increase in the average of cases pending at the close of the year—3,305, as compared with 3,308 in 1912.
Yet in land appeals, where delay is prejudicial to the interests of entrymen or claimants of the benefits of the general-land law, the arrears, including motions for rehearing, have increased from 2,230 to 2,267.
This is not large; on the contrary, it is surprisingly small.
It demonstrates, however, that the need of a greater number of qualified assistant attorneys, to which the attention of Congress has been repeatedly invited, is not transitory, occasioned by temporary conditions.
In a note in connection with the estimates for the ensuing year, the necessary legislation to remedy this condition is suggested.
The adjudication of appeals and the consideration of legal questions constantly arising in administration are not the only charges upon the time and industry of this office.
Litigation in the courts of the District involves the department in many suits at law and in equity which must be defended by the Assistant Attorney General.
During the last year 19 such causes have been tried and decisions rendered—4 in the Supreme Court of the United States, 8 in the Court of Appeals, and 7 in the Supreme Court of the District.
This does not include interlocutory orders.
The department was successful in all save one, which is now pending in the Court of Appeals from the adverse decision of a Justice of the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia.
There are now pending 27 cases—3 in the Supreme Court of the United States, 4 in the Court of Appeals and 20 in the Supreme Court of the District.
Elsewhere, in connection with appeals in pension and bounty land matters, the reestablishment is recommended of the Board of Pension Appeals to relieve the Assistant Attorney General's office of responsibility in connection with that class of appeals.
In the year that has passed the operation of the so-called threeyear homestead law has had a marked effect upon the output of the office, owing to the premature submission of final proofs in a large number of cases.
This placed upon the office the duty of considering an unusual number of proofs that did not furnish a proper basis for a patent, so while the work of the office was much heavier on account of this act, there was not the equivalent showing of results that might have been expected.
The number of patents written during the last year was 63,496, as against 67,475 for the year previous, but when the conditions under which this result was secured are compared with those of the former year it is apparent that there was no want of industry in the office.
Area entered and patented.
The total area of public and Indian lands originally entered and allowed during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1913, is 15,867,222.45 acres, an increase of 1,292,533.63 acres, as compared with the area entered during the year 1912.
The area patented during the fiscal year is 12,678,076 acres, an increase of 2,542,601 acres, as compared with the fiscal year of 1912; of the above area 7,320,058 acres were patented under the homestead law.
Receipts and expenditures.
The total cash receipts from the sales of public lands, including fees and commissions on both original and final entries, for the fiscal year 1913 were $4,287,540.67.
Miscellaneous receipts were as follows: From sales of Indian lands, $2,118,- 469.34; reclamation water-right charges, $274,172.57; depredations on public lands, sales of Government property, and copies of records and plats, etc., $275,322.23; making the aggregate of cash receipts of this bureau during the fiscal year 1913, $6,955,504.81, a decrease of $3,017,543.19, as compared with those for the fiscal year ended June 30,1912.
The decrease in receipts and increase in the area disposed of is caused by the decreased number of homestead entries commuted to cash and the increased number on which proof was made under the three-year act of June 6, 1912.
The difference of nearly 2,000,000 acres on which commissions only were received instead of the Government price of $1.25 and $2.50 per acre would account for the decrease in receipts, and also the fact that the land service no longer collects reclamation water-right charges, these moneys now being collected by the Reclamation Service under the act of August 9, 1912 (37 Stat., 265).
The total expenses of district land offices for salaries and commissions of registers and receivers and incidental expenses during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1913, were $890,474.06, an increase of $40,353.02.
The aggregate expenditures and estimated liabilities of the public-land service, including expenses of district land offices and surveys, were $3,316,362.30, leaving a net surplus of $3,639,142.51.
Field service.
The field service has been somewhat handicapped in the prosecution of its work by reason of the reduction by $150,000 of the appropriation allowed for its maintenance, necessitating a considerable reduction in the force.
Nevertheless, the high standard of efficiency heretofore set has been maintained and, while the number of cases investigated and closed during the fiscal year is not as large as during the previous year, yet, when the reduction of the force is taken into consideration, the results accomplished make an excellent showing.
Some progress has been made in the investigation of oil lands in California, and, as a result of the investigations made by the field force, a number of suits have been instituted during the year by the Department of Justice to recover lands patented as agricultural which, in fact, are oil in character.
The necessity for increase in the force assigned to this work has been recognized, but it has been impossible to meet the demand by reason of the limited appropriation.
During this fiscal year field investigation has been completed in connection with the 1,129 Alaska coal claims.
The past year proceedings were directed against 99 of the Alaska coal claims, which brings the total up to 399 on which hearings have been ordered.
The testimony has been taken in a number of cases and the records are now before the Commissioner of the General Land Office for consideration, and hearings are being held and will be completed in a large number of these cases within a few months.
There have been 765 Alaska coal claims canceled or held for cancellation.
The work of the investigation of private irrigation companies proposing to furnish water for the irrigation of lands within desert entries is largely increasing and is very important, since the adjudication of the desert-land entries is dependent upon the findings of the department as to the resources and reliability of the company and the feasibility of the proposed irrigation system.
Not only is this work valuable in the adjudication of the cases but it also protects the entryman who contemplates the purchase of stock in any such company, since if the investigation discloses that the project is not feasible and the company not bona fide, the entryman is in many instances saved a loss which would accrue by an unwise investment.
An additional and new line of work has been placed upon the field service by the act of March 4, 1913 (Public, No. 450), which provides for the sale of fire-killed or damaged timber on the public domain outside of.
Instructions for the administration of this act are now under consideration and provide that the field service shall undertake designation, appraisal, and other work incident to the sale of such timber, and this must be met by the appropriation for the field service, since there is no other appropriation available.
It is too early to estimate the additional work which will devolve upon the force by reason of the administration of this law, but it is believed that it will amount to a considerable item of expense, for which there will be no reimbursement, for the act provides that the proceeds of the sales shall go into the general fund derived from the sale of public lands, which is turned over to the Reclamation Service.
Public surveys.
Further experience with the direct system of surveys now in operation demonstrates the wisdom of its adoption.
Increased efforts were made at the opening of the 1913 season to secure the execution of all surveys authorized, and at the end of the last fiscal year 154 parties were at work on the various kinds of surveys, under the jurisdiction of the General Land Office.
The plan of procedure provided for the surveys of homesteads within national forests has been adopted by the forester, and the instructions printed in pamphlet form for the guidance of the surveyors.
These irregular tracts listed by the forest officers will be surveyed by metes and bounds, whether on unsurveyed or surveyed lands, under the supervision of the Surveyor General, and the expense of the field and office work of the segregation will be hereafter borne by the Government instead of by the entrymen.
There is an increase of 900,000 acres in the total of new surveys over that of last year, which, added to the area of lands resurveyed during the year, shows an output of 10,250,000 acres, an excess over 1912 of about 2,500,000 acres of accepted surveys.
If the production is counted by the surveying season instead of by the fiscal year the increased activity in surveying operations during 1913 will, it is estimated, result in an aggregate of 15,000,000 acres, which may safely be predicted a record for recent years and a high-water mark for surveys under the direct system.
Desert-land entries.
During the past year 2,328 desert-land entries were approved for patent, a slight increase over the preceding year.
The gradual absorption of the water supply from the smaller streams by individual entrymen has resulted in the organization of water companies to furnish water from distant sources.
Companies of this character are carefully scutinized to determine their resources, liability, and control of water rights.
Indian allotments.
During the year ended 5,243 Indian allotments were disposed of by approval, an increase of 3,069 over the preceding year.
These were chiefly tribal allotments, though included in the number were a few fourth-sectional allotments on the public domain, and approximately 400 Turtle Mountain selections under the act of April 21, 1904.
Ceded Chippewa pine logging.
The tenth year of Chippewa logging, Minnesota, closed on June 30.
During said year there were cut 89,616,153 feet of timber, valued at $771,689.81, which was less than that of the preceding year.
The total amount of timber cut during the 10 years since the logging operations began is 1,094,075,158 feet, and the total amount received for the timber has been $7,538,- 756.67.
The amount of timber cut and paid for already exceeds, by over 188,000,000 feet, the original Government estimates, and several of the contracts have not been completed.
State selections.
There was a notable increase in the acreage of State selections approved during the year ended; selections were approved under the various State grants to the amount of 598,657.71 acres.
This is an increase of 417,377.12 acres over the approvals for the preceding years.
The States of Arizona and New Mexico during the past year entered actively upon the selection of lands granted them in the enabling act of June 20, 1910 (36 Stat., 557), upward of 1,400,000 acres having been selected during the year.
National forests.
Since the issuance of the last annual report 12 national forests have been enlarged and 27 reduced, under the act of June 4, 1907 (30 Stat., 36).
There are now 163 national forests embracing 186,616,648 acres.
The decrease in area of national forests since the beginning of the fiscal year is 789,728 acres.
Homestead entries in forest reserves.
During the last year approximately 365,000 acres of agricultural lands in national forests were opened to settlement and entry under the homestead laws, under the provisions of the act of June 11, 1906 (34 Stat., 233).
Recent legislation provides for the survey by the Forest Service of metes and bounds claims under the act of 1906, without expense to the entrymen for the field work.
Railroad land grants.
Owing to the many withdrawals of land for coal classification, and also with a view to their value for powersite and reservoir purposes, much additional labor has been necessary in the preparation of clear lists of railroad lands for patent.
The area patented to railroads during the year amounts to 1,335,- 174.18 acres.
Power-site reserves.
Under the provisions of the act of June 25, 1910 (36 Stat., 847), and the amendatory act of August 24, 1912 (37 Stat., 497), there were during the year 89 withdrawals for powersite purposes, embracing 152,686 acres, and 68,034 acres, theretofore withdrawn, were restored.
There were three withdrawals as public water reserves covering 4,360 acres, and one reservoir site was created embracing 4,454 acres.
On June 30, 1912, there were withdrawn as power site, etc., 2,231,156.75 acres.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 1913, there were withdrawn 161,670 acres, and 74,299 acres restored, leaving under reservation June 30, 2,233,360.48 acres.
Carey Act.
During the past fiscal year applications were received for the withdrawal of 198,403.99 acres, as against 1,416,974.04 acres during the previous year, showing a substantial decrease in applications for withdrawal.
Especial attention is called to the large increase of approvals this year over last; in 1912, 97,917.01 acres were approved, while in 1913, 395,160.74 acres were approved.
The patents issued during the past year total 35,170.62 acres.
The operations of the past year under this act have been very encouraging; there is a manifest tendency among the States which enjoy the benefits of this act to cooperate, and thus secure a general uniformity of action.
Recommendations for legislation.
1. Modification of the present form of appropriations for public surveys.
2. A consolidated right-of-way act, to include all classes of rights relative to irrigation, generation of electric power, telephone and telegraph, municipal and other public purposes, tramways, etc.
3. That a forfeiture act be passed applicable to approvals under the right-of-way acts of March 3, 1891, and February 1, 1905.
4. An amendment of the act of June 22, 1874 (18 Stat., 194), by which its protection will be extended to include desert-land entrymen as well as homesteaders.
5. That a consolidated Carey Act should be considered by which the several acts and amendments may be brought together.
7.
That the offices of register and receiver be abolished and in lieu thereof one officer be provided to perform the duties of both.
8. The passage of an act authorizing the submission of final proofs before a special officer designated for that purpose.
9. Regulations controlling the conduct of professional land locators.
10. Provision for uniformity of fees in public-land proceedings.
11. Statutory provision for another Assistant Commissioner of the General Land Office.
The Indian Bureau combines in its administrative duties more varied and intricate problems than any other bureau under this department, dealing as it does with not only material subjects involving expenditures of vast sums, but of human problems connected with the working out of the civilization of a race of people within our borders though alien to our form of government and the customs of white men.
It has been remarked, in fact, that the activities of this bureau comprehend all that is ordinarily met with in the course of human life.
Throughout the Indian Service there are some 6,000 employees, distributed over 26 States, handling property approximately valued at $1,000,000,000.
In the early days of this bureau's existence, the Indians were dealt with as several large bodies corresponding to the Indian reservations.
To-day the Indian Office is engaged in distributing this vast estate to the individual owners, having due regard to the material and moral welfare of the individuals concerned.
Of the 324,000 Indians, a large number are as yet unfitted to assume the duties of full citizenship.
The work to be done, therefore, is not merely a physical distribution of this estate, but the preparing of the owners thereof for the fulfillment of their obligations to the Government and to themselves.
Heirs of deceased Indians.
One of the tasks now before the Indian Bureau is the determining of the heirs of deceased Indian allottees.
It is estimated that there are now pending more than 40,000 heirship cases, representing estates valued at approximately $60,000,000.
Allotments.
Another large work is the completion of the allotment of lands to individual Indians, it being estimated that there are probably more than 120,000 unallotted Indians on the reservations throughout the Western States, there having been allotted about 180,000, covering an area of about 34,000,000 acres.
Timber lands.
As the timber areas of the country become depleted the value and importance of the timber lands on Indian reservations and owned by the Indians increase.
It is estimated that the stumpage value of the timber on Indian lands will exceed $80,000,000.
One of the problems confronting the Indian Bureau is the conservation of these Indian timber lands in such manner as to promote the sale of the ripened and matured timber.
There are on many of the Indian reservations large areas of irrigable land requiring business-like administration.
The allotment of lands, the operations of the Indian forests, the development of the irrigable lands, and other activities of the Indian Service, including the education of the Indian youth, the preservation of the health of the Indian population, the development of agricultural, stock-raising, and other industrial pursuits, the procuring of employment for the graduates of Indian schools, the furnishing of educational facilities, are each receiving the most considerate attention.
Health.
The health conditions on Indian reservations are such as to warrant increased activity to bring about remedies for existing evils and to carry forward with greater rapidity the improvements now being inaugurated.
It is reported that there are approximately 25,000 Indians suffering from tuberculosis, while available hospital facilities will accommodate but a few hundred.
During the last fiscal year 1,905 Indians were reported as having died from tuberculosis, and this probably represents not more than 75 per cent of the total number who have succumbed to this disease.
In order to check and control this condition, alarge expenditure of funds will be necessary and the situation is so grave that immediate action should be taken.
The Indian Office is now making a careful study of the housing conditions of the Indians and improvements along this line will greatly facilitate the checking of tuberculosis.
Another disease to which the Indians seem particularly susceptible is trachoma, which is infectious, and inasmuch as the Indians are living to a considerable extent among the white population, the checking of this disease becomes a serious problem in which the white citizens are consequently much concerned.
Agriculture and stock raising.
Agriculture and stock raising are receiving special attention.
The reservations are largely divided into farm or stock districts under the immediate charge of farmers or stockmen, and in connection with the agricultural work experimental farms are being operated on some of the reservations, including Pima, San Juan, Shoshone, Pala, Colville, Soboba, San Xavier, Shivwits, and Leupp, and all the reservation Indian school farms are being used to demonstrate to the older Indians the possibilities of the soil in the several sections of the country.
These farms also produce an income which is used in support of the school plant.
Roads.
Another matter receiving attention is the construction of good roads through Indian reservations.
Through cooperation with the officials of the counties adjoining and including the reservations, much has been accomplished in the way of road and bridge building.
Transfer of offices.
The headquarters of the chief of irrigation and those of the medical supervisor, the chief supervisor of special agents, the supervisor of schools, the supervisor of farming, the supervisor of construction, and the supervisor of stock have recently been concentrated at Washington, where the work of these several branches of the service will be brought under the immediate direction of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
It is believed that this change in the organization will effect a large saving of funds and materially increase the efficiency of the service.
Mining.
Mining on Indian lands, particularly for oil, has received increased impetus during the past fiscal year, owing to the discovery of additional oil pools in the Osage Nation and on Indian lands west and south thereof.
The department is pleased to note the advance in the price of crude oil to a maximum of 88 cents per barrel on June 30 (it has since that time advanced to more than a dollar per barrel).
During the past fiscal year more than 49,176,000 barrels (estimated) were sold from the territory of the Five Civilized Tribes in Oklahoma, producing a revenue of $1,496,179.
During the year oil was discovered in the State of Washington near the Quinaielt Reservation and many applications for permission to negotiate leases of lands on that reservation have been received, but the approval of such were withheld pending the determination of the existence of oil in commercial quantities.
The report of the Commissioner to the Five Civilized Tribes shows that satisfactory progress has been made in the matter of finally closing the affairs of the Five Civilized Tribes.
The citizenship rolls were closed by law cn March 4, 1907.
The work of allotment is practically completed with the exception of the delivery of certain allotment deeds and other minor details.
The equalization of allotments has been about completed in the Cherokee, Choctaw, and Chickasaw Nations with the exception of about $307,000.
In many cases the amount to be paid is so small that it offers no inducement for the allottee to make application or go to any trouble to secure the same.
No steps have as yet been taken to equalize allotments in the Creek Nation, as it will require legislation before this can be done.
Under the Creek agreement each citizen was entitled to an allotment of land at the appraised value of $1,040, and where the appraised value of the allotment was less than that amount they were to receive the difference in money.
The appraised value of the land subject to allotment fell short of the required amount necessary to give each citizen a full allotment by nearly $6,913,000, while the Creek tribal funds aggregated only about $3,700,000.
Allotments in the Seminole Nation.
Allotments to the 3,119 citizens of the Seminole Nation have been completed.
The remaining unallotted land, 680 acres, was sold during the past year.
All allotment deeds in this nation have been issued with the exception of 879.
All Seminole tribal property has been disposed of with the exception of the two tribal boarding schools, including 320 acres each.
Allotments in the Creek Nation.
Allotments have been made to the 18,716 citizens of the Creek Nation and the remaining unallotted land, 1,754 acres, was advertised and disposed of with the exception of 343 acres.
The work yet to be performed in this nation consists of equalization of allotments when proper legislation is secured, sale of the remaining unallotted lands, sale of 203 town lots, and disposition of certain suits involving town lots.
There are four boarding schools in this nation, including 40 acres each, still maintained by the tribe.
Also the Creek capitol building at Okmulgee, including the land upon which it is located, has not yet been disposed of.
Allotments in the Cherokee Nation.
The allotment work in the Cherokee Nation to the 41,696 citizens, which was considerably delayed by reason of litigation affecting the rights of certain new-born children, which was finally determined in favor of such children, has now been about completed, with the exception of the delivery of a few patents.
No patents have yet been issued to 165 new-born Cherokees, for the reason that a portion of their allotments are involved in suits, having been clouded by illegal conveyances.
All of the unallotted land in this nation has been disposed of with the exception of 925 acres.
No unallotted land was sold in this nation during the past year.
The work yet to be performed in this nation consists of the sale of the remaining unallotted lands, proper conveyance of about 272 cemeteries, and issuance of patents to unallotted lands as final payments are made.
It appears that all tribal property in this nation, except unallotted land, has been disposed of, the Cherokee Orphan Training School having been conveyed to the United States since July 1, 1913, as provided by the Indian appropriation act of June 30, 1913.
Allotments in the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations.
In the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations allotments have been completed to the 37,685 citizens.
Three separate sales of the unallotted and timber lands were held during the year at which there were sold 898,083 acres for $4,474,867.
The work of surveying and appraising the surface of segregated coal and asphalt lands in these nations was not completed by December 1, 1912, the limit fixed by law and such work was, therefore, suspended on that date and not again resumed during the fiscal year.
The larger portion of the survey work was completed but the work of appraisement which was performed will have to be done over again, owing to the resignation of the appraisers, effective November 14, 1912, and to the fact that the schedules of appraisement submitted by them were not satisfactory and were not approved.
The work to be performed in these nations consists of the sale of the remaining unallotted lands and timber aggregating about 1,278,000 acres, all of which is located in the Choctaw Nation, except 7,839 acres in the Chickasaw Nation, now being advertised, the completion of the survey and appraisement of the surface of the segregated coal and asphalt lands aggregating about 432,000 acres and the sale of said surface after the work of appraisement is completed, which is now under way.
There will also remain the coal and asphalt deposits underlying these lands to be disposed of, which will require further legislation.
There are also in these nations about 2,250 town lots to be disposed of, various cemetery tracts, etc., to be conveyed to the proper parties, four tribal boarding schools in the Choctaw Nation, two tribal boarding schools in the Chickasaw Nation, the Choctaw capitol building at Tuskahoma, and various other minor tribal properties to be disposed of.
Unallotted land sold.
In the Five Civilized Tribes there were disposed of during the year ended June 30, 1913, a total of 900,175 acres of unallotted land, the purchase price being $4,494,683, making a total sale since the first sales in 1910 of 1,849,722 acres at a purchase price of $10,745,495.05, of which amount $5,315,785.46 has already been paid in, the deferred payments bearing 6 per cent interest from date of sale.
Coal and asphalt leases.
There are 109 tribal coal leases, covering 99,800 acres, and 7 asphalt leases, covering 4,960 acres, entered into from 1899 to 1902, running for a period of 30 years from date, covering portions of the segregated coal and asphalt lands in the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations, the royalty on coal being 8 cents per ton, mine run, and on asphalt 10 cents per ton for crude and 60 cents per ton for refined asphalt.
During the year 3,103,071 tons of coal and 4,752 tons of asphalt were mined.
The act of March 4, 1913, provided for leasing additional acreage of segregated coal lands to operators of coal mines, and regulations were prescribed on June 18, 1913, under said act.
No additional leases have been made up to June 30, 1913.
In February, 1913, the Bureau of Mines was charged with the duty of inspecting the physical operation of coal, asphalt, and other mines on tribal land and also mining operations on allotments of restricted Indians, and Mr. J. J. Rutledge, a representative of the Bureau of Mines, was stationed in Oklahoma for that purpose, with headquarters at McAlester.
Work to be done.
While the work of allotment and disposition of tribal property has been about completed, except as referred to above, there is a vast amount of detail work yet necessary to be performed, the importance and volume of which is not readily understood by one not familiar with such work.
It is necessary to complete the allotment plats, show thereon the sales of land, pay out the money necessary to equalize allotments, and make proper notation thereof on the records; in the case of deceased allottees ascertain the heirs or the persons entitled to receive payment, examine guardianship papers, etc., open up accounts with each purchaser of unallotted land, receive payment and compute interest on each installment, prepare patents as final payments are made, and in general complete the records in shape to be permanently filed, as such records will be the basis of all titles to land in the Five Civilized Tribes.
In performing this work it is necessary to make numerous field investigations, take testimony, etc., in addition to the actual work of advertising and selling the unallotted lands and remaining property of the tribes.
It will also be necessary when payment of tribal funds is to be made, after all tribal property is disposed of, or partial payment, if desired, to be made before that time, for rolls to be prepared showing the amount due each member.
Expenses of tribal governments.
The expenses of the tribal governments of the Five Civilized Tribes during the year, including tribal attorneys, amounted to $89,628.84.
At the present time the tribal government consists of the principal chief, or governor, with such clerical force as is necessary.
Practically no governmental functions are being exercised, the principal duties being to look after the interests of the tribe generally and execute conveyances, etc., until such time as tribal affairs are finally closed and the tribal government can be dispensed with entirely.
Tribal attorneys are also employed in each of the nations, except the Seminole, to represent the tribes in litigation affecting their interests, and during the past year the scope of the duties performed by said tribal attorney has been considerably enlarged by authoring them to take action in probate matters and generally to protect the estates of minors and dependent citizens from waste and dissipation.
Total receipts.
During the past year there was received $3,535,- 878.15, which was thereafter disposed of or accounted for, making a total of $7,071,756.30 handled by the commissioner's office pertaining to tribal affairs.
Work of Union Agency.
Matters affecting individual Indians of the Five Civilized Tribes within the restricted class are handled by the United States Indian superintendent at Union Agency.
Of the total membership of the Five Civilized Tribes, approximately 101,000, nearly one-third, are within the restricted class, which comprises all persons of one-half or more Indian blood.
The work in connection with these Indians includes the making of oil and gas and other leases, the collection, supervision, and disbursement of royalties therefrom, the removal of restrictions, sales of land, and the handling of the moneys derived from such sales for the benefit of the Indian.
A grand total of $9,968,363.90 was handled by the Union Agency during the fiscal year.
Also, much work of a general character is done, in placing Indian pupils in school, encouraging industrial advancement, providing better sanitary conditions, and making investigations and cooperating with State officials in probate and other matters affecting estates of minor and dependent citizens of the Five Civilized Tribes.
Probate matters.
According to the reports submitted, probate matters affecting minor Indian citizens of the Five Civilized Tribes are generally unsatisfactory, largely because of the great volume of such business in the local courts and the lack of State machinery and the defective or inadequate statutory probate procedure.
In some counties the reports indicate a deplorable situation, which every effort should be made to remedy.
The greater number of these probate cases involve the estates of part-blood Indians in the unrestricted class, where the department can give no affirmative relief, except in an advisory or assisting capacity, to the courts.
A bill regulating procedure in the probate courts, including deeds to the lands where the heirs are full-blood Indians, was introduced in the last legislature of the State of Oklahoma and its passage urged by the governor and the whole delegation in Congress, but failed.
During the past fiscal year the local representatives of the department in the Five Civilized Tribes and the tribal attorneys have cooperated with the probate courts in protecting the estates of minor and dependent citizens of the Five Civilized Tribes, with excellent results, so far as the funds available would permit.
It is estimated that there are fifty or sixty thousand living minors, members of the Five Civilized Tribes, many of whose allotments are valuable for oil and gas or other minerals.
Removal of restrictions.
During the past fiscal year 1,238 applications for removal of restrictions were made, and the records show that under the act of May 27, 1908, restrictions have been removed unconditionally on 109,375.21 acres, and conditionally on 221,743.71 acres.
In the latter case the land is sold and the proceeds disbursed for the benefit of the Indian, under the supervision of the department.
During the year 1,650 tracts of land, from which restrictions have been removed, were offered for sale, of which 735 tracts were sold, aggregating 51,817.89 acres, the consideration being $502,406.36.
Oil and gas leases.
Four thousand eight hundred and five leases, mostly oil and gas, were filed during the year, being a large increase over previous years.
The activity has been noticed in the oil and gas business during the year, owing to the discovery of new fields, and the increased price of oil.
The total oil and gas royalties received during the year, by the United States Indian superintendent for the benefit of Indian lessors, was $1,496,179.31, and 49,176,000 barrels of oil were sold from the territory of the Five Civilized Tribes, including leases on both restricted and unrestricted land.
Education.
Of the $300,000 carried by the Indian appropriation act of August 24, 1912, it is shown that $292,176.86 was paid to 2,284 school districts, at which there were enrolled 23,442 Indian pupils, and 2,284 freedman pupils.
This appropriation was made by Congress to assist the public schools of the State of Oklahoma within the territory occupied by the Five Civilized Tribes, for the reason that so much of the allotted land was not subject to taxation that sufficient revenue was not received from taxation to properly maintain schools.
A similar appropriation in the same amount is contained in the Indian appropriation act of June 30, 1913.
The superintendent urgently recommends a more aggressive policy for the education of Indian children, and particularly the rapidly growing class of full-bloods that are not officially recognized as Indians, and have no allotments, except as they may inherit.
He also calls especial attention to the condition of the health of the fullblood class, and based upon an investigation made by the Indian Medical Service recommends 'specific appropriations for sanitariums and medical assistance among these Indians, in the total sum of $75,000.
Needed legislation.
The work pertaining to the winding up of the tribal affairs of the Five Civilized Tribes is rapidly approaching completion, although it will be several years before all payments are finally made on unallotted tribal lands and other tribal properties sold or now being disposed of and the proceeds thereof, together with other moneys, which will aggregate many millions of dollars, can be distributed to the members of the different tribes entitled thereto.
First.
To equalize allotments by payment in money of various amounts to approximately 17,780 Creek citizens involving several million dollars.
Second.
Provision for the final disposition of the coal and asphalt minerals in the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations, reports pertaining to the valuation of which are contained in Senate Document No. 390, Sixty-first Congress, second session.
Third.
Provision to pay per capita payments to Indians from time to time from moneys on hand as the Secretary deems proper.
Fourth.
The disposition of 12 tribal boarding schools, together with the land reserved for each, which are now being maintained from tribal funds, or some arrangements made for the setting aside of specific amounts for their permanent maintenance in order that other tribal funds may be distributed.
With reference to the affairs of the individual Indian, Congress has provided that all lands allotted, including homesteads of allottees having less than half blood, including minors, shall be free from all restrictions and that all land, except homesteads, of those having one-half or more than half and less than three-quarters Indian blood, as shown by allotment records, shall be free from all restrictions, and that the restrictions on land allotted to all other enrolled Indians, including minors, may be removed wholly or in part by the Secretary of the Interior; therefore, no further legislation would seem advisable relative to removal of further restrictions, the Secretary of the Interior being authorized to release those now under the supervision of the department as he deems advisable.
Many of the restricted class of Indians, however, principally full bloods, are not living upon land selected by them and designated as their homesteads, which in the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations cover an average of 160 acres of land and in the other nations 40 acres each.
Legislation seems to be advisable to permit Indians, with the approval of the department, to change and have designated from their allotted lands not exceeding 40 acres for a homestead, which should be their home place and not be subject to lease, thereby insuring for such Indians a home.
Under existing law the allotted lands other than homestead of such Indians may be leased for five years, and the lands embraced in their homesteads for one year without the approval of the department.
As a result many Indians have leased their entire holdings for grossly inadequate rentals, and where leases are canceled or set aside for various reasons new leases are not infrequently made affording no better compensation.
The Commissioner to the Five Civilized Tribes renews the recommendation previously made by him that leases be approved by some local authority designated by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
Such action would result in better leases being obtained, lands properly cuitivated and improved and, by requiring portions of the revenues derived therefrom, as also from the proceeds of sales of portions.
Ample appropriation should also be made for the purpose of improving the sanitary and physical conditions of the more ignorant full-blood Indians.
Until land can be taxed and educational facilities provided by the State, liberal appropriation should be made and provided for the compulsory education of Indian children, especially full bloods.
In view of the fact that State probate courts have jurisdiction over estates and property of all Indian minors and as investigatiors made by the Creek and Cherokee national attorneys, and others under direction of the superintendent of the Union Agency, have conclusively shown that in some districts the estates of such minors are not being protected, and vast sums of money have been recovered during the past year through the Union Agency and tribal attorneys, the Commissioner to the Five Tribes suggests that Congress provide further appropriations for the better protection of the estates of restricted Indian minors and, if it is considered that Federal appropriations can not properly be made for such purposes in connection with estates of Indian minors no longer under control of the Government, that, where found advisable and desired by tribal representatives, tribal funds be used temporarily at least for the purpose of making necessary investigations and further assisting the county officials in protecting the estates of unrestricted minor Indians until the State legislature may enact laws insuring better protection.
Considering the extent of country embraced within the Five Tribes, the large population of white people, and the prevailing conditions, as shown by reports, it is apparent that some action along these lines is needed better to protect the interest of Indians who are under supervision of the department as well as certain classes of minors who are not.
Names on pension roll.
The pension roll bore the names of 860,294 pensioners of all classes at the beginning of the year.
There were 19,758 names added to the roll in the course of the year by original, restoration, and renewal allowances; and the names lost by death, remarriage, limitation, failure to claim for three years (sec. 4719, R. S.), and other causes numbered 59,852.
There was thus a net loss to the roll of 40,094 names, and the number borne on the roll at the close of the year was 820,200.
Of this number 503,633 represented persons who rendered service in the Army or Navy of the United States, including 328 Army nurses, the remaining 316,567 being the names of persons pensioned as widows and dependents.
First payments.
There were 433,995 first payments on new issues made during the year, carrying a total of $18,250,225.26.
The number of such payments made in the preceding year was 78,781, involving an amount of $4,096,502.81.
This increase in first payments was due to the large number of allowances under the act of May 11, 1912, increasing rates of pension to survivors of the Mexican and Civil wars, the names on the roll under said act being increased from 13,246 at the beginning of the year to 379,064 at the close, and some thousands more having been added and lost in the course of the year.
Unexpended balances of appropriation.
Disbursements for pensions.
The amount disbursed in the payment of pensions during the year was $174,171,660.80, an increase over the preceding year of $21,185,227, and over the highest expenditure of any year prior thereto (made in 1909) of $12,197,957.03, and the cost of administration of the bureau for the year, including the payment of pensions, was $2,543,246.59, an amount in excess of the cost for the previous year by $94,389.28.
These increases in expenditure for pensions and cost of administration are chargeable to the new legislation referred to in the preceding paragraph.
It is to be noted, however, that the latter item includes an expenditure of $274,433.45 from an appropriation of $300,000 made for the employment of temporary clerks during the year to expedite the settlement of claims filed under the new law.
The amount appropriated for the payment of pensions for the fiscal year 1914 is $180,000,000, and it is estimated that $170,000,000 will need to be appropriated for the fiscal year 1915.
The amount disbursed for pensions from July 1, 1790, to June 30, 1865, is given as $96,445,444.23.
The total of pension disbursements for the period from the latter date to June 30, 1913, is shown to be $4,461,094,380.45, and the cost of maintenance of the pension system for that period reached a total of $125,871,965.64, making the total expenditure on account of pensions from July 1, 1790, to June 30, 1913, with cost of maintenance as far as shown, $4,683,411,790.32, and the total paid out for pensions, exclusive of cost of maintenance, $4,557,539,824.68, of which amount $4,294,596,944.47 is charged to allowances made on the basis of services rendered in the Civil War.
Method of paying pensions.
Important changes in the method of paying pensions were prescribed by the act of August 17, 1912 (37 Stat., 311), in pursuance of recommendations made in the Commissioner's annual report for 1911.
The act provided for the establishment on February 1, 1913, of a disbursing office in the bureau to take the place of the 18 pension agencies, and also directed that not later than January 1, 1913, pensions should be paid in certain cases by checks drawn without separate vouchers or receipts.
These provisions were fully complied with, both as to the changes in method and the times when they should be in operation.
The first payment without vouchers was made for the quarter ended December 4, 1912, and the disbursing office was in full operation on February 1, 1913.
The changes were carried into effect without interruption in pension payments and without appreciable loss or damage to the records, machinery, and other equipment brought in from the pension agencies, notwithstanding they were required to be made concurrently and while the bureau was in the midst of the great volume of work incident to the adjudication of the half million of claims filed under the act of May 11, 1912.
Certificates issued.
There were 443,622 pension certificates issued during the year, as compared with 90,922 issued during the prior year and 328,676 issued in 1908—the largest output of any previous year in the bureau's history.
This increase in number of certificates issued was due to claims adjudicated under the act of May 11, 1912.
There were 504,938 applications filed under said act from the date of its approval to June 30, 1913, and 429,369 pension certificates were issued thereunder during that period, 894 of which were in original allowances.
The act was amended by an act approved March 4, 1913, to provide, among other things, that further increase of rate thereunder on account of advancing age should be made without further application by the pensioner, to commence from the date of his attaining the age entitling him to the increased rating.
In claims adjudicated since this amendment future ratings have been given in the certificates to take effect automatically when the pensioner shall attain the age entitling him thereto.
Applications filed.
The total number of applications filed during the year was 139,565, and 471,363 claims were adjudicated; 444,558 of these were admitted and 26,576 were rejected, while in 229 cases certificates were not issued because of there being no benefit to accrue to the claimant.
Payments to widows and minor children.
Orders for the payment to widows or minor children of pension accrued to date of death in the cases of deceased pensioners or claimants for pension were issued in 12,794 cases, and claims for the payment of pension so accrued as reimbursement of expenses of last sickness and burial were allowed in 5,710 cases during the year.
Special pension acts.
There have been 42,337 grants of pension made by special acts of Congress since 1861, and there were 22,016 of such grants remaining on the roll at the close of the year, having an annual value of $6,699,096.
Only a part of this value, however, attaches to the special act grants, as most of them provided merely increases in rates of pension previously granted under the general pension laws.
Offenses against the pension laws.
There were 61 cases of offenses against the pension laws presented to the Department of Justice for prosecution, and indictments were found in a like number.
There were 49 convictions secured in 51 cases brought to trial during the year, and there were 95 cases pending in the hands of United States attorneys at the close of the year.
Three civil suits were disposed of, two by judgments in favor of the Government and one by discontinuance at the instance of the United States attorney.
Two civil suits were pending at the close of the year.
The sum of $2,523.62 was recovered through refundments.
Bounty-land warrants.
During the year four original bounty-land warrants were issued, three for 160 acres each and one for 80 acres, in all 560 acres.
A duplicate of a lost warrant for 40 acres was also issued.
The total number of bounty-land warrants issued to the close of the fiscal year 1913 was 598,694, granting 68,792,830 acres.
Pensions on account of War of 1812.—The names of 199 widows of soldiers of the War of 1812 were on the roll at the close of the year.
The last surviving pensioned soldier of that war died in 1905.
The last surviving soldier of the Revolutionary War died April 5, 1869, and the last surviving widow of a soldier of that war died November 11, 1906.
Elsewhere in the table shown in the report of the office of the Assistant Attorney General the statistics concerning the work of the pension-appeal section during the past year are given in detail.
There were pending October 1, 1912, 806 undecided appeals and motions.
During the year 2,660 appeals and motions have been docketed, making in all 3,466 cases presented for decision.
Of these, 2,658 were disposed of, leaving 808 pending.
Contrasted with the work of the preceding year, the figures show a material increase in appeals filed, contrary to all expectations when the former board of pension appeals was abolished.
The report also shows extraordinary industry on the part of the section, numerically the same as in the preceding year, to keep current with the work.
Appeals and motions exceeding by 459 the number filed in the year ended October 1, 1912, while the number of cases decided outnumbered those in the preceding year by 767.
Despite this, there are now 808 pending cases as compared with 806 a year ago.
The reason is to be found in the recent increase in the number of appeals, beginning about the last of July, and especially during September.
If the increase is maintained there will be more than 4,000 cases presented for decision during the ensuing year.
Of the appeals, in 2,346 cases the action of the Commissioner was affirmed, in 228 reversed, and 21 appeals were dismissed.
Thus, in about 9 per cent of the appealed cases error was corrected.
But this relates merely to docketed appeals, cases in which the bureau did not recede from its adverse action.
Appeals are filed in the bureau, and under the rules the bureau has 30 days in which to report on each appeal.
It may recede from its adverse action and satisfy the contentions of the appellant.
It is only in those cases where it adheres to the action from which appeal is taken that the appeals are forwarded to this office and entered upon the docket.
Of the total number of appeals filed in the bureau last year there was recession from the adverse action in about 16 per cent of the claims; hence in one-fourth of the cases in which appeal was taken the appellants were benefited, either by the action of the bureau or by the action of the pension-appeal section.
In the estimates it is recommended that the board of pension appeals be reestablished.
The reasons were stated in the report for last year and in a note attached to the estimates.
The same reasons now exist, but with greater force.
The board was abolished on the theory that the appeals would be less and less.
There were but 532 cases pending at that time.
It has been necessary to retain on the work the same number of attorneys and medical men that constituted the board at the time of its abolishment.
Appeals have increased since the abolishment of the board, and, in face of the utmost industry, the arrears have correspondingly increased.
The reason for transferring the work to the Assistant Attorney General's office, where it is all finally reviewed by an attorney acting for the Assistant Attorney Generol, no longer exists.
The board should be reestablished.
There were received during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1913, 67,986 applications for mechanical patents, 1,930 applications for design patents, 172 applications for reissues, 7,053 applications for trade-marks, 926 applications for labels, and 344 applications for prints.
There were 38,754 patents granted, including reissues and designs, and 5,166 trade-marks, 664 labels, and 254 prints registered.
The number of patents that expired is 21,427.
The number of allowed applications which were by operation of law forfeited for nonpayment of the final fees was 6,970.
These statistics show a slight decrease in the volume of business during the last fiscal year, the total number of applications for patents for inventions, for designs, for reissue of patents, registration of trade-marks, registration of labels, and registration of prints, disclaimers to patents, and appeals on the merits is 80,084.
The total of all applications for the fiscal year immediately previous was 81,459 for the same period, which shows a decrease of 1,375 applications received.
The total receipts of the office were $2,082,490.23.
The total expenditures, including salaries, amounted to $1,924,459.42, and the net surplus over expenditures was $158,030.81, making a grand total of net surplus of receipts over all expenditures $7,290,103.57.
To account for the great difference in surplus between the fiscal years 1912 and 1913, the former being $74,823.49 and the latter $158,- 030.81, an increase of $83,207.32, attention is called to the fact that a single item of $65,000 was saved by the discontinuation of the printing of the library edition of copies of patents.
This large expenditure each year was found not to be justified in view of the fact that very few libraries subscribed.
There is an urgent and ever growing need for a new building for the Patent Office.
Plans for the accomplishment of this took definite form when an appropriation of $5,000 was made in the public buildings bill at the last session of Congress to be expended for the preparation of plans, and a commission was appointed, consisting of the Secretary of the Interior, the Commissioner of Patents, and the Supervising Architect of the Treasury, for the purpose of investigations as to available sites and other matters.
On April 1, 1913, the convention of the International Union for the Protection of Industrial Property becamc effective so far as concerned the adhering nations.
This convention, which was amendatory to the Paris convention of 1883, was signed at Washington June 2, 1911.
Ratifications have been deposited with the Department of State on behalf of the following Governments: Germany, Austria (including Hungary, Bosnia, and Herzegovina), Dominican Republic, Spain, United States, France, Great Britain, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Norway, Netherlands, Portugal, Switzerland, and Tunis.
All future ratifications of this convention are, under the provisions of the protocol, transmitted directly to the International Bureau at Berne.
The Commissioner of Education during the year established two new divisions, namely, the division of negro education and division of kindergarten education.
Negro education.
The division of negro education was established with the cooperation of the trustees of the Phelps-Stokes fund.
Besides a general preliminary study of schools for negroes in the South, it has made a first-hand study of the high, private, and industrial schools for colored people in Alabama, has collected a great deal of information regarding those schools, and is preparing a preliminary report thereon.
It has been able to render much assistance to persons making inquiries regarding the reliability of schools for negroes.
Kindergarten education.
The division of kindergarten education was established with the cooperation of the National Kindergarten Association on March 3; 1913.
It has made a survey of the status of kindergartens in public schools and of all other kinds of kindergartens in the United States.
In cooperation with the bureau a committee of 20 kindergarten training teachers has been created to assist in making a survey of kindergarten training schools with the purpose of formulating standards for such schools.
Colleges of agriculture and mechanic arts.
The reports of the colleges of agriculture and mechanic arts endowed under the acts of Congress of August 30, 1890, and March 4, 1907, were received and examined.
The expenditures were found to have been made for the purposes specified in the acts.
The total amount paid out by the Government for these institutions since 1890 is $33,802,000.
Fiftytwo institutions for higher education were visited by specialists of the bureau.
Several inspections were made at the request of the institutions, and detailed reports of the investigations were made to the officers of such institutions.
Rural education.
As a means for the improvement of rural schoolhouses, the bureau prepared, for lending purposes, six cardboard models of each of three different types of schoolhouses.
The demand for the loan of these models received from school officials, lumbermen, associations, health boards, normal schools, and others has been overwhelming, and it has been possible thus far to comply with only a very limited number of the requests.
This experiment has been so successful that the bureau must undoubtedly extend this service as soon as funds therefor can be made available.
In addition to this service, special advice regarding the construction of schoolhouses has been given to school officials in the States of Alabama, California, Florida, Georgia, Indiana, Kentucky, Michigan, Missouri, Nebraska, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia.
A special agent in school hygiene rendered valuable service to the International Congress on Hygiene and Demography held in Washington City in the fall of 1912, and had charge of the educational exhibit held in connection with the congress; he also rendered much assistance in the preparation of an exhibit for the International Congress on School Hygiene at Buffalo, N. Y.
The increase of the appropriation"for the investigation of rural education, industrial education, and school hygiene"rendered possible the more complete organization of the field work in rural education by the appointment of a chief of field service and three specialists, who were assigned to duty as follows: The chief of field service in charge of the work in Southern States, with headquarters at Richmond, Va.
Western States; and the third has charge of the work in the Eastern and Northern States.
These persons have made special studies of the condition of rural education in their several districts and have collected a large amount of information.
In the South the bureau has cooperated with the southern education board and the conference of education in the South, with the supervisors of rural education, and the directors of rural school improvement in the several Southern States, and has made a special study of the means by which the school terms are being extended, better preparation given teachers, and the standards of the schools improved.
One specialist and two collaborators were detailed to make a careful study of the rural schools of Denmark for the purpose of finding and reporting the means by which they have become such a vital element in the rural life of that country.
Three months were spent in going to Denmark and making personal inspection of typical rural schools.
The results of these studies will be published in a series of four or five bulletins and will form a valuable contribution to the literature of rural education.
The collector and compiler of statistics spent three months studying the schools of certain cantons and cities of Switzerland for the special purpose of reporting on the methods by which the work of these schools is adapted to the needs of the people, interpreting these methods in terms of American methods, and showing how they may be adapted to the conditions and needs of American schools.
The school systems of 21 cities in the United States were visited and studied.
Publications.
The publications issued by the bureau during the year included two volumes of the annual report, the annual statement of the Commissioner, 44 numbers of the bulletin, 3 numbers of the library circular, and 1 miscellaneous publication.
Of the abovementioned'bulletins 9 related to rural education and 4 to industrial education.
Teachers' salaries.
In cooperation with a committee of the National Education Association the bureau is prosecuting an inquiry into the subject of teachers' salaries in the United States.
Schools for natives of Alaska.
In Alaska 76 schools were maintained for the education of the natives, with an enrollment of 3,563.
The field force consisted of 5 superintendents, 106 teachers, 9 physicians, 9 nurses, and 3 hospital attendants.
The prosperity of the Hydaburg colony upon the tract on Prince of Wales Island, reserved for its use by Executive order, where the natives successfully conduct their own store and sawmill, caused the natives of Klukwan and Klawock, in southeastern Alaska, to desire a similar reservation upon which to conduct their own enterprises.
By Executive order a tract with an approximate area of 800 acres bordering the Chilkat River has been reserved for the exclusive use of the Klukwan natives.
Much of this land has agricultural value, and gardening will be systematically taught by the teacher of the United States public school.
The proposed reservation at Klawock is within the Tongass National Forest; arrangements are being made with the Forest Service for its reservation.
Medical work among natives of Alaska.
Among the most urgent needs of the natives of Alaska is protection against the diseases which prevail among them to an alarming extent.
Of the appropriation"Education of the natives of Alaska" for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1913, $32,000 was expended (1) in maintaining hospitals in rented buildings at Juneau and Nushagak; (2)/ in maintaining improvised hospitals in school buildings at Nulato and Kotzebue; (3) in payments under contracts with the Holy Cross Hospital at Nome, with the Fairhaven Hospital at Candle, and with the Cordova Hospital for the treatment of diseased natives upon the application of a superintendent, physician, or teacher in the Alaska school service; (4) in the employment of physicians and nurses in the hospitals and in field work in their respective districts; and (5) in furnishing medicines and medical books to the teachers for use in relieving minor ailments.
Dr. Krulish, of the Public Health Service, who made án investigation of the health conditions in the native settlements in southeastern Alaska, in western Alaska, on the Yukon River, and in the vicinity of Nome, states that, in his opinion, 15 per cent of the native population of Alaska is infected with tuberculosis in its varying forms, both active and latent, while in 7 per cent it is present in its active stages.
Trachoma, rheumatism, and venereal diseases also prevail to a considerable extent in many of the native villages.
An appropriation of at least $125,000 is needed to establish among the natives of Alaska an Alaska medical service with an efficient organization.
The good results already accomplished by the present inadequate medical service demonstrate that disease among the natives of Alaska could be eradicated if funds are provided for the establishment of well-equipped hospitals in important centers and for the employment of a sufficient number of physicians and nurses.
Reindeer service in Alaska.
The latest statistics regarding the reindeer service are those of the fiscal year 1912, according to which the total number of reindeer in Alaska June 30, 1912, was 38,476, distributed among 54 herds.
Of the 38,476 reindeer, 24,068, or 62.5 per cent, were owned by 633 natives; 3,776, or 9.8 per cent, were owned by the United States; 4,511, or 11.7 per cent, were owned by missions; and 6,121, or 16 per cent, were owned by Lapps.
The total income of the natives from the reindeer industry during the fiscal year 1911-12, exclusive of the value of the meat and hides used by the natives themselves, was $44,885.04.
In order to make the natives preserve and accumulate the reindeer intrusted to them and to preclude the possibility of the reindeer industry being taken from the natives, no native has been permitted to sell or otherwise dispose of female reindeer to any person other than a native of Alaska.
Strict adherence to this fundamental principle has built up for the natives of northern and western Alaska this industry, which is especially adapted to them and which affords them assured means of support.
There is grave danger that granting to the natives permission to dispose of female reindeer to white men would rapidly deprive the natives of their reindeer and destroy this great native industry, which is the result of 20 years of careful oversight and fostering care.
There is urgent need for the more rapid distribution of the reindeer in Alaska.
At the present time they are in restricted areas and their wider distribution is urged, so that they would be available as food in case of serious disasters affecting the food supplies of the inhabitants of Alaska.
Needs of the bureau.
Within the three years from July 1, 1910, to June 30, 1913, the work of the bureau has increased more than threefold, with an increase of only 20 per cent in appropriations.
With the present appropriation and equipment the bureau can attempt to do only a small part of the work for which it was established and for which there is urgent demand.
Necessary increases in salaries.
An assistant commissioner, who should also be a specialist in secondary education, and should serve as the chief of a high-school division of the bureau.
Additional specialists and clerks in higher education, including universities, colleges, schools of technology, schools of professional education, and normal schools, with particular emphasis on the need of a specialist to devote his entire time and attention to the colleges of agriculture and mechanic arts for negroes in the Southern States.
A considerable increase in the appropriation for the investigation of rural education, industrial education, and school hygiene, the present appropriation of $15,000 being wholly inadequate for this purpose.
The investigation of city school administration and education in city schools, which work the bureau is at present able to do only in a most meager and unsatisfactory way.
The investigation of the education of exceptional children, for which there is an urgent demand, but for which the bureau has now no apprcpriation.
The investigation of the education of adult illiterates and the dissemination of information as to the best methods of reducing the large amount of illiteracy of adult population in all parts of the country.
The investigation of school and home gardening in cities and manufacturing towns, and for dissemination of information as to how this important form of industrial education may be promoted by the cooperation of the school and the home.
The investigation of home education and the dissemination of information as to the best methods of the early physical, mental, and normal education of children in the home and the cooperation of the home and school for the education of children of school age.
A specialist in educational theory and practice, to serve as a director of investigations in education, assisting National, State, and local committees and commissions and making available for them the large collection of material in the library of the bureau.
A librarian and an assistant editor, the first of which is needed for the better care and use of the bureau's large collection of books, pamphlets, and reports on education, and the second because of the large increase of work in the editorial department.
Two additional translators, and for a specialist and two assistants in foreign and domestic systems of education, all of which are needed to enable the bureau to keep the people of this country informed in regard to the significant progress in education in other countries.
Two additional collectors and compilers of statistics, to enable the bureau to obtain prompt and accurate information for its reports.
Necessary additional clerks, copyists, laborers, and messengers.
An increase in appropriation for traveling expenses for the Commissioner and employees acting under his direction, which is necessary to enable them to make first-hand investigations of educational conditions in different parts of the country and to disseminate information by meeting with educational associations and other societies interested in education in different parts of the country.
Cooperative investigation and experiment in secondary and elementary education to enable the bureau to carry on, with the help of expert educators, important investigations and definite experiments in education under scientific control.
An increase of $400 in the appropriation for collecting statistics, etc., for which the present appropriation is inadequate.
The appropriation of $125,000 to enable the Secretary of the Interior, in his discretion and under his direction, and with the advice and cooperation of the Public Health Service, to provide for the medical and sanitary relief of the Eskimos, Aleuts, Indians, and other natives of Alaska, for which there is an imperative demand and which is necessary not only to the life and health of the natives but for the welfare of the white settlers as well.
That the various lump-sum appropriations be made available for personal services in the District of Columbia and elsewhere, without which the best results can not be had from the expenditure of these funds.
The scientific work of the Geological Survey has been continued along lines similar to those followed in previous years and the usual number of contributions have been made to the knowledge of geology and related subjects.
The appropriations for the work of the survey for the fiscal year 1913 aggregated $1,479,920.
During the last six years the field investigations and the attendant office work have shown a remarkable growth.
Notwithstanding the fact that during that period the former technologic branch of the survey has been independently organized as the Bureau of Mines, the survey is larger now than six years ago.
The personnel has increased more than onethird, the general correspondence more than two-fifths, and the distribution of reports and maps, including maps sold, practically onefourth.
The total cash receipts from sales of publications has increased three-fifths since 1907.
Notwithstanding these gains in every particular there has been a net loss in annual appropriations.
Because of the increasing pressure of work overtime service has become almost habitual in many of the divisions.
Many of the scientists average at least 10 per cent overtime, while in certain groups of the clerical force overtime throughout the year averages from 5 to 7 per cent, and in some instances 20 per cent for a month at a time.
A low average is also found in the record of annual leave taken, the amount for the year being 19 days, or scarcely two-thirds of the 30 days permissible.
In connection with this matter of overtime work and what may be considered a maximum output, it is believed that the limit has been reached and that a crisis now faces the work carried on by this bureau.
In other words, the activities imposed by Congress on the Geological Survey have been increasing faster than the appropriations provided therefor.
In short, the organization is undermanned and underequipped; overtime work is evidence of enthusiastic loyalty to the public service, but the strain is cumulative and the organization requiring it is bound to suffer.
The demand upon the survey for more work can not be checked, but the means to meet the demand can be provided.
A serious limitation upon economy in the administration of the Geological Survey appropriations results from the discordance between the fiscal year and the field season.
The necessity of making field plans and starting field projects on July 1, when'from two to three months of the natural field season have passed, involves not only great inconvenience but serious financial loss.
Congress has in some measure relieved this unnatural situation by making certain of the appropriations for the field service wholly or in part immediately available.
Yet even this plan fails to afford practical relief when, as in the last two years, the appropriation act was not finally passed until late in the year.
It is difficult to estimate closely the loss involved, but it is an actual money loss of large dimensions and represents a considerable proportion of the total appropriation.
Alaska Railroad Commission.
A special contribution was made by the survey to the work of the Alaska Railroad Commission, which was created by the Sixty-second Congress and charged with the investigation of transportation routes in Alaska.
The commission consisted of five members, and the survey geologist in charge of investigation of mineral resources in Alaska was named in the statute as one of the five.
Alfred H. Brooks was therefore designated by President Taft to serve as a member and was made vice chairman of the commission.
Mr. Brooks visited Alaska with the other members of the commission, leaving Washington September 3 and returning December 1, 1912.
The resulting report was submitted to the President and by him transmitted to Congress January 20, 1913.
Geologic surveys.
Investigations were continued in 45 States by a force of 140 geologists.
More than 60 per cent of the appropriation was expended in the public-land States.
Systematic detailed surveys of mining districts were continued in Alabama, California, Colorado, Georgia, Idaho, Missouri, Montana, Nevada, Tennessee, Utah, and Washington, and general and detailed geologic and paleontologic investigations were conducted in all parts of the country.
A large amount of geologic work was done in the coal and oil fields of the public-land States, while the search for commercial deposits of potash on the public lands was continued.
Alaska surveys.
The appropriation for investigations in Alaska was not made until August 24, 1912, and was reduced from $100,000 to $90,000 with the result that the work was much curtailed, the average length of the field season for the year being only 53 days, as against 110 days in former years.
However, 12 field parties were engaged in surveys and investigations during the year, covering 2,000 square miles by geologic reconnaissance surveys, 525 square miles by detailed geologic surveys, and 298 square miles by detailed topographic surveys.
Investigations of water resources and of special field problems in the important mining districts were also carried on.
Statistics of mineral resources.
The work of the division of mineral resources included the preparation of the report on the mineral resources of the United States for the calendar year ended December 30, 1912.
This report will complete the third decade of the work of this division, which was first authorized by Congress in 1882.
The reports constituting the volume are printed as advance chapters throughout the year as soon as the data become available.
On June 30, 1913, 33 of these chapters had been completed and transmitted to the printer.
These figures are compiled from individual reports received from over 60,000 operators and represent the output of between 75,000 and 100,000 mines, quarries, and wells.
In the collection of these figures the following States cooperated with the survey: Alabama, Georgia, Iowa, Kansas, Maryland, Michigan, Missouri, New Jersey, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Virginia, Washington, and Wisconsin.
The Mineral Resources volume, which is prepared under the direction of geologists who have specialized in the subjects treated by them, has come to be a yearbook of information concerning the mineral resources of the United States.
Not only are the figures of production, past and present, given, but the Nation's reserve or future supply is discussed, accompanied by general maps showing the areas in the United States producing the precious, semiprecious, and baser metals and the nonmetallic minerals.