NovEMBER 14, 1914.
Sir: Three things of unusual purport have marked the life of this department during the past year-the passing of the Cherokee Nation, the opening of Alaska, and the advancement of a series of measures aimed to promote the further development of the West.
These things are apparently unrelated, yet they have made an appeal to me as alike illustrative of the newness of our country, the novelty of its problems, and the responsiveness of our Government.
There is such a significance in these policies, they evidence a faith so robust, as to give them distinction.
And if it is true that "in America each is to have his chance," the events of this year are well designed to give a sure confidence to the Alaskans and those who look to that Territory as a land of opportunity, to the Indians and those who are concerned as to their future, to the home maker and miner of the West and all whose interests are allied with theirs.
On the 1st of last July the Cherokee Nation ceased to exist.
This act was the culmination of a treaty promise made over 80 years ago, extended by statute, and at last placed within administrative discretion.
The word of the white man has been made good.
These native and aspiring people have been lifted as American citizens into full fellowship with their civilized conquerors.
The Cherokee Nation, with its senate and house, governor and officers, laws, property, and authority, exists no longer.
Surely there is something fine in this slight bit of history.
It takes hold upon the imagination and the memory, arouses dreams of the day when the Indian shall be wholly blended into our life, and at the same time draws the mind backward over the stumbling story of our relationship with him.
The people of the great Sequoyah have lost their identity, yet— and this is a fact that all do not know—there are still several thousand of these American citizens for whom the United States stands to a greater or less degree in loco parentis.
We hold our hands upon the property and the private concerns of approximately onefifth of these "free people."
This seems to be an anomalous situation and prompts at once the inquiry, Has this Government a policy with relation to these people and the others of their race?
We have had three centuries of contact with the Indian.
Do we now know where we are leading him and what our own purpose is with regard to him?
Have we aught that may be openly declared as a definite and somewhat immediate aim toward which we can work with clear and unwavering purpose?
If we have such a policy it should be stated.
And this is for love of the Indian himself, who daily asks the question, "What is my future to be at the hands of the white man?"
That the Indian is confused in mind as to his status and very much at sea as to our ultimate purpose toward him is not surprising.
For a hundred years he has been spun round like a blindfolded child in a game of blindman's buff.
Treated as an enemy at first, overcome, driven from his lands, negotiated with most formally as an independent nation, given by treaty a distinct boundary which was never to be changed"while water runs and grass grows," he later found himself pushed beyond that boundary line, negotiated with again, and then set down upon a reservation, half captive, half protégé.
What could an Indian, simple thinking and direct of mind, make of all this?
To us it might give rise to a deprecatory smile.
To him it must have seemed the systematized malevolence of a cynical civilization.
And if this perplexed individual sought solace in a bottle of whisky or followed after some daring and visionary Medicine Man who promised a way out of a hopeless maze, can we wonder?
Manifestly the Indian has been confused in his thought because we have been confused in ours.
It has been difficult for Uncle Sam to regard'the Indian as enemy, national menace, prisoner of war, and babe in arms all at the same time.
The United States may be open to the charge of having treated the Indian with injustice, of having broken promises and sometimes neglected an unfortunate people, but we may plead by way of confession and avoidance that we did not mark for ourselves a clear course, and so,"like bats that fly at noon," we have"spelled out our paths in syllables of pain."
There are some three hundred thousand Indians in the United States.
This grand total includes all who are of Indian blood or who have been adopted into the tribes.
The census figure of 1910 shows an Indian population of 304,950, as contrasted, it may be noted, with a population in 1860 of 254,300.
These are for the most part wards in chancery, the Government being the chancellor.
They live in large part on reservations, which are little more than expanded and perhaps somewhat idealized orphan asylums.
They have lands aggregating in extent 109,150 square miles, or a territory equal to that of Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Kentucky, and Virginia, and worth, by rough estimate, $600,000,000.
Over two-thirds of this land is now held as individual farms, the unallotted or tribal lands being estimated as worth less than $200,000,000.
If an appraisement were made of the full value of the timberlands and of the oil and coal lands, and added to this was the value of the herds and personal property of the Indians, it is probable that they would be found to have a wealth approximating $900,000,000.
The function which this Government is performing for these Indians is to care for their personal welfare, supervise their business affairs, improve their property, hold their moneys, give education to their children, care for their sick, protect them from their enemies, and insure them against starvation.
This surely is doing much for a people who are richer on the average than the majority of our own people.
And, we ask, must this governmental activity persist?
Must this burden always rest upon the people of this country?
Is it for the benefit of the Indian himself that it should continue?
There are those who say that it should not last a single day.
The American conscience, however, our sense of justice, our traditions, in fact, will not permit the adoption of a drastic course that would cast the Indian upon a world for which he is ill prepared.
Yet I am of the opinion that it would be better, far better, to sever all ties between the Indian and the Government, give every man his own and let him go his own way to success or destruction, rather than keep alive in the Indian the belief that he is to remain a ward of the Government.
The advocates of the sink or swim policy may be reckless The advocates of the almshouse policy are surely doing harm.
Is there, then, no way out?
Must we go blunderingly on without goal and without policy?
The way out is gradually and wisely to put the Indian out.
Our goal is the free Indian.
The orphan-asylum idea must be killed in the mind of Indian and white man.
The Indian should know that he is upon the road to enjoy or suffer full capacity.
He is to have his opportunity as a"forward-looking man."
This is not my dictum, for the Government has been feeling its way·toward this policy for nearly 40 years.
This is the rationale of the whole of our later congressional policy, of the liberality of Congress toward the education of the Indian, of the allotment system, of limitations fixed upon disposition of property.
If the course of Congress means aught it means that the Indian shall not become a fixture as a ward.
It is the judgment of those who know the Indian best, and it is my conclusion after as intimate a study as practicable of his nature and needs, that we should henceforth make a positive and systematic effort to cast the full burden of independence and responsibility upon an increasing number of the Indians of all tribes.
I find that there is a statute which significantly empowers the Secretary of the Interior to do this in individual cases.
That authority is adequate.
And as soon as the machinery of administration can be set in motion I intend to use such authority.
If year by year a few from each of the tribes can be made to stand altogether upon their own feet, we will be adding to the dignity of the Indian race and to their value as citizens.
To be master of himself, to be given his chance—this is the Indian's right when he has proven himself.
And all that we should do is to help him to make ready for that day of selfownership.
It is a strange thing indeed that we should be concerning ourselves so largely and spending so many millions each year for the remaking of the people who are the truest of Americans.
It shows how anxious to be just and willing to be generous are our people.
They feel with a quick conscience how cruel it would be to introduce this primitive man into a harsh, competitive world of business with a code of its own more foreign to him than that of the Bushido; too much, they fear, like pitting Little Boy Blue against Shylock in a trade.
Let us frankly state the fact—there is such a thing as being too unselfish, and this the Indian too often is, for he has not gained a forecasting imagination.
His training has not given him the cardinal principle of a competitive civilization, the self-protecting sense.
It is not instinctive in him to be afraid of starving to-morrow if he is generous or wasteful to-day.
And work?
Why work if not necessary?
Is it not, as an Osage chief once reprovingly said to me, is it not the hope of every American that he may some day be a gentleman who does not work?
We are bent, then, upon saving the Indian from those who would despoil him until the time comes when he can stand alone.
And that time comes when he has absorbed into his nature the spirit of this new civilization that he has become part of.
This is certainly a revolution we are expecting—an impossible revolution in some natures—the substitution of a new standpoint for one long taught by fathers and grandfathers.
Truly such a transformation is not to be worked like some feat of legerdemain, by a turn of the wrist Bayonets can not do it; money can not do it.
We can force men to work.
We can keep them without work.
These two methods we have tried with the Indian, and they have failed in leading him toward the goal of responsible self-support.
Adaptation to new environment comes from education, through experience.
We therefore have the task of introducing a new conception into the Indian mind.
This is not a thing that can be done wholesale.
It becomes an individual problem, and our hope lies in schools for the young and in casting more and more responsibility upon the mature, and letting them accept the result.
What should the test be in passing upon the fitness of one who is to be sent out into the world?
Plainly his ability to handle himself, to care for himself so that he will not become a charge on the community.
To be a rich Indian is not a qualification, for his wealth may indicate, and generally does, nothing more than good fortune.
In the land lottery some drew prizes and some blanks.
Nor should the degree of blood be the test, nor education.
For many of those who are wisest in counsel and most steady in habits and sturdy in character are uneducated full bloods.
The man who can"do"for himself is the man to be released.
And he is the man who thinks not in terms of the Indians' yesterday but in terms of the Indians' to-morrow.
One whose imagination can take that leap and whose activities will not lag behind.
It is to be remembered that we are not looking for an ideal Indian nor a model citizen, but for one who should not longer lean upon the Government to manage his affairs.
There are many thousand Indians in our charge who are entirely self-supporting, capable, thrifty, farsighted, sensible men.
And singularly enough these are most often found among those tribes which were most savage and ruthless in making war upon the whites.
Some of these are indeed so farsighted that they do not wish to enjoy full independence because their property would then become subject to taxation.
Others are attached by a tribal sentiment and by the natural conservatism of the Indian to existing conditions.
Still others are held to governmental control in part because of the entanglement of their tribal.affairs.
The Government will not do its duty toward itself or toward these Indians until men of this class are fully released.1' There is a second class, made up of those willing to work but not knowing how, and a third class, of those who know how but have no tools.
For these there is help—the teacher farmer for the one and a small loan in the form of tools for the other.
There are those, too, for whom it is too great a jump to pass from hunting to farming, but who can herd cattle, and for these the Government is providing herds for their ranges.
Congress has been liberal in its appropriations for these things, and with a stable policy and administrative efficiency these Indians can be gradually lifted into usefulness, full self-support, and into entire independence.
Then there is the "proud" red man who idly clings to the traditions of his race and talks of its past with such dignified eloquence, declaring in one glowing moment against the injustice of requiring service from those who once owned the continent and in the next sentence pleading for rations.
This man is half brother to him who has degenerated under the orphanasylum system into a loafer.
My confidence is that for all these there is some hope, for most of them much.
But from what has been already said it will be perceived that in the direction of Indian affairs I believe it wisest to give our chief concern to those who are willing to work, who show evidence of a rudimentary ambition, and to convert the Bureau of Indian Affairs into a great cooperative educational institution for young and old, reducing to the minimum the eleemosynary side of its work and its trust functions.
It sounds trite, but it has its significance here, that it is not so important to conserve the wealth of a people as to develop their capacity for independence.
For the young the schools¹ are doing much, especially the day schools on the reservations.
By way of answer to those who are troubled at the neglect of the Indian it may be noted that since 1863 we have expended $85,000,000 in the education of the Indian.
Beginning with $20,000 a year, the annual appropriation for this purpose now reaches nearly $4,500,000.
Those schools are most useful in which emphasis is laid upon the industrial side of life.
There are no better schools, I am well advised, than many of our reservation schools, where each child is taught the rudiments of learning and to be useful in practical things—reading, writing, and arithmetic; how to plow and sow, hoe and harvest; how to build a house and shoe a horse, or cook a meal, make a dress and nurse a sick man or animal.
In one thing we are shortthe art of inducing ambition.
This largely depends upon the genius of the teacher to fire the imagination of the pupil, for, after all, the true teacher is an inspirer, and the only thing he teaches his people is to want something.
That is the first step in all civilization.
We need teachers in the Indian Service, men and women with enthusiasm and with sympathy, not learned but wise.
We are to control less and to help more.
Paternalism is to give way to fraternalism.
The teachers we need are helpers, farmers and nurses, who may not know how to write ideal reports but do know how to trust and secure trust There is no way by which an Indian can be made to do anything, but experience justifies the belief that there are many ways by which he can be led.
To turn the Indian loose from the bonds of governmental control, not in great masses, but individually, basing this action upon his ability to watch his steps and make his way, not in any fool's dream that he will advance without tripping, but in the reasonable hope that he will develop self-confidence as he goes along; to destroy utterly the orphan-asylum idea, giving charity only to the helpless and in gravest emergencies; to teach the Indian that he must work his way, that the Government will no longer play the part of Elijah's raven; to convert the young to our civilization through the creation of ambitions and desires which the blanket life can not satisfy; to organize each group of Indians into a community of sanely guided cooperators, who shall be told and taught that this Government is not to continue as an indulgent father, but as a helpful, experienced, and solicitous elder brother—this program we are adventuring upon.
It may be inadequate, but it is surely a long step on the road which the Cherokees took.
To carry out this policy there should be continuity of purpose within Congress and within this department.
The strength of the administration should be turned against the two enemies of the Indian—those who, out of sentiment or for financial reasons, keep the Indian's mind turned backward upon the alleged glories of other days and the injustices that have been done him, and those who would unjustly take from him the heritage that is his.
The demands now being urged that reservations shall be broken up to make way for white men who can use the lands to better advantage should be resisted, unless it can be shown that the Indians under proper stimulus will not use these lands, or that by the sale of a portion the Indians would be enabled to make greater use of the remainder.
The Indian is no more entitled to idle land than a white man.
But speculation is not use; and the Indian must be regarded as having the first call upon the lands now his, at least until white men are willing to surrender their lands when not used.
Idle Indians'upon idle lands, however, must lead to the sale of the lands, for the pressing populations of the West will not long look upon resources unused without strenuous and effective protest, and the friend of the Indian who would give him his 'chance and would save for him his property is he who keeps in mind the thought of his future instead of his past, and that future depends upon his willingness to work.
In my report of last year I suggested a series of measures for the development of western resources which I thought consonant with the advancing spirit of our time and would meet the demand of the West.
There were five of these measures, one providing for a Government railroad system in Alaska; an Alaskan coal-leasing bill; a new reclamation act; a bill providing for a new method of opening and developing coal, phosphate, oil, and potash fields, and a waterpower bill.
All of these measures have passed the House of Representatives, and the first three also passed the Senate and by your approval have become law.
I feel that it is conservative to say that by the passage of these bills the Federal Government has given to the more remote States greater assurance of its interest in their welfare than has been given for many years.
Hope has again come to the heart of the waiting Alaskan in the promise of a railroad that shall pierce the mountains of the coast and reach the great interior of this beautiful and promising land.
The commission of engineers appointed by you to survey possible routes, which has with·its force spent the summer in Alaska, has already returned, and will in a short time submit to you its plans and surveys upon which may be based a conclusion as to the route and character of the railroad to be built.
Four coast points have been considered as possible termini: Cordova, from which now runs the Copper River and Northwestern Railroad, which could be extended northerly through the Chitina Valley to the Tanana; Valdez from which now runs an excellent Government road, extending through the Chitina Valley to Fairbanks; Portage Bay, on the west coast of Prince William Sound, where no settlement now exists but which could be connected with Turnagain Arm by tunnel and so on northerly through the Susitna Valley to Fairbanks; Seward, from which now extends the Alaska Northern for 72 miles to the eastern end of Turnagain Arm.
Although the bill authorizing this work did not become law until March 12, 1914, the Commission of Engineers had been appointed, their subordinate engineers and other employees had been selected, their horses, supplies, boats, and outfits had been bought, and they were in Alaska and at work by the earliest day in summer when their work could be undertaken.
Congress supplemented its railroad bill by the passage of another act of no less significance, a bill providing for the leasing of the great coal fields of Alaska.
As this is virtually the first bill to pass Congress authorizing the leasing of any of our resources, it may be well to outline its provisions.
It first provides for a survey of the coal lands of Alaska, preference to be given to the Bering River, Matanuska, and Nenana fields.
These fields would doubtless supply the needs of the far West for many years if made accessible.
The Nenana field is some 30 miles from Tanana River and could feed the great interior, while the Matanuska is but a short distance from Cooks Inlet on the coast, and the Bering River field is near Controller Bay and the city of Cordova.
In the two best fields (Matanuska and Bering River) a reservation is to be made for the Government, not alone to supply the needs of our ships, but to be operated in the event that the price of coal is raised to such a figure by monopoly as to make this of public value.
The surveys are to be in 40-acre blocks, and the leases are not to exceed 2,560 acres, which is the average coal operation of the United States.
As a coal mine under modern conditions is much more than a tunnel or a.shaft, requiring a plant costing from a quarter to half a million dollars, it was necessary to make the acreage large enough to justify such an expenditure.
The leases are to be awarded through competitive bidding or otherwise, under general regulations made by the Secretary of the Interior, with a minimum royalty payable to the Government of 2 cents a ton and an annual rental of from 25 cents to $1 per year per acre applicable on the royalty.
This last provision as to rental is to make it onerous to hold land undeveloped.
The leases are to be for not more than 50 years, subject to renewal on new terms.
The utmost care was taken by Congress to guard against monopolization of the fields.
Railroads are not permitted to hold more of these lands than will supply their own needs.
Leases may be transferred only with governmental consent.
No one may be a shareholder or otherwise have an interest in more than one holding.
And for violation of its general and specific prohibitions criminal penalties may be imposed.
Provisions against waste and for care in the operation of the mines are required in each lease.
The safety and welfare of the miners are safeguarded, and an eight-hour day for underground workers is specified.
Wages shall be paid twice a month, and the company store as a compulsory base of purchase is frowned on.
The miners are to be insured the fair and just weighing of the coal mined, and other measures may be provided in the leases which may be needed"for the protection of the interests of the United States, for the prevention of monopoly, and for the safeguarding of the public welfare."
Leases may be forfeited by appropriate proceedings in court for noncompliance with the provisions of the lease or of general regulations, and the lease may provide for enforcement of other appropriate remedies for breach of specified conditions therein.
To care for the strictly local and domestic needs for fuel, provision is made that a limited license or permit, for 10 acres and running for not more than 10 years, may be granted to any person without payment of royalty.
As Alaska contains many scattered coal veins easily accessible from mines and towns this is a provision that it is thought will make for general relief.
Having provided in this manner here most generally stated against those conditions which have arisen within the United States and which have threatened Alaska, Congress has restored the coal lands of Alaska to the world's use.
Just as Congress is advancing funds for the Indians with which to buy cattle and horses and plows, and thus make their other assets available and eventually make them self-supporting, so Congress also by this bill and by its Alaskan railroad bill takes a long step toward making Alaskan resources so available as to pay Alaska's cost of development.
As in my report of last year, I again suggest that there is but one businesslike and adequate way of dealing with the removed affairs of so great a territory, and that is by the creation of a new piece of administrative machinery, which I have designated descriptively as an Alaskan development board.
Alaska should be administered as a unit by men upon her soil.
In a report sent to Congress I have shown the confusion and curious admixture of official functions which now obtain as to Alaskan matters—a veritable Babel of official voices.
There is no reason that appeals to me against placing all the internal resources of that Territory under the supervision of a commission of presidential appointees, who will give a constructive note to this work and advance the interests of Alaska by prompt and farsighted administration of the policies which Congress shall declare.
There is to be a large movement toward this new land in the next few years; it has, indeed, already begun.
To gather into one sheaf the powers now so widely scattered among various departments would make for the efficient management of the Government's interests and give form to the faith that the Federal Government is to have a continuing policy of concern for the affairs of the Territory.
The chief purpose of this law is to make it easier for the pioneer farmer on a reclamation project to bring his land into full yielding.
The time for the payment of the farmers' indebtedness to the Government was extended from 10 to 20 years.
Thus, by reducing the annual installments paid for water rights, the settler may be enabled to level his land, secure the necessary farm implements and cattle, and in general given an opportunity to take from the land enough to pay for his water rights and live.
The Government had placed its projects at points distant from markets.
This arose from the desire to bring within such projects as large a body of Government land as possible, which could not be found near well-settled sections.
The result was the attraction of men of small means, whose hopes far exceeded their realizations.
By passing this extension act Congress remedied a mistake it had made 12 years before, when the original bill was enacted.
A"hard" Government could have forced payments upon many projects within the time originally fixed.
It could have had its bond.
But it would not have been a wise Government, for it would have held back the development of the projects and reduced to a minimum their service to a country which with its growing population needs every acre put to use.
There are other provisions of this act which will make for the fuller use of the land, not the least important of which is one which it is hoped will compel cultivation of private holdings and no longer permit their being held for speculation.
It had been my hope at this time to lay before you a plan or plans for the greater extension of the work of reclaiming the arid West.
Some of these States richest in possibilities, which without doubt will in the future maintain dense population, must await the day of further irrigation.
It is a misfortune to them that war has come upon Europe and closed the sources of those streams which reach even into the farthermost and most arid parts of America.
In conjunction with the governors of the Western States there has been formed an interstate irrigation commission.
This body contains men of sagacity and high purpose, who have at heart the developing of a practicable plan of financing other great reclamation projects, to be constructed, perhaps, by the cooperative effort of the States with the Federal Government.
Such plans, however, are not for this day.
And this leads to a consideration of those bills for western development which have passed the House but not the Senate—the general leasing bill, so called, and the power bill.
Through these the wise development of the natural resources may be secured, and the reclamation fund which is annually diminishing with the sale of the public domain may, particularly through the general leasing bill, secure a much needed replenishing.
These measures commended themselves so heartily to the favor of the House of Representatives that they were both passed without a roll call.
Alaska out of Alaskan resources, so these bills aim to make available for the upbuilding of the West through irrigation whatever moneys may come out of their enactment.
The reclamation fund in the first instance is to have these moneys and later such revenue is to be divided in equal portions between the States whence the resources come and the Federal Government.
Had there been such a law during the past 10 years it has been estimated that the United States could have had for reclamation work not less than $50,000,000 as a 10 per cent royalty upon the oil produced from Government lands.
These measures come from a real need.
Existing law is not fitted for the uses to which it is put.
Water power will not be developed under a revocable permit law.
Capital asks more insurance against arbitrary action.
The West needs water power.
There are many sites held in reserve which should be used.
Development, however, will not take place until a law is passed which will give such promise of safety to the investor as a reasonable man may ask.
The Ferris bill will meet this need, for it gives a 50-year lease of the Government site or other needed Government lands.
At the end of that period, however, the Government may take over the plant, paying for the right of way, water rights, and lands only their actual cost and for all other property (excepting franchise or good will) its reasonable value.
This provision saves to the people the invaluable right of taking back their own if experience proves it to be wise to do so.
This bill does not give to the engineer-promoters who represent great syndicates of capital all that they wish, for they ask a permanent right to lands or their use practically without condition.
I take it, however, that the day for granting such favors has passed.
It is the judgment of men of wide experience that this bill will bring development where power is needed.
The general leasing bill is called for chiefly by the existence of certain absurdities in our laws—making the placer law applicable to the entry of oil lands, for instance.
The oil developers of this country, who are among the most venturesome of modern miners, need the protection of a law against their own kind.
It is hard to know when one has a good title, and oil men would welcome the enactment of this measure.
The Government is to-day prosecuting men for violating the law in taking up, through "dummies," more than the 160 acres allowed.
The real defense of these men is that 160 acres is not enough for a modern mine, and they are right.
Perhaps if men are given an opportunity to lease the lands they will not risk the embarrassments of prosecution.
And the Government might appear more fair in giving the alternative of purchasing a small amount or leasing more.
The only other minerals covered by this bill are phosphates and potash.
Of the former we know that our supply in the West is most extensive and altogether untouched.
Some day these phosphates will be as valuable as water power, for each year the western land calls more strongly for the restoration of its substance.
For potash in commercial quantities we are now making a strenuous hunt.
There can be no argument for these measures or against them which was not made before the House Committee on the Public Lands or the House itself, and their passage commends them to the mind as expressive of a practical policy which the country will find increasingly advantageous.
While it is matter of the largest concern that the Government should be wise in determining what its policies for the future shall be, it is, I respectfully submit, a matter of no less moment that its administration of the law that already is shall be responsive to the needs of the people.
I would therefore present to your eye in succinct form a picture of the effort that this department is now making to so administer existing law as to stimulate confidence in the Government and a cheerful acceptance of its policies.
It can not be unknown to you that there is throughout the country, more especially in the Western States—which because of their ambition are naturally impatient of obstruction—a very real fear of what is called “the bureaucracy of Washington.
This is said to be a "system" or organized machine, the spirit of which is to oppose action or to effect negative action.
It is visualized as either cynical or malevolent, altogether out of sympathy with those who needs must come to the Government for some form of help, and so wound round and round with the red tape of officialdom as to resemble a barbed-wire entanglement which, if not absolutely impregnable, is only to be passed through after much suffering and toil.
It is a matter of no immediate concern how much basis there is for this belief.
The presence of the belief makes it a real problem, and the destruction of the belief a necessity, if the Government itself is to remain an object of pride and its beneficent efforts understood and appreciated.
How sincere the attempt made by the men and women of this department to put at rest any such notion is attested by the statements that follow of the things accomplished, the plans made, and the policies inaugurated by our various bureaus during the past year.
Almost every line of this straightaway record has to me an uncommon and vital interest, for it tells of the making of homes, the saving of lives and fortunes, the rise of industries, the struggle after hidden resources and the measuring of those known, their preservation, and their utilization.
To shorten the time in which a patent may be secured, either for an invention or a homestead, may not be as picturesque an achievement as to build a railroad or divert a river onto a parched plain, but they measure alike in the effort to so serve this Government that "in America each is to have his chance."
1. Reduced the delay in acting upon homestead final proofs by 50 per cent.
2. Surveyed more than 17,000,000 acres of public lands at a cost of less than 4 cents an acre for field work, the lowest record of cost for such work ever made.
3. Lessened delays in handling right of way, power, and Carey Act matters from former period of 6 or 8 months to about 30 days.
4. Eliminated approximately six months' delay in acting on applications for surveys.
5. Administered the exclusion from national forests and the restoration to entry of nearly 4,000,000 acres of public lands.
6. Issued statement of unappropriated public lands by counties in July instead of October.
7. Issued 73,999 patents covering 14,391,071 acres of land, as compared with 63,496 patents covering 12,678,076 acres in 1913.
8. Approved over 4,900 forest and reclamation homesteads and miscellaneous entries, as against 2,800 in the preceding year.
9. Patented 10,000,635 acres under the homestead laws, or 2,680,577 acres more than in 1913 in addition to 1,145,483 acres of commuted homestead.
10. Patented 6,645,046 acres under the three-year homestead law, as against 3,500,388 acres in the year before.
11. Examined 80,653 original homestead and desert-land entry papers, as compared with 67,274 examined in the previous year.
12. Restored to entry 516,000 acres of land embraced in fraudulent or erroneous entries.
13. Investigated and reported on more than 22,000 cases in the field.
14. Won 160 civil suits for cancellation of patents.
15. Conducted business of 99 local land offices, including payment of salaries and commissions of registers and receivers, for $36,775.46 less than in previous year.
16. Made effective elimination of 831 withdrawals for administrative stations in national forests, opening thereby to forest homestead entry 150,698 acres.
17. Reorganized procedure for surveys within railroad landgrant limits, making possible the survey of about 1,250,000 acres durthe field season of 1914, as against about half that amount during the previous field season.
1. Completed detailed geological surveys covering 12,000 square miles, including 180 square miles in Alaska, and reconnoissance geological surveys of 57,000 square miles in the United States and 6,500 square miles in Alaska, the total territory surveyed geologically during the year being as great as the combined area of Denmark, Switzerland, and Greece.
2. Made topographic surveys covering 23,000 square miles in the United States, 6,000 square miles in Alaska, and 342 square miles in Hawaii, or an area more than the Netherlands and Belgium combined.
3. Continued stream gauging at 1,400 stations in 39 States, Alaska, and Hawaii.
Designated as nonirrigable and open to entry under the enlarged homestead act, 33,000,000 acres in 12 States, or enough land to make 100,000 homesteads of 320 acres each.
Examined and classified 2,400,000 acres of Indian lands and 1,700,000 acres of withdrawn phosphate lands.
Restored to entry nearly 9,000,000 acres of land of all kinds previously withdrawn for classification, including 8,275,000 acres of coal-land withdrawals, of which 1,300,000 acres were appraised and made available for purchase as coal lands, 188,000 acres determined not to contain oil, 260,000 acres classified as nonphosphate, and 90,000 acres decided not to be essential to water-power development.
Caused the withdrawal of a total of 752,500 acres, including 209,000 acres of oil lands, 170,000 acres of phosphate lands, 92,000 acres as possibly containing potash, 183,000 acres reserved for waterpower sites, and 75,000 acres of public water reserves.
5. Made its annual census of mineral production through correspondence with about 90,000 mineral producers.
1. Returned to the Treasury $7,658,572.87 of the amount appropriated by Congress for the payment of pensions.
2. Reduced the total expenditures for pensions from $174,171,660.80 in the preceding year to $172,417,546.26.
3. Saved nearly half a million dollars in the total cost of maintenance and expense of the pension system, including salaries.
4. Reduced the number of employees of the bureau by 145 persons without the removal from the office of a war veteran or soldier's widow.
5. Saved to pensioners about a million dollars formerly spent for the execution of vouchers, by abolishing the voucher system of paying pensions.
6. Improved the method of paying pensions so that each pensioner receives his check on the exact day when due, instead of waiting in some cases from 10 to 15 days as formerly.
7. Reduced the number of pending claims from 83,581 to 27,521, and made it possible to give almost immediate attention to all communications received.
1. Stored enough water in its various reservoirs to make a lake 50 miles long, 15 miles wide, and 10 feet deep.
2. Diverted 4,000,000 acre-feet of water (a stream equal in volume to the Hudson River where the Mohawk enters it) and irrigated 700,000 acres on 16,354 farms, an area equal to that of Rhode Island.
These farms provided homes and occupation for 61,253 people and produced crops valued at $15,732,000, or about $25 per acre.
3. Began and completed 479 miles of irrigation canals, 115 miles of drainage and waste-water ditches, 80 miles of irrigation and drainage pipe line, 536 bridges, and 1,022 culverts; laid in dams and other irrigation works enough concrete to build more than 2,000 miles of city sidewalks 6 feet wide and 3 inches deep; manufactured 500,000 barrels of sand cement; constructed 3 miles of dikes and 27 miles of railroads, 17 miles of electric-transmission lines, 45 miles of telephone lines, 36 miles of wagon roads, and 120 buildings.
4. Maintained and operated 7,130 miles of irrigation canals, which, if in one continuous canal, would reach in an air line from Palm Beach, Fla., to Fairbanks, Alaska.
5. Excavated 14,000,000 cubic yards of earth and stone.
6. Protected 144,000 acres of irrigated lands against water logging by construction of drainage ditches and underground drains.
7. Brought 110,813 acres of additional lands under irrigation, and made 60,000 acres more susceptible of irrigation.
8. Opened 4,000 acres of land to homestead entry under the reclamation law.
9. Initiated cooperation between Reclamation Service and States of Oregon, California, and Washington in construction work.
10. Inaugurated system of cooperation with Department of Agriculture to promote better farming on projects, for the study of farm credits, and promotion of organizations for improving grading, branding, and marketing of farm products.
11. Initiated new policies of supervision under reorganization of service, by which heads of five divisions comprise a commission for management of service.
12. Cooperated with governors of irrigation States in creation of Interstate Irrigation Commission.
13. Reduced the ratio of general expenses from an average of 9 per cent during the preceding three years to less than 6 per cent during the calendar year 1914.
14. Introduced a policy of publicity, keeping the water users informed of how their money is being spent, and of cooperation with the water users in the determination of new policies affecting their projects.
1. Promoted Indian stock raising and improvement of stock breeds by the purchase of 267 stallions, 1,048 bulls, 12,272 heifers, 2,510 steers, 3,738 cows, 2,110 mares, 469 rams, 513 sheep, 670 horses, and 67 mules, at a cost of nearly a million and a half dollars.
2. Began an aggressive campaign for stamping out trachoma and tuberculosis and improving health conditions, including the construction of many hospitals.
3. Initiated a more strenuous movement for encouraging industry and self-support among Indians.
In this effort the Indians are being discouraged from leasing their grazing lands and urged to farm and use their own lands.
Tribal herds have been started, and 450.
4. Increased the Indian revenues from rentals of oil and gas lands on the Osage Reservation in Oklahoma by competitive bidding for leases, and generally by the enforcement of modern methods for preventing waste in the drilling and operation of oil and gas wells.
5. Approved allotments of 452,921 acres of land to 4,066 Indians; sold 90,768 acres of land for $1,652,815; approved 1,148 applications for patents in fee to lands aggregating 152,404 acres.
6. Inaugurated an aggressive campaign for the protection of the property of Indian minor children in Oklahoma to correct a deplorable condition theretofore existing; suggested rules of probate procedure which were adopted by the courts and have been enforced with gratifying results.
7. Formulated a plan for the protection of the water rights of the Indians, insuring wise and economical use of the tribal funds in connection with irrigation expenditures.
1. Invented and applied methods for extracting radium from the carnotite ores of Colorado and Utah with greater efficiency than is attained by any foreign producer of radium and at an indicated cost of less than one-third the present selling price.
2. Developed the fact that the annual value of the by-products wasted in present methods of making coke in this country amounts to $75,000,000, and conducted investigations looking to the use of better methods of making coke and the upbuilding of by-product industries.
3. Saved $200,000 or more to the Government in purchase of coal through the use of the specification method of buying coal on the basis of its content of moisture and ash and its heating value, and the selection of fuels best adapted to certain power plants.
4. Through an expenditure of not more than $15,000 in investigations and demonstrations, has been instrumental in saving natural gas valued at $15,000,000 during the last 18 months.
5. Conducted investigations and experiments with petroleum with a view to increasing efficiency in the petroleum industry, in which preventable wastes and losses in the development of oil fields and in transporting and storing oil are fully $50,000,000 yearly.
6. Carried on tests for perfecting"permissible" lamps, electric motors and switches, and other safety devices, which, if generally used in mines, can not fail to greatly reduce the number of fatal and other accidents.
7. Designed and demonstrated devices for arresting dust explosions in coal mines.
8. Was first in bringing about the use of "permissible," or relatively safe, explosives, of which more than 25,000,000 pounds were used last year in many gaseous and dusty coal mines, with a corresponding reduction of the danger of explosions.
9. Rescued men after disasters; trained over 8,500 miners in rescue or first-aid methods; was instrumental in greatly increasing the number of rescue and first-aid corps equipped and maintained by mining companies.
Nearly 25,000 miners have received this training, and more than 12,000 sets of rescue apparatus have been purchased by private companies.
More than 3,000 men were killed and more than 100,000 men were injured in the mining and metallurgical industries of this country during 1913. The money loss from these accidents is estimated at not less than $12,000,000, and hundreds of millions of dollars were lost or wasted from not employing efficient methods of mining and treating ores and minerals.)
1. Made a comprehensive study of recent developments in higher education in England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales; of the preparation of teachers for secondary schools in Germany, France, and Great Britain; of the methods of teaching English and sciences in American high schools, and of standards of colleges and secondary schools in the United States.
2. Made and published a digest of all school legislation and judicial decisions affecting schools and education in the United States within the last three years, and began a complete digest of all the school laws of all the States.
3. Prepared and published bulletins on health teaching and on the better care of health of school children, and a bulletin on rural schoolhouses and grounds, and gave direct assistance to State and city school officers and college boards of education in all parts of the country in planning schoolhouses and grounds.
4. Visited 500 rural schools, participated in 100 rural-school conferences, studied rural high schools and agricultural schools in 15 States, visited rural schools in England, Scotland, and Ireland, and studied the rural-school systems of these countries.
5. Investigated 400 schools for negroes in eight Southern States, and studied elementary and secondary education for negroes in the South.
6. Made a comprehensive study of kindergartens in the United States, the relation of kindergartens to the elementary schools, the results of kindergarten work, and the preparation of teachers in kindergarten training schools.
7. Made a study of illiteracy among the foreign population of three States, and is devising means for the elimination of illiteracy among the adult population.
8. Provided schools for the natives of Alaska, cared for their health, and gave relief from the effects of storm, flood, and epidemic diseases.
9. Increased its activities by organization of divisions for the study and promotion of home education, for instruction in civics and citizenship, and for the education of immigrants, and made provision for divisions for the study and promotion of agricultural education, education in trades and industries, education in home economics and for home making, and for horticultural education and home gardening directed by the schools in cities, towns, and manufacturing communities.
1. Replaced military troops with civilian rangers in several parks.
2. Admitted automobile to parks where condition of roads makes motoring safe.
3. Gave better protection to park timber from fire through cooperation with Forest Service.
4. Cooperated with Good Roads Office of the Department of Agriculture in beginning of comprehensive surveys by experienced engineers for systems of roads and trails through parks, at reduced cost of construction.
5. Made sanitary inspections of the larger parks, and began work looking to protection from pollution of drinking water, proper disposals of sewage, and enforcement of hygienic regulations necessary to protect the health of visitors.
6. Improved hotel and camp facilities for visitors in several parks, and made a 20 per cent reduction in transportation rates from the western entrance of Yellowstone Park.
7. Increased efficiency and reduced cost of superintendence by the appointment of a general superintendent and landscape engineer for all the parks, and the gradual superseding of superintendents of the several parks with park supervisors at lower salaries.
1. By change of method has enabled an applicant to secure a patent in two-thirds of the time that formerly was necessary.
In order to do this the office has acted upon 19,873 more old cases and 1,368 more new ones than had been acted upon during the preceding year.
2. From January 1, 1914, to November 14, 1914, granted 4,703 more patents and sent to issue 11,257 more applications than in the same period of 1913.
3. Substantially reduced the accumulation of pending applications.
4. Increased the surplus receipts of the office for the fiscal year from $158,030.81 in 1913 to $240,856.43 in 1914.
5. Accomplished these results without increasing the office force.
Secretary.
Although it appears from the foregoing that the total number of arrears on October 1, 1914, is 5,140 in contrast with 3,305 the previous year, this is entirely due to the remarkable increase in the number of appeals filed in pension cases—a matter discussed under the caption of "Appeals in pension and bounty land claims."
The gratifying feature suggested by the figures lies in the marked reduction of arrears in the appeal cases affecting public lands, wherein a gain of over 500 has been made.
On October 1, 1913, there were 2,194 cases pending on appeal and 123 on rehearing.
On October 1, 1914, 1,642 were pending on appeal and 100 on rehearing.
This curtailment is in part due to an increase in the number of cases decided.
The fact that during the past year the office has been relieved of the review of abstracts of title in connection with the work of the Reclamation Service has contributed somewhat to this accomplishment, but it is largely due to the change in the method of disposing of certain cases—cases where the decision of the Commissioner of the General Land Office has been found so carefully and fully to set out the essential facts and the law applicable as to make it unnecessary to do other than to affirm the judgment formally.
A thorough and cautious examination of such cascs here makes this plan feasible.
The saving accomplished is in the elimination of a great deal of transcription and other work entailed by the former method of an extended opinion in each case.
This saves much time both to the clerical and law force and renders easier the problem of keeping the work of the small stenographic force current with that of the attorneys.
During the year 17 cases against the department in the courts sitting in the District of Columbia, in which the Assistant Attorney General has been charged with the defense of the Secretary or his officers, have been disposed of successfully save in two cases, and in one of these petition for rehearing is pending.
Two of these cases were in the Supreme Court of the United States, 4 in' the Court of Appeals, and 11 in the Supreme Court of the District.
Fifteen cases are now pending in the Supreme Court of the District and 2 in the Supreme Court of the United States.
The total area of public and Indian lands originally entered and allowed during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1914, is 16,522,852.12 acres, an increase of 655,629.67 acres as compared with the area entered during the year 1913.
The area patented during the fiscal year is 14,391,071 acres, an increase of 1,712,995 as compared with the fiscal year 1913.
Of the above area, 10,000,635 acres was patented under the homestead law, an increase of 2,680,577, not including homesteads—22,129 patented as soldiers'additional entries.
The decrease in receipts and increase in area disposed of is caused by the decreased number of homestead entries commuted to cash and the increased number on which proof was made under the threeyear act of June 6, 1912, the area patented under this act in 1913 being 3,500,388 acres, as against 6,645,046 in 1914, an increase of 3,144,658, or nearly double.
The total cash receipts from the sales of public land, including fees and commissions on both original and final entries and sales of old Government property in the local offices, for the fiscal year 1914 were $4,256,102.96 (1913, $4,287,540.67), a decrease of $31,437.71 Miscellaneous receipts were as follows: From sales of Indian lands, $1,844,802.77 (1913, $2,118,469.34); depredations on public lands, $21,913.85; leases, power sites, etc., act of February 15, 1901, $2,681.28; copies of records, plats, etc., made at General Land Office, $17,180.66, and at 13 surveyor generals' offices, $5,686.11; making the aggregate cash receipts of this bureau during the fiscal year 1914, $6,148,367.63 (1913, $6,955,504.81), a decrease of $807,137.18.
This decrease is caused partly by the fact that the reclamation waterright charges are now collected by the fiscal agents of the Reclamation Service, and partly by the fact that the sales of Indian lands were less, and by decrease of commutation homestead entries.
The total expenses of district land offices for salaries and commissions of registers and receivers and incidental expenses during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1914, were $853,698.60, a decrease of $36,775.46.
The aggregate expenditures and estimated liabilities of the public land service, including expenses of district land offices and surveys, were $3,028,187.32, leaving a net surplus of $3,120,180.31 of receipts over expenditures.
During the year the field service has accomplished satisfactory results in its field work.
The number of cases investigated and reported on was practically the same as last year, notwithstanding that the force was somewhat reduced.
This speaks well for the efficiency of the service.
The biggest task confronting the field force is the investigation of oil lands in the withdrawn areas in California.
The results achieved have not been as great as could be desired, due to the limitation upon the force under the available appropriation.
However, the preliminary work of general investigation and searching of records has reached such a stage that it is expected that during the next fiscal year tangible results will be shown and this situation will be well in hand.
During the latter part of the year the force in that field was considerably augmented, and if needed it is planned to make a further increase.
The hearings in the Alaska coal cases remaining undisposed of are rapidly nearing completion, and it is expected that all the pending hearings will be disposed of during November.
A notable innovation in the method of conducting hearings has been inaugurated during this year.
Previously the bulk of the hearings were held during the winter season, when field work could not be prosecuted vigorously.
Now a special agent has been designated as a hearings officer to conduct hearings on the part of the Government.
This results in hearings being held at all times of the year, so that the convenience of the claimants is met as nearly as is possible.
As a result of this complaints of delays in securing hearings have ceased.
Public surveys.
The superiority of the direct system for field work has been thoroughly demonstrated in the result of the past year.
During the field season of 1913—that is, the latter part of the fiscal year of 1913 and the first half of the fiscal year 1914—the field work for over 17,000,000 acres of surveys and resurveys was performed at a cost for such field work of less than 4 cents per acre, including Alaska.
The actual cost in money for field work under the direct system is not only materially less than under the contract system, but the work is done in the field in a more thorough, systematic, and permanent manner, rendering subsequent examination in the field unnecessary and obviating disputes and controversies over the question of satisfactory compliance with contracts.
Substantial reductions in expenditures have been effected and greater expedition secured in perfecting surveys made on the application of settlers.
The necessity for an early extension of the public surveys in Alaska is noted, especially that portion of the Territory embracing the coal fields, and to this end a special appropriation is recommended.
Marked attention has been given to surveys within railroad grants.
By expediting the submission and examination of accounts submitted by the field force engaged in such surveys a much greater advantage is secured under the existing appropriations than has heretofore been accomplished.
Restoration of lands withdrawn or reserved.
The act of September 30, 1913, authorizing the employment of suitable methods for the restoration to entry of lands previously withdrawn or reserved, has proved extremely advantageous both to the Government and to the public.
Actual home seekers are given an opportunity to select or choose places for their future homes in advance of the time when the owners of scrip and others who do not intend immediately to occupy or make use of the lands may accomplish their intended appropriations.
National forests.
During the last fiscal year 15 national forests have been reduced and 4 enlarged under the act of June 4, 1897 (30 Stat., 36), and the Caribou National Forest, in Idaho, has been enlarged by the act of April 21, 1914 (Public, No.87).
There are now 183 national forests, embracing 185,321,202 acres, of which area approximately 88 per cent is public land.
The decrease in area of national forests since the beginning of the fiscal year is 1,295,446 acres.
Homestead entries in forest reserves.
Notices of restoration were issued during the past year in accordance with the provisions of the act of June 11, 1906 (34 Stat., 233), in 2,580 lists, by which approximately 255,000 acres of agricultural lands in national forests were opened to settlement and entry under the homestead laws.
In the previous year approximately 365,000 acres, included in 3,620 lists, were opened.
Up to June 30,1914, approximately1,405,000 acres have been restored under said act of 1906.
There are 777 lists pending for action.
During the past year 2,685 homestead entries were made of lands in national forests.
Desert-land entries.
The material questions to be considered in connection with desert-land entries are the right to the use of water, its application to the land, and the sufficiency and permanency of the supply.
It follows that as the available supply of this valuable commodity is absorbed these questions become more complicated, and closer and more careful field and office inquiry must be made before decision can be reached that title has been earned.
During the past fiscal year 2,127 desert-land entries were patented, embracing 346,794.74 acres of land; 15,170 proofs of annual expenditures were examined, and 2,783 applications for extension of time within which to submit proofs and 573 assignments of desert-land entries or portions thereof were considered.
Soldiers' additional applications.
There is no decrease in the number of claims filed under sections 2306-2307 of the Revised Statutes.
Five hundred and twenty-two new cases were filed during the past year as against 491 of the preceding year.
Many of these claims are for small fractional rights, and entail an amount of labor entirely out of proportion to the value of the land involved.
A 1-acre right requires as much work as a right for 120 acres, and calls for correspondence with the War Department, the Auditor of the War Department, and the Pension Bureau in order to establish the identity of the soldier with the entryman.
Under the decisions of the courts the present legal status of the additional right is equivalent to that of scrip locatable upon any lands subject to homestead entry, and this character of the claim is taken advantage of by the scrip dealer, rather than the soldier or his heir, who usually assigns the right for a very small part of its ultimate value in the hands of the dealer.
The Commissioner suggests that the repeal of the law at the present time would not operate to the serious detriment of the original grantee, and would relieve the department of a very serious burden that is not carried for his benefit.
Indian allotments.
During the fiscal year 6,769 Indian allotments were disposed of by approval and the issuance of trust patents.
The approvals for 1913 aggregated 5,243, and for 1912, 2,417.
Those disposed of during the past year were chiefly tribal or reservation allotments, but included 800 Turtle Mountain selections made under the provisions of the act of April 21, 1904 (33 Stat., 189).
In addition, nearly 2,000 patents in fee were issued to Indians and to purchasers of allotted lands.
Logging on ceded Chippewa lands.
There were logged on ceded Chippewa lands, Minnesota, under the act of June 27, 1902 (32 Stat., 400), during the past year 85,799,120 feet of timber, valued at $763,915, as against 89,616,153 feet, valued at $771,689.81, the preceding year.
During the 11 years since logging operations began on said ceded Chippewa lands there have been logged 1,178,395,167 feet of timber, valued at $8,316,099.07.
The amount of timber cut already exceeds the original Government estimates by over 270,000,000 feet.
Railroad grants.
During the past year railroad and wagon-road selections were received in the General Land Office amounting to 451,619.47 acres, and during the same time 855,374.20 acres were patented, an increase of patented area over selections submitted of 403,754.73 acres.
Last year the excess of patented area over selections submitted was but 275,474 acres.
During the year 77 railroad patents were issued, as against 22 the year preceding.
Railroad rights of way.
Under the act of March 3, 1875 (18 Stat., 482), and the Alaska right of way act of May 14, 1898 (30 Stat., 409), 473 applications were received during the past year, as against 255 the year previous.
During the year 576 were disposed of, as against 274 the year preceding.
Rights of way for irrigation and other purposes.
All other rights of way" show a decrease in the number received, but a large increase in the number disposed of.
There were 666 applications received, as against 1,133 last year; 1,197 cases were disposed of, as against 898 of the year previous.
This class of work is practically current.
State selections.
Indemnity school-land selections aggregating 177,294.68 acres were approved during the past fiscal year, 484,571.64 acres in 1913, and 147,988.16 acres in 1912.
Under grants made to the several States for specific purposes approvals aggregated 924,- 921.27 acres, as compared with 114,086.10 acres in 1913 and 33,292.46 acres in 1912; totals—1914, 1,102,215.95 acres; 1913, 598,657.74 acres; and 1912, 181,280.62 acres.
Reclamation under the Carey Act.
The Commissioner furnishes a general summary of the operations of the Carey Act down to the present time.
He calls attention to the excellent purpose underlying this legislation and some of the difficulties that have been encountered in accomplishing its full beneficent intention.
Commenting on the situation as it now stands, he suggests that it would seem as a first step some means should be provided for taking up and rehabilitating and completing those feasible projects which have been partially constructed, but which for various reasons are now at a standstill, and suggests that from the experience of the Government, both in the Land Department and Reclamation Service, the underlying principle of any plan adopted should be one that shall have the effect of guaranteeing the integrity of the project; that is to say, sufficiency and reliability of water supply, good engineering, economical expenditure of funds, with the elimination of the promoter's profits, to the end that irrigation securities shall become gilt-edged, with consequent low interest charge.
Cooperative State and Federal legislation will be necessary to bring this about.
Judicial proceedings against the Oregon & California Railroad Co.
United States against the Oregon & California Railroad Co. et al., to declare a forfeiture of the grants made to said company, attention is directed to compromises by stipulation between the Attorney General and certain purchasers from said company, as authorized by the act of August 20, 1912 (37 Stat., 320).
The acreage involved in the suits thus compromised for which the purchase price has been paid to the Government is 340,887.87, for which the United States has received $852,219.95.
Power-site reserves.
Under the provisions contained in the act of June 25, 1910 (36 Stat., 847), as amended by the act of August 24, 1912 (37 Stat., 497), and the act of June 25, 1910 (36 Stat., 855), 247,639 acres were withdrawn for water-power-site purposes during the year 1914.
During the same period there were restored 90,305 acres previously withdrawn.
At the present time the outstanding power-site withdrawals total 1,991,617 acres.
Disposition of the public domain.
Contrary to the general belief, the business of the Land Department is increasing, although the moneys received from public-land sources are decreasing.
A comparative study of the statistics of the General Land Office submitted by the Commissioner, covering the last five years, makes the reason for this situation apparent, as the logical result of the present methods by which title to our public domain may be acquired.
The permanent development of our national resources, substituted for the sale of our public lands has naturally resulted in the diminution of the cash receipts, while at the same time enlarging the activities of the public land service.
As a result of this study of the situation the Commissioner is led to note the marked decrease in the annual addition to the reclamation fund during recent years, and to raise the question asto whether or not it will be more conducive to the general development of the country if the Government should charge a low price, say $1.25 per acre, in addition to the usual fees and commissions, for all lands disposed of under the homestead laws, the proceeds to be used for the reclamation of greater areas of arid lands.
In this connection he calls attention to the fact that if such had been the practice from 1910 to 1914, inclusive, assuming that the same number of homesteads had been entered, it would have produced about $40,000,000.
The experience of the Government in the sale of Indian lands tends to the belief that such a practice would not greatly deter settlement.
Legislation.
The recommendations contained in the last annual report, to wit, demarcation of boundaries between certain States; consolidation of the Carey Acts; similar legislation with respect to the several right-of-way acts; provision for the forfeiture of the rights of way acquired under the acts of March 3, 1875 (18 Stat., 482), and March 3, 1891 (26 Stat., 1095), on account of nonuser; amendment of laws relating to Alaska; provision for a final-proof-taking officer; equalization of fees in public-land proceedings; and provision for an additional Assistant Commissioner, are again renewed and urged upon the especial attention of Congress.
The progress made in administering the affairs of the Indian Bureau during the past fiscal year has been most gratifying.
As a first essential it has been the aim to promote a reciprocal attitude on the part of the Indians, to bring them in friendly touch with the administration of the bureau, and to establish a cordial cooperation between them and those laboring in their behalf.
A comprehensive study is being made of the physical conditions surrounding the Indian problem in general, and each reservation or locality, considered in the light of a unit, is being analyzed with especial reference to its particular needs and possibilities.
Many responses are being received from representative members of the several tribes to whom letters have been addressed inviting suggestions for their tribal and individual betterment.
From these much is learned of the Indians' material and moral welfare which, added to the information gleaned through other avenues of investigation, furnishes a basis for an intelligent study of the industrial, educational, and moral improvement of this race of people.
The machinery of the bureau, with some modifications and im provements, is ample to provide for all educational requirements, and automatically promotes moral standards.
It is through the enlargement of industrial activities, however, that the greater number of Indians residing on the reservations must be awakened from the apathy into which they have been driven through several decades of misdirection.
Hundreds of these people are to-day in the advance guard of the country's history makers; but on the reservations are too many leading an idle, aimless life.
To reach this great mass of human beings and instill within them ambitions for enlightened comfort and contentment is the serious task at hand, to meet which there must be opened to them the gates leading to the several avenues of industrial pursuits.
Heretofore and more particularly previous to the beginning of the last fiscal year and excepting some instances where tribal funds were available for the purpose, this has been impossible through the lack of funds.
The Congress in the last Indian appropriation act provided reimbursable funds of $725,000 with which to continue this crusade and the Indian Bureau is now most actively engaged in advancing reservation Indians along industrial lines.
During the past year there were expended about $1,000,000 in the purchase of live stock and in the upbreeding of the Indians' cattle, horses, and sheep.
This sum, however, came principally from the Indians' own funds and was used for tribal purposes.
In some instances a small part of these tribal funds was advanced to individual Indians to assist them in procuring farming equipment.
The use of reimbursable funds is not, however, an experiment, as it has been proven through the use of smaller sums than that appropriated by the last Congress that such a fund can be used beneficially and with practically positive assurances of reimbursement.
The first fund of this nature was appropriated by the act of April 30, 1908, for use at the Fort Belknap Reservation in the sum of $25,000.
The total purchases made from this fund aggregated nearly $30,000, and there is still due from Indians a little over $9,000, made possible by reloaning the reimbursements.
In 1910 $15,000 was appropriated for similar use at the Tongue River Reservation; in 1911 $30,000 was appropriated and apportioned by the Indian Office among 14 different superintendencies, and in the act of June 30, 1913, $100,000 was made available for this use, with which last-mentioned amount the Indian Office has been enabled to lay out a comprehensive plan for assisting the individual Indians to embark in some profitable industrial pursuit.
Never before in the history of the Indian Office has the future of the Indians looked so promising.
Educational facilities and opportunities.
In addition to the large nonreservation schools, such as those at Carlisle, Pa.
Lawrence, Kans.
Chilocco, Okla.
Riverside, Cal.
Phoenix, Ariz.
Through the encouragement of the Indian Bureau the Indian children have to a very large extent been induced to enter the public sehools where available, and during the past fiscal year the increased enrollment in the public schools in some instances amounted to more than 100 per cent.
Various forms of cooperation with the public schools have been employed, including payment of tuition for Indian children where the Indian pupils were in the minority, and in other cases where the greater number of pupils were Indian the payment by the State authorities for tuition for the white children.
The total enrollment of Indians in the nonreservation, reservation boarding, day schools, mission, and public schools is 57,898.
Health conditions.
With the increased appropriations for the fiscal year 1914, much has been done in the way of improving the sanitary conditions of the Indians and providing sanatorium treatment for the diseased and afflicted.
At the close of the fiscal year there were 50 hospitals, with a combined capacity of 1,400 patients, and 6 others under construction, and with the $300,000 appropriated for health work for the ensuing fiscal year, $100,000 is made.available for hospital purposes.
Plans are being completed for the construction of seven new hospitals, at a cost ranging from $12,000 to $15,000 each.
These facilities are hardly adequate for a population of over 300,000 persons with a high percentage of tuberculosis and trachoma, which two diseases are being combated with every facility at hand.
Mining operations.
The oil situation in Oklahoma became a very perplexing problem during the past year, due somewhat to the extensive production and a waning market.
Wells of large volume in the Cushing district brought in a little over a year ago were augmented by the discovery of another large pool near Healdton.
The latter development, however, is of an inferior grade but of great value for fuel.
The price of oil has gradually receded from $1.05 per barrel in February, 1914, to 55 cents in October of this year.
Efforts are being made to bring about a diminution of oil development and production until such time as the demands for oil shall become greater.
The Indian Office is cooperating with the Bureau of Mines in an endeavor to prevent the waste of oil and gas in Oklahoma, it having been shown that thousands of barrels of oil were lost during the past year in the Healdton field alone.
The loss in natural gas has been, generally speaking, through a wanton disregard by the producers of the value of this commodity.
The operators generally were seeking oil for which there was a market, and the natural gas, being unmarketable, was merely a side issue.
Native industries.
The Navajo blanket industry, which furnishes to this tribe an annual income of $600,000, is receiving attention not only as to the extension of the industry but the procuring of an adequate market for the product.
Basketry and lace-making are industries promising remunerative employment to the Indian women, and plans are under way in the Indian Office to induce the Indians to make a better grade of articles and to create a better market and consequently better prices.
Irrigation of Indian lands.
On 56 different reservations there are 62 principal irrigation projects or systems covering an area of 900,000 acres; homes of 20 acres each for 45,000 Indians, with an estimated value of $72,000,000 on which there has been expended $8,500,000, and which will require a further expenditure of $13,000,000 to complete.
These are exclusive of the projects in Montana under construction by the Reclamation Service.
The irrigable lands belonging to the Indians form one of the principal sources of wealth of these people, and also form probably the best opportunity for these people to become individually self-supporting.
In some sections of the country the Indians are better acquainted with irrigation farming than the whites in the same communities, and they are making great success in this line.
In other sections they will have to be taught the advantages of this method of farming and a considerable part of the reimbursable appropriation will be used to place individual Indians in the way of making use of this resource.
One of the most important irrigation developments with which the Indian Office is confronted is in what is generally known as the Papago country in southern Arizona.
The available water supply in this section lies in an underground stratum and the development necessarily will be somewhat more costly than where the gravity system can be used, but the climatic conditions fully warrant the expenditure, and the necessities of the Indians demand it.
There are about 10,000 Indians who will be benefited by this underground water development in southern Arizona, and these are a people who have occupied the country for hundreds of years.
Five Civilized Tribes.The year marked the practical extinguishment of the tribal form of government for the Cherokees.
The tribal form of government was abolished at the close of the last fiscal year, all tribal officers having tendered their resignations, effective as of that date.
All these resignations were accepted except that of the chief, whose temporary continuance in office will be necessary to complete the disposal of the few remaining details incident to the dissolution of the tribal government.
The force of tribal attorneys employed under authority of the act of Congress of June 30, 1913, has accomplished much in the way of prosecuting those who had defrauded minor Indians, and in recovering estates, causing the removal of dishonest and incompetent guardians, procuring substitution of substantial bonds for worthless ones, and saving many thousands of dollars to Indian minors, and directing the investment for their benefit.
These direct results will have a beneficial moral influence on the whole community and will go far toward preventing a repetition of dishonest methods in the future.
Purchasing supplies.
The Indian Bureau purchased last year approximately $3,500,000 in goods and supplies.
Efforts are on foot to effect economy in the purchasing of Indian supplies through (1) the securing of contractors of reputable commercial standing, (2) the selection of the best articles obtainable for the money and of a standard to meet the needs of the service, (3) a most thorough inspection of deliveries, and (4) a development of short cuts with quick results, both as to the placing of the order and delivery to the destination.
The Bureau of Standards, the Bureau of Mines, and the Bureau of Animal Industry are lending material assistance in the inspection and selection of purchases with which the respective bureaus are intimately acquainted.
In order that the purchasing of Indian supplies might have the undivided attention of a force organized solely for the purpose, there has been created in the Office of Indian Affairs a purchase division to which has been assigned the complete study and devising of plans for the effecting of economies in this line.
Individual Indian moneys.
These funds are derived principally from the sale of allotted and inherited lands, lease accruals, the sale of timber, oil and gas royalties, and earnings of outing pupils.
At the close of the fiscal year these individual funds on deposit in bonded banks amounted to $13,000,000.
These deposits draw interest averaging about 31 per cent.
In addition to the individual funds, there are approximately $5,000,000 of tribal funds on deposit in bonded banks.
During the year two of these banks were closed by order of the Comptroller of the Currency, and since the beginning of the policy of depositing Indian moneys in banks there have been in all five failures but no loss has accrued to the Indian depositors, either of principal or interest, as the sureties have in every instance been adequate and have paid all Indian deposits.
A home for each Indian.
The initial step in separating the Indian from reservation or tribal life is the allotment to each of a tract of land.
Since the passage of the general allotment act in 1887, the making of allotments to Indians has progressed continuously and at the end of the last fiscal year there were a total of 212,190 allotments made.
During the last year, 4,066 allotments were approved and 8,521 selections for allotment were made.
Under the several laws relating to allotments, the areas differed from 10 acres of intensivefarming irrigable land on the Colorado River and Yuma Reservations to 320 acres of agricultural or 640 acres of grazing land in the more rigorous northern climate occupied by the Sioux.
Except in the southwestern country, particularly in Arizona and New Mexico, the dividing up of the reservations has been nearly completed.
Following the allotments in severalty comes the next step in individualizing the Indian and the making of him a home builder.
This is now the real work of the Indian Bureau.
To this end, there are employed in the Indian Bureau 450 farmers, each assigned to a district, whose duty it is to instruct the Indian allottee in agriculture, and reports show that at the end of the last fiscal year there were 29,482 Indians engaged in farming an acreage of 604,518.
The field matron.
There is no more potent factor in the development of Indian home life than the field matron.
It is not enough that she should be familiar with the duties of housekeeping, but she must be endowed with a sympathetic nature and missionary spirit; she must teach the Indian mothers how to feed and care for their infants, in health and in sickness; she must teach them to love their homes and to be appreciative of comfortable and even beautiful surroundings; she must create in them the desire and need of that excellence in home building which brings happiness and contentment.
For this purpose, the Indian Bureau has apportioned $60,000 from the appropriation of $450,000 for industrial work, and is expending its energy in procuring for this service personalities meeting the requirements.
Leasing of Indian agricultural lands.
While in some cases it is imperative that an Indian be permitted to lease his allotment, the practice is being, however, discouraged by the Indian Bureau, and every effort is being put forth to induce the Indian to engage more extensively in the cultivation of his own land and thereby reap the reward of industry which too often has been the harvest of the more progressive white lessee.
The Indian Bureau has to combat not only the tendency in the Indian to yield to the seductiveness of idleness, but also public opinion against the nonuse of comparatively large areas of agricultural land.
By the judicious use of the reimbursable funds appropriated for the purpose, much headway has been made toward building up an ambition in the Indian to possess the wealth and competency which by right is his through ordinary industry and endeavor, and the leasing of these lands is being restricted more and more to the minors and those physically disabled or otherwise incapacitated.
Forests and lumbering.
With approximately $90,000,000 worth of timber, the Indian enters the lumber mart as no small factor.
The Indian Bureau is now operating 40 sawmills on various reservations through the Northwest and far West, and during the fiscal year just closed there were purchased seven new up-to-date sawmills and in addition two mills were rebuilt.
This vast timber asset is not only a source of wealth to the Indians, where its development is strictly along commercial lines, but its conversion into lumber for building fences and other purposes is essential in the training and employment of the Indians themselves, both in the mills and in the logging camps, and are elements of economic administration well balanced with the needs of the Indian in his home life.
With the diminishing supply, the prices are proportionately increasing, and it is pleasing to note that while the timber resources in private ownèrship have been so greatly encroached upon, those of the Indians have remained intact, and through the construction of roads are becoming each year more accessible and valuable.
Combating the use of intoxicants.
The strongest kind of a campaign is being waged against the traffic in liquor in the Indian country.
The evil resulting from the use of intoxicants is emphasized when the Indian becomes the victim.
These truly first Americans vere not bequeathed ages of training in self-control, and it is no wonder that when there is thrust upon them this most insidious of vices they become ensnared in its monstrous grip.
Not alone for the salvation of the Indian is it incumbent upon those acting in the capacity of guardian to suppress this traffic, but it is a duty owed to the surrounding white communities.
The Indian, possessed as he is of lands and money, becomes through the agency of this vice a common prey to the unscrupulous white man or designing tribesman, and encourages dishonesty and sharp practice among the white neighbors, so that the white community surrounding these Indian reservations becomes more and more debauched and the standard of square dealing grows so diminutive that the very youth in the community is no longer able to distinguish between right and wrong.
An efficient special corps of employees devoted solely to this branch of the work is cooperating with the superintendents in awakening the conscience of the communities surrounding Indian reservations as well as the employees of the service, from the lowest to the highest, to the debauching effects of the use of intoxicants among Indians.
Sale of and patents in fee for Indian lands.
Nearly 100,000 acres of Indian lands were sold during the past year for a consideration of $1,652,815, which sum has generally been placed to the credit of the individual Indians subject to their checks when approved by the Indian Office.
This money is in large part used by the Indians in improving their retained lands, but in the case of old and feeble Indians it is paid to them as their needs require.
During the year there were approved 1,148 applications for patents in fee, covering 152,000 acres of land, and since the act of May 8, 1906, authorizing the issuance of patents in fee, there have been approved 7,315 applications, involving an area of nearly 800,000 acres.
It is estimated that about 75 per cent of these applications have been approved to Indians of one-half or less Indian blood.
Indians for exhibition purposes.
It is deemed inimical to the interests of the Indians to encourage their participation in circuses and shows where the customs and habits of their forefathers are exhibited as representative of Indian life.
Every effort is being made to dissuade the Indians from abandoning even temporarily their homemaking for this short but lucrative occupation.
Where it is not possible to prevent this practice, the Indian Office protects them as far as possible by securing from their employers satisfactory bonds guaranteeing the payment of salaries and their return to the reservations.
The curtailment of the photographing of Indian ceremonies is also being enforced, particularly where they picture manufactured and nonprogressive customs and ceremonies.
Economies in the service.
With its 6,000 employees, the Indian Service becomes a fruitful field for economy in administration, and the bureau has been deeply appreciative of this fact and has inaugurated reforms both as to the betterment of the service and decreased demands upon the Public Treasury.
After a thorough investigation in some sections of the field service it was found that a reduction in force could be accomplished without a decreased efficiency, and many positions not absolutely necessary have been discontinued.
The practice of paying per diem to employees when not actively on duty, such as for Sundays and holidays, has been discontinued, and the per diem is now allowed only to employees for service in the field when actually away from headquarters and where such per diem is legal and constructively payable.
The report of the Commissioner to the Five Civilized Tribes shows the progress made in the matter of closing the affairs of the Five Civilized Tribes in Oklahoma.
The citizenship rolls were closed by law on March 4, 1907, and the work of allotment has been practically completed, as shown by previous reports.
There are still some allotment deeds to be delivered and other minor details in connection with closing the allotment records to be attended to.
The equalization of allotments in the Cherokee, Choctaw, and Chickasaw Nations has been completed with the exception of about $92,000 due 6,987 allottees.
In most of these cases the amount to be paid is so small that the allottees fail or refuse to make application or take any steps to secure the same and it will probably be necessary to withhold such payment for the present and pay the allottees entitled thereto at the same time the per capita payments are made.
Also no steps were taken during the year to equalize allotments in the Creek Nation, but the Indian appropriation act of August 1, 1914, provided for the equalization of Creek allotments on the basis of $800 instead of $1,040 as provided by the Creek agreement, there not being sufficient funds to the credit of the Creek Nation to equalize allotments on a basis of $1,040.
Status of work in Seminole Nation.
The allotment work in the Seminole Nation has been completed with the exception of issuance of about 800 deeds to restricted allottees and the delivery of 751 deeds to unrestricted allottees in cases where the land has been sold for grossly inadequate considerations.
All Seminole property has been disposed of with the exception of two tribal boarding schools, including 320 acres for each school.
There are about $1,800,000 tribal funds to be distributed per capita to the citizens in this nation.
Status of work in Creek Nation.
The allotment work in this nation has been completed with the exception of the delivery of 643 deeds.
There are 2,495 acres of unallotted land to be disposed of; and there remains the equalization of allotments requiring payment to about 17,700 allottees, authorized by the act of Congress approved August 1, 1914.
There are four tribal boarding schools in this nation with 40 acres of land each and also the Creek capitol building and grounds at Okmulgee and 168 town lots to be disposed of.
Status of work in Cherokee Nation.
The allotment work in this nation has been completed and all of the unallotted land disposed of, with the exception of 80 acres involved in suit and 226 acres, including what is known as "Big Lake,"the status of which has not yet been determined; the payment of 1,996 shares to equalize allotments, and the final distribution of tribal funds per capita, amounting to about $836,000.
There are also about 270 rural cemeteries for which patents are being prepared and 997 allotment deeds to be delivered.
Status of work in Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations.
The allotment work in these nations has been completed, with the exception of adjustment of a few minor details, investigation as to several duplicate enrollments, and the delivery of about 1,000 allotment deeds.
There are still 1,425,321 acres of tribal land to be disposed of in these nations, including 968,640 acres of timberland, 25,600 acres of unallotted land, and 431,080 acres of segregated coal and asphalt land.
Also, the mineral underlying the coal and asphalt lands has not been disposed of, but it is contemplated selling the surface of such lands in the near future and disposing of the mineral at a later date when authorized by Congress.
There are also a number of cemeteries to be conveyed in these nations, 2,276 town lots to be disposed of, and the deferred payments on thousands of tracts of unallotted land sold, together with the preparation and delivery of patents to such lands.
There are also six tribal boarding schools being maintained in these nations which belong to the tribes.
The principal work of the Commissioner to the Five Civilized Tribes during the year was in connection with the sale of unallotted lands.
Three sales of such lands were held during the year, at which 317,955 acres were sold for a total of $1,499,151.38.
One sale of timberlands in the Choctaw Nation was held under regulations approved by the Department August 9, 1913, at which 1,274,024 acres were offered and 306,286 acres sold for $1,460,244, or an average of $4.77 per acre, the average minimum price being $4.23 per acre.
Another sale of unallotted lands in the Creek and Cherokee Nations, including some land that had been sold but declared forfeited on account of failure of the purchasers to make payment, was held under regulations approved September 20, 1913.
At this sale 2,769 acres in the Creek Nation were sold for $17,893 and 8,656 acres in the Cherokee Nation were sold for $20,205.03.
The third sale consisted of 244 acres in the Cherokee Nation, all of which was disposed of, the total purchase price being $808.50.
The sales held during this year, together with previous sales of unallotted lands aggregated 2,157,039 acres in 29,825 tracts, the total purchase price being $12,189,192, or $2,623,867 more than the minimum price asked.
A total of $7,133,841.38 has been collected from the sale of land, and the balance of the purchase price, representing deferred payments, draws 6 per cent interest until paid.
About 532,000 acres of unallotted land sold have been paid for in full and patents issued.
The work of surveying, classifying, and appraising the surface of the segregated coal and asphalt lands, consisting of 431,080 acres, was completed during the year, such surface being surveyed into 3,598 tracts of agricultural and grazing land, aggregating 395,087 acres, the remainder of the surface of said lands, 35,983 acres, being classified as suitable for townsite property and subdivided into 3,552 lots, from 1 to 40 acres each.
Time for the completion of the appraisement of these lands and improvements was extended to December 1, 1913, by the Indian appropriation act of June 30, 1913, and by joint resolution approved December 8, 1913, the time was again extended for 60 days from that date; any unfinished work after that time to be completed by the Secretary of the Interior.
The work was finally completed by the appraisers on February 7, 1914, and the schedules prepared by them were thereafter forwarded by the Commissioner to the Five Civilized Tribes for approval.
No steps were taken to dispose of the surface of these lands during the fiscal year.
Tribal revenues.
On June 30, 1914, there was on deposit in 197 national banks and 52 State banks in Oklahoma an aggregate of $5,083,988.82 of funds derived from the sale of property belonging to the Five Civilized Tribes, such deposits being authorized by the act of March 3, 1911.
The interest on these deposits amounts to over $220,000 per year.
The banks holding such deposits are located in 69 counties in the State.
The tribal revenues collected during the year were as follows: Grazing fees, $78,385.99; royalty on coal and asphalt tribal leases, $250,504.65; payments on town lots $16,173.49; sale of unallotted lands, $1,537,104.20; other sources, $104,110.69, making a total of $1,956,279.02.
Since the passage of the act of June 28, 1898, a total of $17,099,826.56 has been collected and deposited to the credit of the Five Civilized Tribes by the office of the Commissioner to the Five Civilized Tribes and the United States Indian superintendent of Union Agency.
Coal and asphalt leases.
There are 109 tribal coal leases, covering 99,800 acres, and 7 asphalt leases, covering 4,960 acres, entered into under the act of June 28, 1898, which leases run for 30 years from their date and cover portions of the segregated coal and asphalt lands in the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations.
During the year 2,892,294 tons of coal were mined from these leases, the royalty being 8 cents per ton, mine run, and 1,476 tons of asphalt were mined, the royalty being 10 cents per ton for crude asphalt and 60 cents per ton for refined asphalt.
The total royalty paid was $250,504.65.
Under the act of March 4, 1913, which provided for leasing additional acreage of the unleased segregated coal lands where such acreage was necessary for mines in operation, four leases or additions to leases were approved during the year.
A total of 30 applications for leases under said act had been made up to June 30, 1914.
Tribal governments and attorneys.
The expenses of the tribal governments of the Five Civilized Tribes during the year, including salaries.and expenses of tribal attorneys, amounted to $87,003.37.
The tribal governments consist of a principal chief or governor, with such clerical force as is necessary; practically the only duties being performed are the execution of patents and the making of reports and recommendations concerning matters affecting the tribal interests when called upon.
Tribal attorneys have been employed in each of the nations, excepting the Seminole, to represent the tribes in litigation affecting their interests, and also during the year 3 additional attorneys were employed in the Cherokee Nation, 3 in the Creek Nation, 2 in the Choctaw Nation, and 2 in the Chickasaw Nation for the special purpose of looking after probate matters and the protection of the estates of minors and dependent citizens of the tribes, such 10 probate attorneys being paid from tribal funds, and in addition thereto 8 probate attorneys were employed, payable from congressional appropriation.
The tribal affairs of the Cherokee Nation being practically all disposed of with the exception of the payment of the funds to members of the tribe, the resignations of all tribal officers in such nation were accepted on June 30 with the exception of the principal chief, who will be continued a short time to execute patents to cemeteries or perform any other duties that may be required of him.
Tribal receipts.
During the year there was received by the disbursing agent of the Commissioner to the Five Civilized Tribes, in connection with tribal affairs, $2,150,157.04, which was disbursed or properly accounted for, making a total of $4,300,314.08 handled during the year.
Work of Union Agency.
About one-third of the 101,000 members of the Five Civilized Tribes are within the restricted class.
The matters pertaining to such allottees, including leasing for grazing and agriculture and for oil and gas, sale of their lands, supervision of the proceeds, and the protection of their interests, conservation of their property, etc., are handled by the superintendent at Union Agency, under direction of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
There is also much work of a general character, such as placing Indian pupils in schools, encouraging industrial advancement, better methods of farming, instructions along hygienic lines, etc.
Probate matters.
Owing to the congestion of business of this kind in the county courts and the lack of proper provisions for properly handling the same, and it being impossible for the attention which the importance of the matter demanded to be given to individual cases, in many counties probate matters affecting the estates of minors and dependent citizens of the tribes were in a deplorable condition.
Every effort possible has been made to relieve the situation.
For a number of years there have been 18 field clerks stationed at convenient places throughout the Five Civilized Tribes, each field agent having an average of about 2,000 restricted Indians under his immediate supervision, and also during the past year 18 probate attorneys were employed to look after probate cases thus relieving the field clerks of that work and leaving them free to devote their attention to other matters, such as leasing, removal of restrictions, sale of land, etc.
Practically the greater number of probate cases involve the estates of unrestricted Indians, where the employees of the department can take no action except in an advisory capacity to the courts.
As a result of a'visit to Oklahoma and conference with State and Federal officials by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, a uniform system of procedure in the courts affecting probate matters of Indian minors has been adopted, and the tribal and probate attorneys have cooperated and worked harmoniously with the probate courts in practically all counties, and probate matters generally are in much better condition than heretofore.
Removal of restrictions.
During the year 1,462 applications for removal of restrictions upon the alienation of allotted land were made, as compared with 1,238 during the previous fiscal year, which makes the total number of applications since the passage of the act of May 27, 1908, 11,056, of which 4,770 have been approved conditionally and the land advertised under the supervision of the superintendent, Union Agency, and where sales were effected the proceeds were held by the superintendent and disbursed for the benefit of the allottee from time to time.
In 2,232 cases the restrictions have been removed unconditionally and the allottee permitted to sell his land without supervision of the department.
During the year 934 tracts of allotted land were sold where restrictions had been removed, aggregating 66,104 acres, for $636,042.80.
Leasing of allotted land.
During the year there were filed 3,338 leases covering restricted allotments, practically all of which were for oil and gas.
This makes the total number of leases filed 31,866 since 1898, of which 8,811 were approved and are still in effect, 9,048 have been surrendered or canceled after approval, and 4,674 removed from departmental supervision after approval on account of the restrictions of the allottees having been removed by operation of law.
The price of oil gradually increased during the year until it reached $1.05 per barrel in what is known as the Mid-Continent field in Oklahoma, which resulted in a great increase in the oil industry, and the discovery of what is known as the Cushing field in Creek, Payne, and Lincoln Counties and the Healdton field in the southern part of the Chickasaw Nation.
The price of oil, however, declined until at the end of the fiscal year it was 75 cents per barrel in the Mid-Continent field and 50 cents per barrel in the Healdton field.
On June 30, 1914, the number of open royalty accounts was 10,853, an increase of 1,130 during the year.
The total oil and gas royalties received during the year for the benefit of Indian lessors was $2,113,820.25, which, however, does not include royalties received by Indians direct who are not under supervision of the department.
It is estimated that during the year the sales of oil amounted to 56,201,000 barrels from the territory of the Five Civilized Tribes, an increase of about 7,000,000 barrels, as compared with the previous year.
It is estimated that the total daily production of oil on June 30, 1914, was about 322,000 barrels.
Many small pipe lines have been constructed during the year, but the pipe-line facilities are still inadequate to care for the production.
The actual collections by the Union Agency during the year, in connection with affairs of restricted Indians, totaled $3,135,638.19, not including moneys received from the Treasury Department on requisition nor balances carried over from the previous year.
The disbursements were $3,926,117.43.
Education:—Of the $300,000 appropriated by the Indian appropriation act of June 30, 1913, to assist school districts in the State of Oklahoma on account of the fact that there was so much allotted land not subject to taxation a total of $291,920.37 was distributed in 2,129 districts, in which districts there were enrolled 8,067 restricted Indian pupils, 16,490 unrestricted Indians, and 2,443 freedmen, and $7,785.43 was expended for administrative expenses, making a total expenditure of such appropriation of $299,707.29.
Four tribal boarding schools have been maintained in the Choctaw Nation, 2 in the Chickasaw Nation, 4 in the Creek, and 1 in the Seminole Nation from tribal funds.
During the year the Cherokee Orphan Training School near Tahlequah was purchased by the United States as authorized by the Indian appropriation act of June 30, 1913, and is being conducted for the benefit of orphan Indian children of the Five Civilized Tribes.
In the 11 boarding schools maintained from tribal funds there were enrolled 1,274 pupils at a cost of $206,117.65, including the cost of maintenance, buildings, and repairs.
Every effort possible has been made to place the children, especially of the full bloods, in schools, and satisfactory work has been accomplished along such lines, although on account of natural timidity or disinclination of full-blood children to attend school with white pupils and the lack of accommodation at the boarding schools for all such pupils the result is still far from what it should be.
Needed legislation.
In the last annual report attention was invited to legislation required before the tribal affairs of these tribes can be finally completed and funds distributed.
First.
Provision for the final disposition of the coal and asphalt minerals in the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations underlying about 440,000 acres, the surface of which is now being advertised for sale under the provisions of the act of Congress approved February 19, 1912.
Second.
Provisions to make per capita payments to Indians from time to time from tribal moneys on hand, as may be deemed advisable.
Third.
The disposition of 12 tribal boarding schools, together with the land reserved for each, now being maintained from tribal funds, or some arrangements made for the setting aside of specific amounts for their permanent maintenance, in order that other tribal funds may be distributed.
Regarding the affairs of about 33,000 restricted Indians of these tribes, whose land wholly or in part can not be sold by them except with the approval of the department, no further legislation seems advisable relative to removal of their restrictions, as the Secretary of the Interior is now authorized to release such of them under the supervision of the department as he deems advisable.
Attention was invited in the last report, however, to the fact that many of such class of Indians, principally full bloods, are not living upon or improving lands selected by them and designated as their homesteads.
The recommendation is therefore renewed that legislation be enacted to permit Indians, with approval of the department, to change and have designated from their allotted lands not exceeding 40 acres for a homestead which should not be subject to lease, thereby insuring for such Indians a home, as under existing law all restricted Indians may lease lands allotted to them other than the homestead for a period of five years and the lands within their homesteads for one year without the approval of the department.
As a result many Indians, especially the more ignorant full bloods, lease their entire allotments for grossly inadequate rentals, and where leases are set aside for fraud or other reasons new ones are frequently made for no better consideration.
The Commissioner to the Five Civilized Tribes suggests that, while liberal appropriations are much desired for education until lands can be taxed for such purpose and provision be made to eradicate disease and improve the Indians, he does not believe much permanent beneficial results in such matters will be accomplished until legislation is enacted providing that all leases made by Indians under control of the department shall be approved by some local authority designated by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, thereby insuring for the Indian means to enable him to improve his home and general condition.
The State courts of Oklahoma have jurisdiction over estates of all Indian minors, restricted or otherwise, but by reason of the area of country and the number of Indian minors in each county, together with the large population of white people, it has been found practically impossible to protect the estates of such minors, and in some instances large amounts have been recovered as results of investigations.
The Commissioner of Indian Affairs in January last visited Oklahoma and held earnest and extensive conferences with all of the probate judges, county, tribal, and Federal attorneys throughout the Five Tribes, and as a result there has been adopted a much-desired uniform rule of procedure in handling such minors' estates, and all have cooperated for the better protection of minors' property.
By an increased Federal appropriation, available for investigation, and the vigorous personal attention given by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs to such matters, there is a marked improvement in probate proceedings, and it is apparent that a very material saving and recovery of minors' estates will result.
As restricted minors will be relieved of such assistance and protection when reaching their majority, the importance of having their agricultural leases thereafter approved by some local authority seems highly desirable.
Number of pensioners.
There were on the pension roll at the end of the fiscal vear 785,239 names, a net loss of 35,033 from the total of 820,272 on the roll at the beginning of the year.
The net loss for the preceding year was 40,094.
The number of deaths of pensioned Civil War soldiers was 33,639, as against 36,064 in the preceding year, and the total number of pensioned survivors of that war is 429,354, as against 462,379 at the beginning of the year.
The percentage of deaths of Civil War soldiers from 1909 to 1914 increased gradually from 5.2 per cent to 7.3 per cent, but the actual number of deaths does not always show an increase, year by year.
Unexpended balances of appropriation.
Total.............
Disbursements for pensions.
The amount disbursed in the payment of pensions during the year was $172,417,546.26, as against $174,171,- 660.80 for the preceding year, which was the largest amount ever expended for this purpose.
The decrease in total expenditures may naturally be expected to continue.
The amount appropriated for the payment of pensions for the fiscal year 1914 was $180,000,000, and the appropriation for the current fiscal year was $169,000,000.
It is estimated that $166,000,000 will be needed to be appropriated for the fiscal year 1916.
The total amount disbursed for pensions from July 1, 1790, to July 1, 1914, is shown to be $4,729,957,370.94, of which amount $4,457,- 974,496 is charged to allowances made on the basis of service rendered in the Civil War.
The number of pensioners residing in foreign countries in the year 1914 was 5,163, and the amount paid to them was $1,034,071.88.
Reduction of force.
The decrease in the work of the Pension Bureau due to the fact that most of the claims of soldiers of the Civil War have been allowed under the act of May 11, 1912, necessitated a reduction in the force of the Pension Bureau, and, by action of Congress, 145 positions were eliminated for the current fiscal year.
By declining to fill vacancies as they accured, by resignations, and by transfers to other bureaus, a sufficient number of vacancies existed when the law took effect to necessitate the dismissal of only 50 employees.
Of the 247 old soldiers and the 23 widows of soldiers and sailors employed in the bureau not one was dismissed.
In addition to the 50 employees who were dropped for want of appropriation, a large number were reduced in salary to meet the requirements of the new appropriation act.
It is believed that another considerable reduction of force will be necessary at the end of the current year.
Revolutionary War archives.
The papers in pension and bounty land claims based on service in the War of the Revolution are constantly becoming more valuable.
These have been arranged alphabetically by a method of flat filing which tends to their preservation and facility of reference.
These documents are open to the public under the provisions of the act of Congress of March 3, 1901.
There is a constant demand for information from these records, which consist of 72,284 admitted claims, 10,319 rejected claims, and 8,843 claims for bounty land.
Making allowance for claims for the same soldiers pensioned under different laws, it is found that the actual number of soldiers pensioned for the Revolutionary War was 52,504.
The last pensioned soldier of the Revolutionary War was Daniel F. Bakeman, of New York, who died April 5, 1869.
The last pensioned widow of·the Revolutionary War was Esther S. Damon, widow of Noah Damon; she died November 11, 1906.
During the fiscal year 602 persons called at the bureau for the purpose of examining and collecting historical and genealogical data from these claims.
In response to letters of inquiry, 2,454 certificates of service were furnished; 3,616 negative replies were sent; and 1,046 miscellaneous inquiries relating to the Revolutionary War were answered.
The two great patriotic societies, the Sons of the American Revolution and the Daughters of the American Revolution, make frequent use of these records, which furnish historical and genealogical data of great importance and reliability.
Claims on account of War of 1812.—The total number of certificates, both soldiers and widows, issued on account of the War of 1812 is about 67,000.
Steps were taken, beginning in May, 1914, to index and '"flat file"in envelopes these papers, following the methods used in arranging the Revolutionary War claims.
This work is being carried on by the regular force without special appropriation, and already about 6,000 claims have been prepared.
The value of these papers for historic and statistical reference is considerable and increasing, and their usefulness and accessibility will be greatly enhanced by the arrangement now being carried out.
The last surviving pensioned soldier of the War of 1812 died in 1905.
Lists of pensioners furnished the public.
Pursuant to a provision of the act of May 11, 1912, a list of all pensioners under that act arranged by States, counties, and post-office addresses, is available for use from the beginning of the present fiscal year.
Copies of this list for any given locality can be furnished to anyone on request, upon payment therefor in accordance with law.
Under the arrangements made, such lists can be furnished at an expense of a little less than 1 cent per name.
The demands for the information furnished by these lists, which is useful for many purposes, have been numerous and are increasing.
The aggregate list includes only the soldiers of the Civil War and only those pensioned under the act of May 11, 1912, and is believed to include about three-fourths of the pensioned soldiers of that war, as it does not include those pensioned under the general law.
Certificates issued and applications fled.
There were 95,606 certificates issued during the year, as against 90,922 issued during the year ended June 30, 1912, and as against the very large number of 443,622 issued during the fiscal year 1913, this being the largest output in the history of the bureau and being due to the speedy adjudication of the tremendous number of claims filed under the act of May 11, 1912.
There were received during the year 92,072 applications of all kinds and 92,327 communications from Members of Congress.
The total number of inclosures received through the mail division was 1,829,291, and the total number of pieces sent out was 3,749,490.
Ages of pensioners.
The ages of survivors of the Civil War and the Mexican War pensioned under the act of May 11, 1912, range from 62 years to 103 years, there being eight aged 95, two aged 99, one aged 102, and one aged 103.
The greatest number at any one age is 53,569, aged 70.
The report of the work of the office of the Assistant Attorney General, referred to on pages 27 and 28, shows a notable increase in the number of appeals in pension cases docketed during the year ended October 1, 1914, an increase much in excess even of that predicted in last year's report.
Where last year there were 808 pending appeals and motions there are now 3,175.
During the year 6,580 appeals were filed and 4,211 were disposed of.
The percentage of reversals is small, about 5 per cent.
Of course, as pointed out in the last annual report, that percentage does not mark the limit of benefit to the pensioner due to the existence of the right to appeal, because the docketed appeals do not represent all the appeals filed, but merely those cases in which the Commissioner of Pensions decides not to recede from his adverse action.
In the last report it was said that if the then existing ratio of increase should be maintained, more than 4,000 cases would be presented for decision during the year.
As a matter of fact, the exact figures, including motions, are 7,461.
To meet the situation and to prevent delay in disposing of the appeals, it was necessary to increase by detail the number of gentlemen forming that section of the Assistant Attorney General's office charged with the consideration of these appeals.
Four additional to those already assigned to the work have thus been detailed, aside from extra clerical assistance required by the situation.
The bulk of the increase came within the first six months of the year, 3,623 appeals as compared with 2,957 appeals docketed during the last six months.
This points to a decrease, but even then the number filed in that period is more than double the number in the corresponding months of last year.
Unless the number of appeals decreases rapidly, it will be necessary again to augment the force, because the average age of the old soldier makes it imperative that a decision be rendered on his appeal with as little delay as possible.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 1914, there were filed 69,311 applications for mechanical patents, 2,441 applications for design patents, 189 applications for reissues, 8,146 applications for the registration of trade-marks, 1,016 applications for labels, and 436 applications for prints, the total number of such applications being 81,539, this constituting the greatest number of applications received during any year in the history of the Patent Office.
In addition, 1,696 appeals and 20 disclaimers were filed.
During the year there were granted 38,225 patents (including 1,773 designs and 176 reissues), 5,795 registrations for trade-marks, 720 registrations for labels, and 339 registrations for prints.
The number of patents which expired during the year was 22,398.
The number of allowed applications which were forfeited for nonpayment of the final fees therein was 8,010.
The total receipts of the office were $2,169,988.95, and the total expenditures for all purposes were $1,929,132.52, the net surplus of earnings over expenditures being $240,856.43 for the year, with a grand net surplus of $7,530,960.20 since the establishment of the present system in 1836.
Higher education.
Within the year the Bureau of Education, through its specialists and assistants in higher education, studied the most important recent developments in the universities of England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales; the preparation of teachers for secondary schools of Germany, France, and Great Britain; science teaching in the secondary schools of the United States; the teaching of English in American colleges and high schools; and the teaching of literature in the Gymnasen, Real Schulen, and Lycee of central and western European countries, and continued the investigation of standards in American universities, colleges, technical and professional schools, normal schools, and high schools.
Its representatives visited and inspected 35 American colleges and universities; attended 15 conferences on higher education in different parts of the country; assisted in revising the methods of recording college activities and statistics; examined and certified the reports of the expenditures of Federal funds by the 67 land-grant colleges; made a detailed examination and report of the work of oneof these and a minute and expert examination of the accounts and methods of accounting of three of them.
The bureau worked out plans for the tabulation of college curricula; began a record of important changes in the administration of colleges, universities, and normal schools, and instituted a series of higher education letters.
School administration.
Through its division of school administration it made a digest of all important legislation and judicial decisions in regard to schools and education in all the States for the years 1912, 1913, and 1914; began a complete digest of all the school laws of the several States and completed this for 10 States; and prepared reports on compulsory school attendance, special features in city-school systems, and administration of State systems of education.
It began a systematic study of schools in smaller cities and towns, visiting for this purpose the public schools of 22 cities in 10 States, and assisted in making an extensive survey of the schools of Ogden, Utah.
It issued 22 circular letters on important school legislation and various phases of city-school work.
School hygiene and sanitation.
The division of school hygiene and sanitation collected and installed an important part of the scientific exhibit of the Fourth International Congress on School Hygiene at Buffalo; prepared bulletins on health teaching, buildings and grounds of rural schools, open-air schools, school baths, extensive bibliographies of publications on school hygiene, and a card catalogue of more than 5,000 foreign hygienists.
It assisted school boards in all parts of the country in preparing plans for schoolhouses, laying out school grounds, and in improving the sanitary conditions of school buildings.
Rural schools.
Specialists and special collaborators in rural education made first-hand studies of rural schools in England, Scotland, and Ireland and in 10 States.
In making these studies they visited more than 500 different schools.
They visited and inspected rural high schools and agricultural schools in 15 States, and assisted in campaigns for school improvement in 4 States; they attended about 100 national, State, and local conferences on rural education and meetings of educational associations in which rural education was discussed; they prepared bulletins on.the rural schools of Denmark, based upon studies of the previous year, and reports and bulletins on their studies of schools in the States.
Special studies were made of education in the Southern Appalachian Mountains; of the consolidation of rural schools; of the preparation of teachers for ruralschool work; and of the county unit in rural-school administration, and bulletins were prepared on all these subjects.
About 30 circular letters on rural-school questions were prepared for distribution among rural-school officers.
Kindergartens.
Through its kindergarten division and in cooperation with the National Kindergarten Association and the International Kindergarten Union the bureau made a careful and comprehensive survey of kindergartens and kindergarten work in the United States and of the schools for training kindergarten teachers.
It made a careful study of kindergarten buildings, rooms, and equipment, and an inquiry into the results of kindergarten work as shown in the elementary schools.
It made a brief comparative study of the kindergarten and the Montessori school and a special study of the kindergarten in orphanages and other institutional homes for children.
Negro schools.
Through its division of negro education the bureau made a careful study of secondary and higher schools for negroes in 8 Southern States, visiting for this purpose about 400 different schools, and began a tabulation of the results of this study.
It investigated the systems of accounting in several of these schools, made suggestions for their improvement, and did other constructive work.
It also made some investigation into the elementary public schools for negroes in rural and urban communities.
In this work the bureau cooperated with several agencies and funds for the promotion of the education of the negroes in the South.
Home education.
The division of home education was established to advise parents in regard to the physical, mental, moral, social, industrial, and economic education of their children; to bring about a closer and more intelligent cooperation between home and school; to promote self-culture among older boys and girls and young men and women, and to enable the homes of the country to contribute more toward the education of the children, who are in school less than 4 per cent of the time from birth to 21.
It works through school officers, teachers, and other men and women especially interested in education.
The assistance of nearly 25,000 intelligent women in nearly 1,000 counties has been obtained for this work in rural communities.
Twelve thousand mothers have been given some instruction in the care of young children.
The division has directed the organization of many associations of parents and teachers and has prepared for distribution five reading courses for parents, boys and girls, and young men and women.
Civic education.
The division of civic education, established in February, collected and organized information in regard to civic education in elementary schools, cooperated with several associations in promoting civic education, began a study of the preparation of teachers for work in this and allied subjects, began an inquiry into instruction in government in colleges and universities.
Its representatives visited and advised good government clubs in seven colleges, and conferred with school officers and civic committees in five large cities.
Education of immigrants.
The division of education of immigrants was established late in the spring.
American citizenship and life.
It has also made some investigations in New York and Massachusetts.
Editorial.
The editorial division prepared for publication two volumes of the annual report of the Commissioner, 53 bulletins and more than 200 circular letters, of which approximately 600,000 copies were distributed.
Statistical.
The statistical division collected and compiled statistics of State school systems from all the States and Territories and from 20,863 city school systems, secondary schools, colleges and universities, normal schools, and professional, technical and special schools.
It also collected, compiled, and summarized statistics of 13,595 libraries.
Correspondence.
The correspondence of the year through the offices at Washington and Seattle and the field stations amounted to approximately 97,000 letters each way; 500,727 copies of the publications of the bureau and approximately 100,000 copies of other documents were distributed.
Library.
The library received during the year 4,893 volumes, 8,482 serial publications, and 8,745 numbers of periodicals.
It compiled 223 bibliographies, prepared a monthly record of current educational publications, and circulated 2,246 volumes among teachers and school officers.
The Alaska school service.
For this year the field force of the Alaska school service consisted of 5 superintendents, 1 assistant superintendent, 97 teachers, 9 physicians, 9 nurses, and 3 hospital attendants.
Seventy schools were maintained with an enrollment of approximately 3,800 pupils.
Three hospitals were maintained and natives were cared for under contract by 4 others.
Relief was given sufferers from storm at Nome, from flood at Circle City, from an epidemic of measles on Kodiak Island, Afognak Island, and at Cook Inlet, and from an outbreak of infantile paralysis at Tanana.
The health survey, begun three years ago with the cooperation of the Public Health Service, was continued.
Reservations for natives were made by Executive order at Fort Yukon, Klukwan, Port Gravina, Fish Bay, and Long Bay.
Important progress was made in industrial education at Hydaburg and the cooperative stores conducted by the natives under the direction of government teachers at Hydaburg, Klukwan, and other villages were very successful.
A commodious schoolhouse was finished at Hydaburg and a government school opened at Metlakahtla.
The Alaska reindeer service.
On June 30, 1913, there were in Alaska 47,266 reindeer, distributed among 62 herds.
The increase for the year was 23 per cent, notwithstanding the fact that nearly 5,000 reindeer were killed for their meat and skin.
The total income of the natives from the reindeer industry during the year, exclusive of meat and hides used by the natives themselves, was $66,966.
Commissioner.
In addition to the regular work in the office, the Commissioner visited the Indian villages in southeastern Alaska, attended educational meetings, and visited and inspected schools in 28 States, called national conferences of State superintendents of public instruction, professors of education in State colleges and universities, and rural school inspectors, and made arrangements with the council of the city of Munich, Germany, by which a group of 27 American teachers of industrial subjects were permitted to visit and study in the industrial and continuation schools of that city from Easter to July 15.
Recommendations.
The following recommendations are submitted by the Commissioner: An increase in the salaries of chief clerk, editor, statistician, specialist in land-grant college statistics, specialist in higher education, and other specialists; the removal of the limit on salaries paid from the lump-sum appropriation for rural education and industrial education; provision for an assistant commissioner of education and for additional specialists in higher education and in rural and industrial education; more adequateprovision for the investigation and promotion of the health of children in schools; and provision for the investigation of education and school administration in cities, for the investigation of education of exceptional children, for the investigation and eradication of illiteracy among the adult population, for a fuller study and more adequate promotion of home education, for more effective service to committees and commissions appointed by States and cities and by National and State associations to study and report on various problems of education, for the better care of the library of the bureau, for a more effective editing of the publications of the bureau, for a more comprehensive study of foreign and domestic systems of education, for more complete and accurate statistics, and for definite and scientific experiments in elementary and secondary education.
A larger traveling fund should be provided for the Commissioner and his assistants to enable them to give more direct help to school officers and teachers in all parts of the country.
There should be an adequate appropriation for the care of the health of the natives of Alaska, so that the sick may be properly attended and contagious diseases held in check without encroaching for this purpose on the appropriation for the education of the natives, which is not more than is needed for the support of the schools.
For the next fiscal year there should be a small increase in the appropriation for the distribution of reindeer in Alaska.
Scope of the survey's work.
The investigations of the Geological Survey were continued along lines similar to those followed in preceding years, with the usual number of contributions to science.
The appropriations for the work of the survey for the fiscal year 1914 aggregated $1,517,920.
An amendment to the sundry civil appropriation bill was offered in the House of Representatives which, if agreed to by the Senate, would have restricted the geologic work of the Federal survey to the public lands.
Since the Senate disagreed to this limitation, the only effect of the proposed legislation was to call attention afresh to the question raised in the early years of.
Inadequate appropriation.
The strain upon the survey resulting from the handling of a greatly increased amount of work with an insufficient appropriation continues, although some relief is afforded for the fiscal year 1915 through an increased appropriation for geologic surveys.