WAsHINGToN, November 20, 1915.
Sir: In presenting an outline of the year's work I make bold to express the hope that no other policies of this Government may be allowed to stay the internal development of this country.
There is a fear, how general I do not know, that this Government will halt in carrying out its full and needed program of legislation affecting home affairs because of the immediate need for strengthening our national defenses.
This apprehension arises, I am confident, out of no lack of sympathy with the plan to increase the Army and the Navy, but out of a feeling that the Government in both executive and legislative branches will be so immersed in matters military and naval as to overlook these matters of less dramatic and perhaps less immediate concern.
Any such course would, I am sure, offend the most deep-seated instinct of our people, for in the development of this continent, the discovery of its resources and their highest utilization, there is a fascination to the American which is superlative.
It is indeed our life, and has called out the most sterling qualities in our character.
Those foreigners who write of our country often engage in facetious if not scornful comment upon our bombastic manner of telling the story of our growth and of the things achieved or possessed.
They fail unfortunately to see far enough into the secret of our pride.
To have taken the prize for the largest pumpkin at the county fair, or to have milled more ore in a day than any other mine, or to have built the highest dam in the world¹such things are to us adventures, which make the game of opening a new country worth while.
No one would smile when told that a foreign army had made an unprecedented number of miles in a day's march, or had brought into action a gun of unrivaled caliber, or built a ship of unequaled displacement or power.
These are the very things on which nations pride themselves as revealing their capacity, ingenuity, and resourcefulness.
They make for national self-respect and self-confidence.
And so it is with the American.
His place in the scheme of things is to reveal to the world what can be done in the development of a new country, and every crop raised, every schoolhouse built, every rail laid, every nail driven is evidence that the work he is sent to do is being done.
Instead of being the petty boasting of a parochialminded provincial, this spirit is of the very essence of the highest creative quality.
It is not a figure of speech to say that every American has it in his heart that he is in a small sense a discoverer; that he is joining in the revelation to the world of something that it was not before aware of and of which it may some day make use.
Men work for what they think worth while, and if they find their joy in proving that land has coal, or will raise wheat, or that a refractory ore may be reduced at a practicable cost, and tell about it proudly, they may be serving themselves, but they are also serving the world.
3,000 inhabitants, and has driven a railroad nearly 40 miles inland toward the Arctic Circle on its way to the coal fields of the Matanuska and the gold fields of the Tanana, he has a feeling that he, too, is participating in the making of this new world.
One might say that this was nothing more than sentimental pride.
There is a truer and a more dignified word for this quality; it is the expression of the American instinct for improvement.
We have a passion for going into the unknown, for answering the puzzles that are put to us.
Our imagination is challenged by difficulty.
And the result has been a century of growth, which in its magic and-in its largeness casts a spell upon the mind.
Some months since I sought to learn what I could of the assets of this country as they might be revealed by this department; where we were in point of development, and what we had with which to meet the world which was teaching us that war was no longer a set contest between more or less mobile armed forces but an enduring contest between all the life forces of the contesting parties, their financial strength, their industrial organization and adaptability, their crop yields, and their mineral resources, and that it ultimately comes to a test of the very genius of the peoples involved.
For to mobilize an army, even a great army, is now no more than an idle evidence of a single form of strength if behind this army the nation is not organized.
An army is no longer merely so many rifles and men, cartridges and horses; but chemists and inventors, mines and farms, automobiles and roads, airships and gasoline, barbed wire and turning lathes, railroads and weather prophets—indeed, the complete machinery of an industrial nation's life.
The public domain is rapidly growing less, which means that it is being occupied and used.
Of the two hundred and odd Public lands.
Alaska.
It is heavily mineralized and is a land of unknown possibilities.
One gold mine there has recently erected a mill of 6,000 tons daily capacity, with ore in sight to run this mill for 50 years.
The waters that flow idly to the sea could be made to support not less than 50,000,000 people if turned upon the land The desert.
The demonstration has been given that the lands of little rain can be made more fruitful than those where the rainfall is abundant.
Land and water we have; the problem of bringing them together is one only of money.
When the war in Europe shut off certain chemical supplies, one of our chemists, Mr. Rittman, found a new process Sclentists.
Mr. Parsons and Mr. Moore have devised and proved a process for the reduction of radium from carnotite ores.
An oil expert, Mr. Pollard, was put to the task of saving the billions of feet of gas wasting daily into the air from the oil wells of Oklahoma, and was successful.
Mr. Cottrell has devised a method of taking solids and liquids out of smelter smoke, such as sulphuric acid, arsenic, zinc, and lead.
During the past 50 years the people of the United States have uttered two-thirds of all the revolutionary epoch-Inventors.
Each day we issue an average of 200 letters patent to American inventors, and the number of inventions is increasing with the years.
There are over 20,000,000 boys and girls in the Children.
What has been our policy with respect to these?
How may they be the more highly put to use?
These questions are seen to be more vital than ever before.
And at the outset let me say that I find no need for a change of policy, but only for its expansion.
We have given of our resources as no people ever did before or ever can again.
Within 50 years we gave in subsidies to our railroads public lands that exceeded in size a territory seven times as large as the State of Pennsylvania.
In addition, the Federal Government gave to the States all the swamp and overflowed public lands within their borders, amounting to 64,000,000 acres by roughest approximation, upon condition that they used the proceeds to reclaim the lands, a condition which it may be idle to state has been only in part complied with.
Every country has found itself in embarrassment at the close of a great war.
From Rome under Cæsar to France under Napoleon the problem arose as to what could be done with the men who were to be mustered out of service.
No such embarrassment, however, came to the United States at the end of the Civil War, for out of our wealth in lands we had farms to offer the million veterans—and better use was never made of any land.
Even to-day this"soldiers' scrip" is recognized and is filed to secure choice bits of forest lands or power sites.
Indeed, the peoples of the world were called in and tendered homes, until now, out of an acreage within the United States of a full billion and a half of acres of public domain, we have left as public lands subject to disposal as homesteads and otherwise, less than 280,000,000 acres,1 not one-half of which, it may safely be said, will ever prove to be cultivable.
There passed out of this office last year 61,979 patents to land, some for 160 acres and some for 320 acres—donations from the Nation to the courageous pioneer.
The man who finds gold or silver or iron or lead or copper, or any other of the so-called metalliferous minerals, has it for the asking, sans money and sans price, a prize for discovery.
And all the revenue from the sale of public lands (less 5 per cent, which goes to the States) goes into a fund for the building of irrigation works to reclaim the desert.
A hundred million has been so spent, which is, however, no more than a loan to the farmers.
However, before attempting the governmental construction of such works the Federal Government said to the States through the Carey Act: "If you will irrigate the lands of your State, or if there are private individuals who will do this work, we will give you whatever land you desire up to 1,000,000 acres each and set it apart for 10 years while you try the experiment."
Yet but a small portion of these lands were ever called for by the States, and a still smaller portion have been irrigated, although a number of these projects have been extremely successful.
In some parts of the West, however, the desert is dotted with the deserted homes of those who were lured onto these lands by promising financiers, some promising in good faith and some in the spirit of Mr. J. Rufus Wallingford.
Was there ever a more generous method taken of populating and developing a new land?
Surely there has been no niggardliness on the part of the Government, which has not asked from those who took its lands even so much as the cost of their administration.
In doing all this with so lavish a hand the Government has been expressing the generous instinct of the people and their absorbing determination to"go forth and find."
For a hundred years and a little more this quest has been the drama of our life.
It has given color to our civilization and buoyancy to the hearts of the people.
It has been a century of revelation, and as yet we have only the most superficial knowledge of what this land is, of what it will yield to research, and how it may best be used.
Its development has only begun.
But in all our giving we have been guided by a purpose—the land that we gave was to be converted from wilderness into homes, or from rock into metal.
We gave to the States and to the railroads, with a reservation of minerals.
We gave to the homesteader, with a condition—the land was to be used.
We gave our swamp lands, but to be reclaimed.
We found our coal lands going as farms and we put a price upon them.
We saw our forests being swept clean or monopolized and we held them out from the mass.
Use!
Use by as many as possible!
The superior use!
These were the things we wished and these gave form to our legislation.
No homesteader receives all the lands he wishes, or even all he might use.
One hundred and sixty acres was the limit, not a full section.
But now he may have 320 acres if it is dry farming or grazing land—and for the latter the size might still be increased.
And he can not have it as a speculation.
It must be made a home and brought into the body of the world's producing area by cultivation.
The Government was generous, but it had no intention of being a spendthrift.
When it found itself being imposed upon it stayed its hand and drew back.
So it came about that lands were withdrawn from entry—the Alaskan coal lands, the oil and the phosphate lands, dam and reservoir sites for power plants, and a few water holes which commanded the adjoining miles of desert.
The Nation stayed its hand and drew back, so as to make sure of the right course.
It wished use—use by as many as possible and the best use.
NotE.
Of the 274,000,000 acres of vacant public land in these 11 States, about 14,800,000 acres will be required to satisfy the remaining land grants to these States.
Two years ago I presented in my report what might be termed a program of internal development with respect to land; a railroad into the interior of Alaska; a coal-leasing law for Alaska; a new reclamation act extending the time within which payments were to be made by water users and under which land would be forced into use; a water-power bill governing the use of public lands for hydroelectric development; a general development bill providing for a practicable method of disposing of our oil, gas, coal, phosphate, and potash without danger of monopoly or nonuse.
Of this program the larger portion has been adopted, but the last two failed of passage in the Senate after having been successful in the House.
The plan is to make the West help in its own development.
The royalties from oil, gas, coal, and phosphate lands and from water power developed on public lands should be used for the reclaiming of the arid country and then divided with the States.
The Alaskan railroad is being built.
The Alaskan coal-leasing bill has already been put into effect in a small way by the granting of permits for the operation of small and isolated tracts for industrial and local use.
The lease under which the larger fields which have been reserved may be taken up has been drafted in cooperation with some of the most eminent mine operators of the country.
Its utilization must, of course, await the opening of means of transportation.
The new reclamation act has brought courage to the water users, who found their difficulties almost overwhelming, so new and strange to the people of our northern blood are the problems of irrigation.
The country needs the other bills—urgently, not as a matter of mere local development but as a national necessity.
The need for the general development bill is not difficult to present.
The lands of the Pacific coast are being used intensely in some parts and these lands call for fertilization.
One of the elements which must be restored to the soil is phosphorus.
This is native in most soils but is needed by all after long use.
The orange orchards of California and the apple orchards of Oregon and Washington, not to speak of others, draw heavily upon the soil.
And for its replenishing the orchardists are buying phosphate rock in Florida, which is carried 5,000 miles by water and then inland, while in Idaho, Montana, and Wyoming we have under withdrawal nearly 3,000,000 acres of lands that are underlaid with phosphate rock.
There is no law to-day under which this can be secured.
In Montana and elsewhere throughout the West are smelters which produce the sulphuric acid necessary for the conversion of this rock into practicable fertilizer.
So that the development of this industry waits only upon the passage of a law which will put this mineral at the command of those who need it.
Our coal lands are now subject to sale at appraised values based upon an estimate of the content of the land.
This is at best an expert's guess, and converts each purchase into a gamble, both on the part of the Government and the purchaser.
The bill does not exclude this method, but supplements it with a simple provision by which the purchaser, instead of buying at hazard, may pay a royalty upon what he produces.
It gives the man of moderate means an opportunity to secure a mine.
As to oil and gas, the House committee had extensive hearings at which no practical man engaged in the industry offered any objection to the plan proposed.
The existing law, under which such lands have been taken up, is to be characterized by no politer word than as a plain misfit.
Oil is found hundreds and sometimes thousands of feet below the surface of the earth, yet the law applicable to its acquisition is the placer law, intended to apply to the recovery of superficial minerals.
This law is of romantic origin, for it is the outgrowth of the experience of the Argonauts who went to California in the days of '49.
The measures adopted by these men for the government of their claims along the mountain streams, where they did no more than lift the river sands to the pan or rocker, finally were incorporated into law.
And the governing principle of this law was, that before a man could claim ownership in a placer claim he must have found gold there; and until he did, others might, at their bodily risk to be sure, attempt to make prior discovery.
The utter inapplicability of such a principle to a mineral found perhaps 2,000 feet below the surface, and where the discovery must be made at a cost of twenty, fifty, or a hundred thousand dollars, is clear beyond comment.
Now, under this impossible law a large amount of public land was"taken up," and by that is meant that it was located on and thereafter became a general basis for speculation, and sometimes was developed.
That the law is as hazardous to the investor as it is unsatisfactory to the Government is universally conceded, and in its stead should come a measure under which the Government would give a permit at first, an exclusive permit for drilling, and upon discovery within a given time an area be given as a reward for proving the ground, and adjacent lands leased upon a royalty basis.
There is another charge to be made against the existing law more serious than its unworkability.
It is supremely wasteful.
If the land is leased some control can be exercised over the manner of development.
Millions of barrels of oil have been wasted by being allowed to flow into the streams, by being mixed with water or by evaporation.
There has been no such waste, I am told, in any other mining.
And petroleum is a priceless resource, for it can never be replaced.
Trees can be grown again on the soil from which they have been taken.
But how can petroleum be produced?
It has taken the ages for nature to distill it in her subterranean laboratory.
We do not even know her process.
We may find a substitute for it, but have not yet.
It is practically the one lubricant of the world to-day.
Not a railroad wheel turns without its way being smoothed by it.
We can make light and heat by hydroelectric power, but the great turbines move on bearings that are smothered in petroleum.
From it we get the quick-exploding gas which is to the motor and the airship what air is to the human body.
To industry, agriculture, commerce, and the pleasures of life petroleum is now essential.
Therefore to waste it is a crime.
An absolute government would prohibit a barrel of it being used for fuel before every drop of kerosene, gasoline, and other invaluable constituents have been taken from it.
How much of it there is in the United States no one knows.
The Geological Survey has made a maximum estimate of twenty-three billion barrels, which sounds like an inexhaustible supply.
But at the rate that it is now being consumed in this country alone (265,000,000 barrels a year) this does not mean an indefinite supply, and from the rapid exhaustion of some fields it is manifest that there can be no real approximation of the oil in our lands.
Whatever the supply, it should not be allowed in its crude state to compete with coal as fuel and the Government should not promote its being wasted by applying to it archaic laws under which waste is a certainty.
There is one phase of the oil situation which should be most carefully considered.
President Taft withdrew a large acreage in California and in Wyoming after much of it had been filed upon and after some development had been begun on a part of the lands.
This withdrawal took place in September, 1909, and withdrew part of the lands for the benefit of the Navy as a fuel reserve and other of the lands were to be held awaiting appropriate legislation for their disposal.
The total acreage withdrawn was 3,041,000 acres, of which perhaps one-half was then in private ownership.
There was doubt at the time of these withdrawals as to their legality, there being no specific statute on the books authorizing the action.
So serious was this doubt that as a precautionary measure Congress at its next session passed an act authorizing such withdrawals, and the same lands were subsequently, in July, 1910, withdrawn again.
It was the opinion of many of the most competent members of the bar that the withdrawal of 1909 was void and the operators proceeded to act in accordance with this advice.
The result was that when the second withdrawal, that of 1910, was made, there were a large number of operators engaged in drilling and some had already found oil on these lands.
The Government insisted upon the validity of the 1909 withdrawal, and after failing to have its view sustained in the lower courts, was at last successful before the Supreme Court.
So that to-day those who were not engaged in actual development of the lands at the time of the first withdrawal have no legal title to the lands.
If the full measure of the Government's right is acted upon as a basis of our policy in dealing with these lands it will bankrupt many oil companies and do what appears to me to be an injustice and an unnecessary injustice to those who have invested many millions of dollars under a mistake as to the law.
I shall not assume to say what policy should be followed as to the naval reserves, but as to the other withdrawn lands I believe Congress (which is the one forum wherein relief can be sought) should so act as to recognize the equitable rights of those operators.
This might be done by saying that those who would to-day be entitled to patent were the land not withdrawn may have leases under which they will pay a liberal royalty to the Government.
This plan will doubtless be urged.
I am of the opinion that it is too liberal.
We might draw a line at the time of the second withdrawal.
And if it is thought advisable, there could be imposed a higher royalty than would be called for under the general development bill.
I feel that this is one of those situations often arising in the life of the individual and of the State when it is not wise to exact all that the law allows even as to those who are in the wrong.
When Benjamin Franklin caught the lightning on the tail of his kite, he did a lot of strange things for this world, of which we are only beginning to learn.
Among these are the uses to which flowing water may be put.
The old-fashioned water wheel, which was the motive power of our early industries, is now converted into a'turbine which generates electricity, and this has as great a variety of uses as the muscles of a man's arm or a horse's shoulder.
Among the other strange things done by Benjamin Franklin was to give an added and peculiar value to the ledges of granite which confine our western streams and turn them into dam sites, useful for purposes of power generation.
How many of these there are on public land not yet disposed of no one knows, but we have several hundred under withdrawal, which should be freed from withdrawal and turned into use just as quickly as possible; for, as the muscle of man or horse can raise a few barrels of water from the well to supply stock or irrigate the garden patch, so can the power of the stream, turned into electricity, be used to raise millions of barrels of water to irrigate alfalfa farms or orchards.
And this is now one of the most common uses of electric power in the West, and, in fact, in some of the Eastern States where irrigation is found of value.
The waters that flow down our streams are only a small portion of the rain and snow which fall.
There are streams that follow their courses underground just as clearly marked and as valuable, if once discovered, as the streams above ground.
And to tap these is a part of making America.
Cheap gasoline is doing it in some places; cheap coal in a very few; but cheaper electricity is doing it in a large way.
Then, too, there is that mystifying miracle of drawing nitrogen from the air for chemical use, which can be done only with great power, but is being done in Germany, Norway, Sweden, France, Switzerland, and elsewhere; by which an inexhaustible substitute for the almost exhausted nitrates of Chili has been found.
This is already a great industry in Europe, and will by necessity become greater in the United States than elsewhere, because of our size and need and opportunity.
To increase the yield of our farms and to give us an independent and adequate supply of nitrogen for the explosives used in war, we must set water wheels at work that will fix nitrogen in lime.
And there are still more intimate uses for this power—in places in Montana it is so cheap that it operates the churn, the sewing machine, and the vacuum cleaner, and supplies light to the house and fuel to the kitchen range.
Indeed for the possible uses of electricity there is no measure.
Accompanying the general development bill in its passage through the House was a measure intended to promote hydroelectric development on public lands, named after the chairman of the Public Lands Committee of the House, Mr. Ferris.
This bill was called for by the fact that existing legislation permitted only a revocable permit to be granted for such use, and this was regarded by engineers and financiers as too tentative and hazardous a tenure where millions of money were needed for the installation of the necessary plant.
The Ferris bill meets this difficulty by proposing a lease of these lands for a definite term of 50 years.
The objection is made that the lands should be given outright.
To this there are several answers of substance: No enlightened government gives such a franchise.
There is danger, very real danger, too, of a complete monopolization of such power sites if the lands go forever from the people.
The value of water power is not yet fully realized, and its full value can not be known at this stage in our industrial life.
The purpose of the Government in transferring these lands is to secure their use, because it does not choose to use them itself, but the time may come when it may be most desirable to the full development of our life that they shall be operated by the Nation or the States or the municipalities in the States, and to transfer them forever would cast a burden upon the future which would be unforgivable, and is, moreover, unnecessary.
The people desire these lands used, not held as a mere basis for speculation in stocks or bonds.
Where there is need for such a plant the lands should be available on most generous terms.
At the end of the fifty-year period what becomes of the plant?
If it has been so managed as to best serve the country there would be no reason why the holding company should not have a new lease.
If it had not been so managed the plant should be bought at its value by whoever the new lessee might be, or by those who took over the lands on which it was situated, the State, for instance.
In other countries the plant is generally made to revert to the government at the end of the period without cost; and when it is realized that by establishing an amortization fund of one-half of 1 per cent each year the full expenditure can be refunded in 50 years, the difficulty of caring for the investment should not be insuperable.
The State owns the water, it is said, and should therefore command the right to the use of the land.
This line of reasoning leads to an impasse.
We are not considering rights, but what course is wise.
Quite plainly the State can not command the use of the land and it is not proposed that the Nation shall command the use of the water, for no one can have the land at all unless he first gain the right to use the water from the State.
We have given no other land to the State except for the sustaining of schools and colleges or for reclamation.
If a State wishes coal land, it must buy it.
The traditional policy of the Government has been to deal directly with the people in disposing of their domain.
The fear is expressed that by the imposition of charges for the use of the land an undue and unjust burden will be cast upon the people.
The basis of this fear has not been discovered.
Congress may, of course, if it so desires, fix absolutely the charge that shall be made, and if this were done the charge should be so low as to make the added burden upon the consumer, if any, an infinitesimal one; perhaps first a free period when no charge would be made, and then one-tenth of a mill per kilowatt hour for a period and two-tenths of a mill later.
As already said, with the passage of these two measures there will be no land or resource that will not be at the full service of the people.
And yet the romantic enterprise of revealing America will not be done.
To get from our resources their fullest use—this is our goal.
And this is nothing less than a challenge to the capacity of a democracy.
There are many prosaic details involved in this quest.
The mining men need a new set of mining laws, for instance.
The old code is so elaborate and complicated that the best of brains can not tell what the law is.
The truth seems to be that between mining engineers and mining lawyers the rules of the game have been refined into obscurity.
And if Congress were to say to the President that he might select three men familiar with mining laws and miners' difficulties to suggest a new mining code to Congress, it would, I believe, be giving in earnest a new freedom to the mining industry.
Then, too, there is the matter of the further development of Alaska.
That land is a long way off.
It would be too hazardous a thing to surrender these resources to local control or disposal, for those who have lived in any new country know how great the temptation is to grant away water front and power sites, forests, and other exceptional resources to those who come offering large sums for quick improvement.
Yet this should not drive us into a policy that makes slow administration a necessity.
The confusion in administrative action in Alaska is well known.
I have tried to give it currency that it might hasten the establishment of some method of coordinated control of Alaskan affairs, primarily in the hands of a resident commission but always in touch with and responsive to the wish of Congress and the President through one of the departments.
That land has a mysterious charm, a pull which affects all who see it and those, too, who only know indirectly of its largeness, its grandeur, and its economic possibilities.
This could not be better illustrated than by the number of applications for places which were received by the Alaskan Engineering Commission.
When that body left for Alaska in the spring the number was over 38,000, and most of those who applied were not out of work but already held positions with railroads, in banks, on farms, or in some city shop.
They wished a taste of the large life of this new land.
There are many more of the same desire, some of whom will make Alaska richer by their presence and find happiness in searching out the land.
And strongly would I urge that the standpoint of the Government should continue one of sympathetic cooperation.
No one can survey the physical condition of the United States without being impressed and almost overwhelmed with the magnitude of the work that must be done in keeping our rivers within bounds and putting them to use.
It is the largest task that the Government must undertake sooner or later, and the sooner in my judgment the better.
This matter came immediately and most practically to my attention on a trip made in the late spring to the lower valley of the Colorado River.
Government is reclaiming the desert.
That lowland will grow almost anything, from dates to alfalfa.
Its most helpful friend, and its unrelenting enemy, too, is the river itself, for without the river it would return to cactus and sage.
Yet the river is so jealous of her freedom that she yearly attempts with violence, and by insidious methods as well, to reclaim for herself each foot of land that has by stealth been taken from her.
On the opposite side of the river, the California side, the river is held in by mountains, until it has reached the Mexican line.
There, by a capricious turn, it deserts its old-accustomed channel and flows westward into what was once a lake, but is now little more than a morass, and so slowly finds its way to the Gulf of California.
Immediately north of this westward bend in the river is the Imperial Valley, which has lately been used by several novelists to illustrate the heroic struggle of man with nature.
For this valley was once a sea itself, and has indeed left a sort of rudimentary sea in a lake known as the Salton Sea.
The fruitful soil of this valley, hundreds of feet deep, is the silt of the Colorado, the deposited wash of a thousand miles of mountain channel.
Each June, when the snows of the Rockies melt, the Colorado, resenting the limitations which man has set up for it, presses with two strong shoulders against both sides of its prescribed banks, like Porthos under the slow caving of the earth.
And as long as that flood comes the people on both sides must watch and work as the Hollanders have done.
There are two distinct and aggressive schools of thought on this matter of keeping the Colorado in its place.
One is for sending the river willy-nilly down the old channel.
The other is for letting the river live its own life, but keeping it off our preserves.
One may be termed the absolutist theory and the other the democratic theory.
Congress has thus far committed itself to the latter.
And this year, when danger threatened, Congress joined in raising a fund to keep the river from forcing its way north into the Imperial Valley, and this work was successfully executed under this department by the former Chief of Engineers of the United States Army, Gen. W. L. Marshall.
No one, however, believes that the work is at an end or that we have done more than put a good patch upon it.
Valley.
We need to catch that water when it is young, soon after it has been born from the snows.
There, in mountain valleys, it should be kept for a time and, as needed, led into the peaceful paths of usefulness.
And on that problem the Reclamation Service is working.
The difficulty is to find large reservoir areas.
This instance is cited to show how intimately the matter of flood control and of reclamation are bound together.
The problem extends from sea to sea.
When we come eastward, to the Missouri and the Mississippi for example, we find that in their upper reaches the lands need the waters, while in their lower reaches the lands must be saved from the waters.
No one can take the yearly toll of lives lost and of property destroyed by the furious and unrestrained sweep of our rivers without realizing that the people of this country can not regard themselves as owning this land, really possessing it, until they have brought these waters under subjection.
And in doing this they will literally create new land by the millions of acres, lands that will support millions of people as against the thousands which live upon it to-day.
And in saying this I am not speaking without authority, for a year ago we enjoyed the value of a visit from the renowned builder of the Assuan Dam, Sir William Willcocks, who has spent his life in India, Mesopotamia, and Egypt as a river tamer.
And after he had seen our problem he sighed with regret that it might not be his fortune to see the day, that he said would surely come, when the valley of the Mississippi would be another valley of the Nile, only greater in area and more perfectly adapted to the white man's life.
How these great works can be carried on calls for constructive thought, not merely on the engineering side but more immediately upon the financial side as to those ways and means by which the lands reclaimed shall be made to bear in some degree the burden of the expense.
As to the funds which will be needed, they mount into such figures as to be staggering.
And I can see no hope that this work will be adequately undertaken without the Government advancing its credit and investing directly some of its own funds.
We are conducting this Government from day to day out of current revenues.
Only the richest of people could pursue such a policy.
No private enterprise attempts it.
No railroad system has been built that way.
But few of the States now construct their highway systems out of the year's revenues.
The permanent improvements which the whole people undertake are a legitimate charge against capital account, not against maintenance.
A commission to devise the ways and means by which the States and private land owners and the National Government can cooperate in paying for the work done seems to me a more needed body than one which will report upon engineering methods.
In casting up the assets of the United States as a landed proprietor I have made no mention of one of the most delightful of our national enterprises.
To build a railroad, reclaim lands, give new impulse to enterprise, and offer new doors to ambitious capital—these are phases of the ever-widening life and activity of this Nation.
The United States does more; it furnishes playgrounds to the people which are, we may modestly state, without any rivals in the world.
Just as the cities are seeing the wisdom and the necessity of open spaces for the children, so with a very large view the Nation has been saving from its domain the rarest places of gradeur and beauty for the enjoyment of the world.
And this fact has been discovered by many only this year.
Having an incentive in the expositions on the Pacific coast, and Europe being closed, thousands have for the first time crossed the continent and seen one or more of the national parks.
That such mountains and glaciers, lakes and canyons, forests and waterfalls were to be found in this country was a revelation to many, who had heard but had not believed.
It would appear from the experience of this year that the real awakening as to the value of these parks has at last been realized, and that those who have hitherto found themselves enticed by the beauty of the Alps and the Rhine and the soft loveliness of the valleys of France, may find equal if not more stimulating satisfaction in the mountains, rivers, and valleys which this Government has set apart for them and for all others.
It may reconcile those who think that money expended upon such luxuries is wasted—if any such there are—to be told that the soberminded traffic men of the railroads estimate that this year more than a hundred million dollars usually spent in European travel was divided among the railroads, hotels, and their supporting enterprises in this country.
During the year a new national park of distinction and unusual accessibility has come into existence.
It crosses the Rockies in Colorado at a point of supreme magnificence; hence its title, the Rocky Mountain National Park.
Through it, from north to south, winds the Continental Divide—the Snowy Range in name and fact.
Two hundred lakes grace this rocky paradise, and bear and bighorn inhabit its fastnesses.
It has an area of 350 square miles and lies only 70 miles from Denver.
Many hotels lie at the feet of these mountains and three railroads skirt their sides.
This is Colorado's second national park, the other being Mesa Verde, where this department, with the assistance of Dr. Jesse Walter Fewkes, of the Smithsonian Institution, has uncovered during the last summer prehistoric ruins of unprecedented scientific interest.
Oregon has but recently completed a great highway along the Columbia River.
This should be connected by road with Mount Hood and a portion of the present forest reserve converted into a park.
The limits of Sequoia Park, in California, the home of the great redwoods, should be so extended as to include the Kern River Canyon, a most practicable project to-day; but to-morrow may be too late, because of the lumber interests.
The Grand Canyon is not yet part of the park system, although as part of a national forest it comes under the control of the Department of Agriculture.
There is no reason why this Nation should not make its public health and scenic domain as available to all its citizens as Switzerland and Italy make theirs.
The aim is to open them thoroughly by road and trail and give access and accommodation to every degree of income.
In this belief an effort has been made this year as never before to outfit the parks with new hotels which should make the visitor desire to linger rather than hasten on his journey.
One hotel was built on Lake McDermott, in Glacier Park, one is to be built immediately on the shoulder of Mount Rainier, in Paradise Valley, another in the valley of the Yosemite, with an annex high overhead on Glacier Point, while more modest chalets are to be dotted about in the obscurer spots to make accessible the rarer beauties of the inner Yosemite.
For with the new Tioga road, which, through the generosity of Mr. Stephen T. Mather and a few others, the Government has acquired, there is to be revealed a new Yosemite, which only John Muir and others of similar bent have seen.
This is a Yosemite far different from the quiet, incomparable valley.
It is a land of forests, snow, and glaciers.
From Mount Lyell one looks, as from an island, upon a tumbled sea of snowy peaks.
Its lakes, many of which have never been fished, are alive with trout.
And through it foams the Tuolumne River which in a mile drops a mile, a water spectacle destined to world celebrity.
Meeting obstructions in its slanting rush, the water now and again rises nearly perpendicularly, forming upright foaming arcs sometimes 50 feet in height.
These water wheels," a dozen or more in number, will-be accessible next summer by a trail to be built when the snow melts in June.
While as the years have passed we have been modestly developing the superb scenic possibilities of the Yellowstone, nature has made of it the largest and most populous game preserve in the Western Hemisphere.
Its great size, its altitude, its vast wildernesses, its plentiful waters, its favorable conformation of rugged mountain and sheltered valley, and the nearly perfect protection afforded by the policy and the scientific care of the Government have made this park, since its inauguration in 1872, the natural and inevitable center of game conservation for this Nation.
There is something of significance in this.
It is the destiny of the national parks, if wisely controlled, to become the public laboratories of nature study for the Nation.
And from them specimens may be distributed to the city and State preserves, as is now being done with the elk of the Yellowstone which are too abundant, and may be later with the antelope.
If Congress will but make the funds available for the construction of roads over which automobiles may travel with safety (for all the parks are now open to motors) and for trails to hunt out the hidden places of beauty and dignity, we may expect that year by year these parks will become a more precious possession of the people, holding them to the further discovery of America and making them still prouder of its resources, esthetic as well as material.
I turn now from young America, the land that is underdeveloped, to Young America, our twenty-two million school boys and girls; for these, after all, are our chief resource and our chief concern.
Are we doing all possible to develop this resource?
If there is any one of our institutions in which the American people take undisguised pride and of which they feel justified in boasting, it is the public school system, for this is "the greatest of American inventions" and the most successful social enterprise yet undertaken by any people.
The United States maintains a Bureau of Education in this department, which, upon a small appropriation, collates as best it can the figures and facts which most inadequately tell the story of the growth and use of this most brilliantly conceived piece of governmental machinery.
The American people are not indifferent to their schools.
Quite otherwise.
They pay for their support almost as much as they do for the support of the entire Federal Government; in round numbers, three-quarters of a billion dollars a year, which keeps an army of 600,000 teachers at work.
Education is indeed our foremost industry from whatever point of view it may be regarded.
Yet I am assured that it has made less progress than any of our other industries during the past 30 years.
With all the marvelous record of what the mind of a quick people may produce to make life happier and nature more serviceable, how little can be shown as our contribution to the methods of improving the mind and skill of the young!
We have gone to Europe—to Italy, Switzerland, Germany, and Denmark chiefly—for the new methods with which we have experimented, and Japan has found a way to instruct through the eyes and hands that will make these very practical people still more distinguished.
Yet here and there under rare leadership may be found in this country the most striking proofs of what can be done to tie our schools to our life.
The hope is eventually to make the school what it should be, and easily may be made to be, the very heart of the community—social club and cooperative center as well as school.
There would seem to be nothing visionary in such a hope.
To effect this evolution there is needed primarily leadership, and this the Government must give if it is to realize its desire for a people who are both skilled and happy.
The spirit of our people is against a paternal government.
We do not take with kindness to an authority that is mandatory.
There is a sound belief that a people who make their own way are in the end riper and of stronger fibre than those who accept what is not the result of common determination.
But this spirit of intense individualism does not make us independent of or indifferent to useful methods and helpful standards.
And it is these that we can reveal.
It is these that we should find and place in service, rather than force the disconnected schools of the land to feel their way out or"muddle through."
We may not command, but we may"show how."
This is democracy's substitute for absolutism in the effort to secure efficiency.
For such policy of helpfulness there is abundant precedent, not only in the action of Congress in making minor appropriations for the work of the Bureau of Education on precisely these lines, but in the activities of other departments.
The country is dotted with experimental farms which prove soil values and the farmer of to-day is learning from the Government how great and all-embracing must be the knowledge necessary to the carrying on of his work, for he must know of chemistry, mechanics, markets and finance, transportation, and a world of things which his father or grandfather would have laughed at as the frills of a doctrinaire education, notwithstanding the early example of the wise and manysided farmer who was the third President of this country.
I have said in a previous report that the Bureau of Education should either be abolished or put to serious high purpose.
I believe the latter to be the wise, in fact the necessary, course.
There is a real use for it.
As in the Bureau of Mines we seek to save the lives of miners by educating them in the use of explosives and life-saving apparatus, and by instructing operators in safe methods of building their vast underground workshops, so I would erect the Bureau of Education into a Bureau of Educational Methods and Standards in which would be gathered the ripe fruit of all educational experiments upon which the schools of the country could draw.
This is a wide country, and there is need for a national clearing house where can be centered and exchanged the results of the most remote experiments.
There is no disguising the fact that we have a most difficult problem in the United States—and I can not believe it is ours alone—in the rural community.
A majority of our school children are in rural schools.
The query arises, Are our rural schools doing their part in making life in the country desirable?
An ambitious people will go where education can be had for their children.
There is no sense in talking of the charms of country life and the independence and dignity of producing from the soil if the school at command is no more modern than a wooden plow.
The old-fashioned one-roomed schoolhouse which holds 40 or 50 ungraded pupils, having but a single teacher who knows nothing but books, is not a modern institution, though great men have issued from its door.
It may be all that the county can afford where many schools are maintained, but it is not all that the county can afford if schools are grouped and grades instituted.
The richest State in the Union has over 4,000 schools of this character, wherein the teachers are paid less than competent farm hands, and this brings to mind the correlative thought that one needed reform in the school system is in the elevation of teaching into a real profession, as in older countries.
As it is now, a teacher is almost without status in our society.
And this, in addition to the inadequacy of the pay, has drawn to the profession those who use it only as a makeshift, and those who, out of a spirit of self-sacrifice and love for the work, serve in the highest way the public good.
Of the former class we need fewer, and to the latter should come increasing honor.
How can the schools of a county be so coordinated and combined as to make them efficient tools?
What should be the standard for a teacher's qualifications?
How may children be brought to and taken from the school to distant homes at the least expense?
To what extent should the teaching be out of doors and the"examples" those of real life?
How can the boy learn that there is adventure in farm life as well as in the city?
To what uses may the school building be put as a community center for the neighborhood dance, lecture, or moving-picture show, or, perhaps, as the home of a cooperative buying or marketing organization?
These are but a few of the questions which many men have tried to answer, and there have been some successful experiments made and right answers given.
But it is as hopeless a task for a local school board to find these answers as for a lawyer to know the decisions of all the courts.
The teachers, the superintendents, and the school boards need leadership; they need an authoritative statement of conclusions by the wisest and most practical men in the land; they need to be shown the better way.
And with even as little as a hundred thousand dollars a year for two or three years we could, I believe, conduct a campaign for a new kind of rural school that would work little less than a revolution in rural life.
Our aim would be to identify the school with the farm and the village, and develop a new respect in fathers and mothers for the school as a practical and not a mere scholastic institution.
The problem is only one of popularization.
The experimental work has been done.
We know where the best seed is.
Here is call for the cooperative leadership of the Government in a work of supreme value to the State.
The man to direct this work should be one whose word the Nation would heed.
That such a man can be secured there is no doubt, for experience justifies the statement that there are no men of large capacity whose services the country can not command at a material sacrifice.
If asked how this work could be done I should say that it could best be done by showing to the picked teachers of the country the model schools.
The quickest and the surest way to set this country aflame with zeal for a better type of country school would be to show the teachers such schools, make them live in them, and learn from them by seeing them in action.
There is no such lesson as the one that is taught by experience.
Lectures, moving pictures, and books may aid.
But to see and be part of a movement or life is to make it one's own.
If ten live men or women were taken from each State to some one of the two or three most modern rural schools and there for a month were initiated into the art of teaching out of life, by doing things and not reading about things being done, and if each of these ten went home a missionary for the new idea, how long would it be before the States were converted and old methods abandoned?
And once the right kind of school were started in any State how long would it take others to follow?
This thing can be done and by methods that are so simple and direct that they will be startling.
The need is immediate, and surely it would be a shame to let a generation waste itself while the idea slowly creeps on all-fours through a country that has invented wireless telephony.
In this work the newspapers of the country could, and I feel assured would, give invaluable assistance.
Not merely by the publicity given to the movement, but more definitely by helping in the selection of the candidates for this opportunity, in sending them to these selected schools, and carrying on the campaign for putting what they have found into reality.
There is an evolution in a new nation's life quite as interesting as that in the life of a man.
We pass through stages of development from the simple and earlier period when food is the one thing desired into the more elaborated and complex stages where first we begin to deal with the easily handled things and later reach the point where mind has a controlling part in all that is done.
The pioneer builds his cabin and turns his cattle to graze upon the unfenced wilderness.
He takes his water from the stream and makes his gun serve him with food and give him protection.
It is not many years, however, before he has passed from herdsman to farmer, when soil must be plowed and seed sown.
At first the one-horse plow will do, and any seed.
But life grows more intense—society has gathered around, new demands are created—machinery must be used, seed must be selected, soil fertilized, credit obtained, markets sought, and the life of the simple herdsman has become complicated and broad.
The gay recklessness of other days gives way to constant thought.
So has it been with this country.
For a long time we lived off the country's obvious supplies.
Later we were producers of raw materials—grains and minerals, lumber and cotton.
When manufacturing began it was of the larger, coarser things, which perhaps in their turn went abroad for higher fabricating.
Now, however, we have come into the full tide of modern life when we seek for greater and more varied industries, wider markets, more economical methods of production and exchange.
And in such a new time direction is needed, mutual and coordinated effort must be set up and the more elaborate machinery of organization put into service.
Thought becomes the basis of the new life—hard, close, insistent, constructive thought, illuminated by knowledge and made practical by imagination.
I have reviewed some of the activities of this department that they may suggest how adequate to the task of efficient national development a democracy, even one so young, may be made to be.
It has a foundation in the spirit and self-confidence of its people which no other government can have.
There is needed but the crystallizing touch of coordinated action to make its success complete.
To develop methods by which the energies of many individuals shall be brought to work together is the need.
And as the method of doing this politically has been found in this Republic, so we may feel assured that economically and socially we shall not fail.
An intense nationalization has been the marking note of the past year.
Each American has realized with keener consciousness the meaning of this land to him, and has sought for a larger view of it in its many aspects and, if possible, to gain a glimpse at its future.
To each has come his dream.
We know now that there is more to national feeling than pride in the possession of a land that is rare and valuable or the splendid memory of a history of struggle for those things of the spirit which men call principles.
The highest sense of nationality comes with a sense of purpose—a sense of common purpose.
In what direction are we consciously going?
What are we determined that this land shall be?
This, I take it, is the accepted test of a real national sense; and if it is, the obligations we must carry are certainly serious.
For the United States is not yet ours in the proudest sense, and can not be until we are doing all that can be done to give to all its people and to the world the full expression of its highest intelligence applied alike to its resources and to the life of the people.
1. Patented under all classes of entries, 13,025,427 acres, as against 12,678,076 acres in 1913 and 10,135,475 acres in 1912.
2. Issued 2,711 patents on desert-land entries, embracing 448,752 acres, as against 2,127 patents, embracing 346,794 acres, during the year previous; 2,209 patents, embracing 356,477 acres, in 1913; and 2,285 patents, embracing 364,728 acres, in 1912.
3. Issued 1,669 patents in fee to Indians, relieving 202,050 acres from restrictions against alienation and rendering such acreage subject to taxation, as against 986 patents, embracing 122,432 acres, in 1913, and 1,051 patents, embracing 137,267 acres, in 1912.
4. Patented 146,079 acres under the Carey Act, as against 4,244 acres the year before and 35,170 acres in 1912–13.
5. Patented and certified under railroad and wagon-road grants, 1,624,142 acres, as against 828,911 acres in 1914, 1,340,998 acres in 1913, and 20,975 acres in 1912.
6. Allowed entries of public and Indian lands for 16,861,214 acres, as against 16,522,852 acres in 1914, 15,867,222 acres in 1913, and 14,574,688 acres in 1912.
7. Disposed of 2,943 applications for second entry, compared with 777 in 1914, 749 in 1913, and 837 in 1912.
8.
Approved and accepted original surveys covering 11,988,387 acres and 2,350,962 acres of resurveys, an acreage largely in excess of accepted surveys in any year during the last two decades.
9. Surveyed and opened to entry 27,416 acres of Arkansas lands heretofore erroneously shown on the plats of survey as lake or sunk lands.
10. Reserved 23 town sites on the line of the new Government railroad in Alaska.
11. Laid out and surveyed town site of Anchorage, Alaska, and sold at public sale 655 town lots for $148,980, all within six months.
12. Disposed of 1,389 applications for rights of way for irrigation and kindred purposes, as compared with 898 of the same class the year previous.
13. Investigated 714 railroad rights of way under original action taken in the present year, of which 302 were declared forfeited for failure to construct the road.
14. Issued notices for the restoration of 2,838 lists of lands in national forests, by which approximately 280,000 acres of agricultural lands were opened to homestead entry, compared with 2,580 lists embracing 255,000 acres the year previous.
15. Restored to the public domain 530,841 acres as the result of investigations by the field service, as against 516,298 acres the year previous.
16. Sold 889 tracts of lands surveyed as villa sites, fronting on Flathead Lake, Mont., for $125,000, some tracts selling for $300 per acre.
First sale of the kind in the disposition of public lands.
17: Settled and disposed of controversy of several years' standing, involving the exchange of over 400,000 acres of land in the Navajo and Moqui Indian Reservations, Ariz., for lands outside of said reservations.
18. Restored to settlement and entry after special investigation in the field 7,805 acres in the Imperial Valley, Cal.
19. Surveyed in the field under the Alaska coal leasing act of October 20, 1914, the coal lands in the Matanuska, Bering River, and Nenana coal fields, organizing therefor 15 field parties.
20. Restored from national forests during the period from March 14, 1913, to June 30, 1915, inclusive, 4,789,910 acres, as against 2,400,149 acres restored during the period from November 4, 1910, to March 3, 1913, inclusive.
21. Surveyed within railroad grants during 1914 and 1915 4,008,000 acres, as against 1,620,000 acres in 1912 and 1913.
1. Health conditions are considered of first importance.
Six new hospitals were constructed during the past year in furtherance of a vigorous health campaign.
Every Indian hospital bed not necessarily occupied with those suffering from disease or injury is being utilized for the Indian mother in childbirth.
Education and protection of property are highly important, but everything is regarded secondary to the basic condition which makes for the perpetuation of the race.
2. The Indian Office has taken aggressive steps toward the development of improved vocational training, and has adopted plans in several of the boarding schools which will accomplish the educational training necessary to instill in the Indian youth the real object of educational equipment.
Emphasis is being placed on agriculture and domestic science.
This program will be carried out in all nonreservation and reservation boarding schools.
3. All Indian schools and reservations are being required to utilize every acre of available farm land for the production of the things they consume.
Every effort is being put forth to the end that the Indians shall no longer be altogether consumers but shall become producers, thereby bringing about a corresponding reduction in congressional appropriations.
4. Through the use of the $600,000 reimbursable appropriation for the promotion of industry among Indians the Indian Office has been enabled to purchase equipment and establish on a sound and businesslike basis numerous Indian families on farms and through this system of loans promote the financial integrity and prosperity of the Indians participating in this fund.
5. The policy of promoting and developing the live-stock industry by the purchase of 2,678 stallions, 1,048 bulls, 12,272 heifers, 2,510 steers, 3,738 cows, 2,110 mares, 469 rams, 513 sheep, 670 horses, and 67 mules at an expense of one and a half million dollars, inaugurated during the year ending June 30, 1914, has been continued by the expenditure of a similar amount during the year ending June 30, 1915, in the purchase of 3,682 horses and mules, 72 stallions and jacks, 15,804 cows and heifers, 1,194 bulls, and a considerable number of other miscellaneous stock.
6. The increase in the number of Indian-owned stock has correspondingly decreased the areas of grazing ranges for lease.
This condition, together with the advanced prices of beef, mutton, and wool and the great demand for horses and mules, has materially increased the number of bidders for Indian-reservation leases and has resulted in uniformly advanced prices for grazing privileges.
7. The number of acres farmed by the Indians has been greatly increased during the last year, more than three times the amount of seed having been distributed last spring than ever before.
8. Developed a new type of cotton of the long staple Egyptian variety, which has been given the name of"Pima," after the name of the Indian reservation in Arizona on which it was produced.
Approximately $1,000,000 will be realized from this production during the year.
9. The greatest efforts are being put forth to induce the Indians to take advantage of the expenditures, totaling more than $12,000,000, for irrigation construction, which in the past on several projects have been almost unproductive.
On many reservations the areas actually irrigated have been more than doubled in the year of this report.
10. For the first time an appropriation out of the Ute judgment fund was made for the benefit of the several tribes of Ute Indians.
Since March 14, 1915, more than 20,000 acres on the Uintah Reservation has been placed under cultivation and the water rights thereby protected.
11. During the year the first real step toward a systematic and comprehensive inventory of the timber resources of the Indians has been taken.
12. The rules of probate procedure adopted by the county judges at the suggestion of the commissioner, afterwards promulgated by the Supreme Court, have in their enforcement resulted in the saving and safe investment of more than $1,000,000 during the last half of the fiscal year to the Indians of Oklahoma.
13. New regulations have been adopted to govern the leasing of the Osage lands for oil and gas purposes, which become effective in March of next year.
Under these regulations the Osage Indians will receive one-sixth, and in some cases one-fifth, royalty instead of oneeighth on oil and one-sixth royalty on gas instead of a nominal payment on each producing well.
They will also receive $1 per acre per annum on all undeveloped leased territory until the same is developed.
Large tracts of producing territory under leases expiring March 16, 1916, will be leased on competitive bidding, from which it is expected a great sum of money will be realized.
Improved drilling conditions have been adopted which will greatly diminish the waste in oil and gas throughout all Oklahoma.
2. Returned to the Treasury $3,534,964.08 (including $53,230.22 repayments) of the amount appropriated by Congress for the payment of pensions.
3. Returned to the Treasury $190,296.46 of the sum appropriated for maintenance and expense of the pension system, including salaries of special examiners.
4. Reduced the number of employees by 93 persons without the necessity of dismissing or removing any employee.
This was in addition to the reduction of the force by 145 persons for the preceding year.
5. Continued with increasing facility the payment of pensions without vouchers, enabling the pensioners to receive their checks earlier than under the former system and saving to such pensioners the cost of execution of vouchers.
6. Inaugurated an accounting system by which the exact status of the work of the bureau is ascertained and recorded every day, which has resulted in equalization of the work among the examiners, and elimination of idleness due to waiting for distribution of work.
7. Secured statements showing the marital status of about 350,000 male pensioners for use in the adjudication of widows' claims filed hereafter, and making permanent record of the history of these soldiers.
8. Convictions were obtained in 39 out of 40 criminal cases tried during the year because of violation of the pension laws.
9. By requiring pension claimants to make statement before the board of examining surgeons of all disabilities alleged to be due to service, a large reduction has been effected in the number of medical examinations ordered, the reason being that such a statement eliminates repeated applications by the same claimant based upon new disabilities.
The amount expended for examining surgeons' fees in 1915 was $45,704.40, as against $128,206.17 in 1912.
1. For the first time in years the office disposed of as many applications as were received, although the number of applications filed has not fallen off.
During the years 1912 and 1913 there were filed 8,000 more applications per year than were disposed of.
2. The total number of applications awaiting action June 30, 1914, was 22,283.
On June 30, 1915, there were 18,270, a decrease of 4,013.
3. The number of patents granted in 1914 was 38,225, and the number in 1915, 44,402, an increase of 6,177.
4. Caused a reduction in the number of interferences declared from 1,129 in 1914 to 916 in 1915—a decrease of 213.
1. Inspected the work of 35 universities and colleges in North Carolina and Oregon at the request of the State superintendents of public instruction of those States; made a preliminary survey of higher institutions in the State of Washington; rendered decisions as to the eligibility of 402 universities, colleges, and schools for inclusion in the list of institutions to be accredited by the United States Military Academy.
2. Completed a digest of all the school laws of all the States.
3. Assisted committees of State legislatures in the preparation of proposed educational legislation; assisted in a survey of normal schools in Alabama.
4. Established a division of school and home gardening for the promotion of home gardening under the direction of the school.
The plan advocated by the bureau has already been adopted by more than 100 superintendents.
5. Established a division of industrial education, with one specialist in industrial education and two specialists in home economics, for the promotion and investigation of various types of vocational education.
6. Completed the field work in the study of 575 schools for negroes.
7. Made studies of the provisions existing in various localities for the education of adult immigrants and assisted education officers in such localities in preparing plans for the elimination of illiteracy.
8. Prepared home reading courses for distribution to interested persons.
9. Prepared and put into operation a code of regulations for the self-government of the colony of natives at Metlakahtla, Alaska; procured the setting aside of two additional tracts of land as reservations for the natives of Alaska, one of the Kobuk River and another on Cook Inlet in southwestern Alaska; established two additional herds of reindeer, one at Atka and another on Annette Island.
1. Completed geologic and topographic surveys in United States, Alaska, and Hawaii aggregating nearly 112,000 square miles, an area larger than the State of Colorado.
The items of increase over the work of the previous year include nearly 2,000 square miles more of detailed geologic mapping in the States and a net increase in Alaska of 5,000 square miles in the exploratory and reconnaissance topographic surveys as well as 1,400 square miles more of geologic surveys.
2. Continued the stream gaging at 1,350 stations in 41 States and Hawaii.
3. Classified about 23,000,000 acres of public lands, including action on 3,996 petitions for the designation of nonirrigable lands for entry under the enlarged homestead act.
The area included in these designations is nearly 17,500,000 acres.
The number of petitions from intending entrymen acted upon in the two last years, 9,395, is more than 5 times the number acted upon in the five years 1909-1913.
4. Furnished the General Land Office with reports containing specific information as to the mineral character or water resources of public lands on 10,150 cases other than the enlarged homestead petitions.
This record of reports, which is a measure of the cooperation between the two bureaus, shows an increase of more than 1,000 cases over the number handled in a similar period three years ago.
5. Published reports—scientific, economic, and statistical—aggregating 23,574 pages, a notable increase over any preceding year.
Of these and other Survey publications in stock 596,649 copies were distributed to the public.
The plan of securing the assistance of postmasters in the sale of local topographic maps has been started this year.
6. Published a series of four guidebooks of the West, plainly written, in the effort to make the geologic descriptions of the country traversed readily understood by the average traveler.
This is the begining of a definite movement to popularize the results of the scientific investigations of the Survey.
7. Issued for the first time a mid-year statement reviewing business conditions in the mining industry for the six-month period.
8. Prepared special bulletins to meet the demand for authoritative information concerning possible sources of mineral products hitherto imported; and conducted extensive correspondence bringing producers and consumers together.
This special service to the public has been rendered with the definite purpose of helping to make America more independent industrially.
1. Added 110,000 acres to the area for which the service is prepared to supply irrigation water.
2. Irrigated over 750,000 acres, a larger area than that of cultivated or improved farm lands in Delaware and several times that in Rhode Island.
3. Furnished water to grow irrigated crops worth $16,500,000, equaling in value the annual crop production of New Hampshire.
4. Operated about 9,000 miles of canals, ditches, and drains.
5. Expended $15,000,000 in building reservoirs and other irrigation works.
6. Excavated 17,000,000 cubic yards of earth and rock, the equivalent in volume of a shaft to the center of the earth over 5 feet in diameter.
7. Constructed 753 miles of canals; 284 miles of waste-water ditches and open drains; 60 miles of irrigation and drainage pipe lines; 7,597 canal structures, including 747 bridges; 1,079 culverts and 311 flumes; 51 miles of roads; 178 miles of telephone lines; lined 54 miles of irrigation canals with concrete.
8. Placed three-fourths of a million cubic yards of concrete, sufficient to build a sidewalk 6 feet wide and 3 inches thick over 2,500 miles long.
9. Added to the capacity of its storage reservoirs over 1,000,000 acre-feet, making a total of 6,500,000 acre-feet, a volume that would cover the States of New Jersey and Delaware to a depth of 12 inches.
10. Manufactured 580,000 barrels of sand cement.
The highest dam in the world—the Arrowrock Dam in Idaho.
The dam empounding the largest quantity of water of any artificial reservoir in the word, except Gatun Lake—the Elephant Butte Dam in New Mexico.
The longest roller-crest dam in the United States—the Grand River Dam in Colorado.
The earthen dam with curved stepped spillways of concrete—the Lahontan Dam in Nevada.
12. Reorganized its field forces so as better to coordinate the work in widely scattered localities and improve the efficiency of the organization and economy in building and operating irrigation works.
Established an executive office at Denver, Colo., centralizing the work of disbursing and purchasing for all reclamation projects.
1. Gave to the public a process, devised by one of the bureau's chemists, Dr. Walter F. Rittman, whereby refiners may obtain from crude oils 200 per cent more gasoline than was obtainable by old methods, increasing the prospective life of every oil field, adding a vast sum to the national wealth, and perhaps assuring to automobile and motor-boat owners and all others using gasoline a cheaper fuel.
2. Also gave to the public a second process, devised by Dr. Rittman, whereby benzol and toluol, the first used largely as a base for the manufacture of synthetic dyes and the latter in the manufacture of high explosives, can be made from petroleum—processes which it is hoped may make this country independent of foreign sources of the supply of materials so vitally important to its industries.
Its ultimate success means the ability of the United States to manufacture all the high explosives it might need in peace or in times of national stress, and also the establishment of a dyestuffs industry in this country.
3. Devised methods for the production of radium from the carnotite ores of Colorado and Utah at an average cost of $36,500 a gram, two-thirds cheaper than the market price of $120,000 asked by foreign producers, the new, cheaper methods making it much more certain that medical institutions will be able to procure a sufficient quantity of radium for the treatment of cancer and other malignant growths.
With an adequate supply of radium for therapeutic use, it is intimated that the progress in the future in curing cancer will rival that made in wiping out diseases that once were prevalent.
Physicians who have been enabled to make cures by reason of obtaining a greater quantity of the radium through Bureau of Mines methods, say that radium in cancer will prove an inestimable boon to man.
4. Continued its educational work among the more than a million miners of the United States as to safety, rescue, and first-aid methods, and has been rewarded with lessening death and injury rates, preserving miners to their wives, their children, and their homes.
There were 3,193 fatalities in the coal and metal mines and quarries during the year 1914, as against 3,651 in the previous year, a decrease in the number of deaths of 458.
In 1914 the death rate in these mines and quarries for each 1,000 men employed was 3.16, as compared with 3.49 in the previous year.
5. Developed rescue work throughout the mines of the country until it has resulted in the rescue of 200 men from mines after explosions or other disasters.
6. Induced manufacturers, by calling attention to the possible dangers attending the use of electricity in mines, to devise safer types of apparatus, especially electrical switches and motors, that can be used in gaseous atmospheres without danger of causing explosions by sparks and flashes with the usual attendant loss of life.
7. Investigated the health conditions in certain of the metalmining districts where miners' consumption is prevalent to an almost alarming degree, and where the death rate from this cause is sufficiently high to cause alarm, and has shown the operators and miners how, by the proper treatment of the rock dust, deaths from this cause may be almost totally stopped.
8. Informed operators and miners how the homes of miners can be made more comfortable and more sanitary, and has already witnessed its recommendations adopted by mining companies and construction concerns.
9. Informed the country how the mineral resources of the United States can be utilized to the greater benefit of the public and how the present losses and wastes in the mining and utilization of metals and minerals can be eliminated or minimized.
10. Has made a thorough scientific investigation of the causes of smoke from smelters, the damage done by such smoke, and has, as a result, brought about a better understanding between the mining companies and the farmers, and has suggested remedies which have led to an expenditure involving millions of dollars.
This is a great step forward in a public nuisance which has already been costly to all parties in litigation.
11. Gave public better knowledge of the proper utilization of fuels, with the result that its work has served as a basis for improving equipment used to heat public buildings and for the development of improved types of power-plant furnaces and boilers, with a consequent saving in money spent for fuel.
12. Showed the country that the total annual loss to the petroleum industry through waste, a large part of which was preventable, amounted to $50,000,000, and as much as $10,000,000 in one State; cooperated with State officials and private organizations in efforts to bring about the enactment of laws that would lead to the adoption of less wasteful practices; investigated well-drilling methods and published and distributed descriptions of approved methods of drilling wells that encounter gas under high pressure and of extinguishing burning oil or gas wells; also devised and demonstrated a practical process for drilling through porous formations by which waste of gas in sands overlying oil sands can be stopped and the invasion and ruin of many gas and oil sands by water can be prevented.
1. Initiated additional hotel and camp facilities which enabled the national parks to successfully accommodate nearly two and one-half times as many visitors as in any previous year.
2. Executed long-term contract for development of Yosemite National Park on a profit-sharing basis with Government, concessioners to erect immediately two hotels, and thereafter, as rapidly as possible, camps and chalets in upper parts of the park.
3. Promoted similar development at Mount Rainier National Park which promises to afford service next summer.
4. Designed new and beautiful Yosemite village to gradually replace present shabby village; designed similar developments for other national parks including systems of chalets to be built at points and intervals convenient to travellers in automobiles or on foot.
5. Perfected comprehensive plans for furnishing public information on wide scale about the beauty and accessibility of National Parks with purpose of directing travel thereto.
6. Opened all roads in the Yellowstone National Park to automobiles.
7. Acquired title to old Tioga Road through Yosemite National Park and restored it by extensive repairs, thus opening up new and shorter automobile route across the Sierra; acquired title to the Big Oak Flat Road to and within Yosemite National Park and improved it.
8. Prepared preliminary plans for complete road and trail systems in Crater Lake, Sequoia, Glacier, Mount Rainier, and Yosemite National Parks.
9. Began important development of the eastern entrance to Yellowstone National Park and opened negotiations with railroads looking to interchange of routes which will enable transcontinental passengers to pass through park en route, entering and leaving same through any gates and by any railroads they may elect.
10. Opened to the public the new Rocky Mountain National Park covering superb scenic portion of Continental Divide in Colorado.
11. Extended automobile road to Paradise Valley in Mount Rainier National Park resulting in large increase in travel to and upon the glaciers.
Surveyed road up Carbon River Canyon to open north side glaciers to public.
Completed trail entirely around Mount Rainier, a distance of about a hundred miles.
12. Discovered and excavated a remarkable prehistoric structure in Mesa Verde National Park supposed to have been Pueblo fortress.
Repaired and restored several prehistoric ruins.
13. Erected on the rim of the Grand Canyon of the Colorado River a rock memorial to John W. Powell, the original explorer of canyon.
14. Surveyed Mineral King Road to open up southern part of Sequoia National Park.
15. Established central purchasing agency for several western national parks.
16. Installed at Hot Springs Reservation a scientific system of mountain climbing known as the Oertel System of Graduated Exercises for benefit of persons under medical supervision.
The following table shows the receipt and disposal of matters received and disposed of in this office during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1915, which were docketed or recorded.
The table of work of this office contained in each annual report, beginning with that of 1909, has been for the year ending October 1.
The above table, therefore, covers a period of three months that were embraced in that of the last annual report.
It is, however, a correct statement for the full period of the fiscal year, thus conforming to the intent of the report and other statistical tables contained therein.
This change does not permit of most accurate comparison, but it may be noted that the matters thus docketed total 23,942 as against 26,877 for the year's period shown in the last report, while the number disposed of total 27,663 as compared with 25,041.
Thus the total number of matters pending have been reduced from 5,140 October 1, 1914, to 1,907, July 1, 1915.
This very substantial reduction is due largely to the reorganization of the force in this office, the adoption of new and better methods for the handling and disposition of cases, and the creation by Congress of the Board of Appeals.
Full credit is also due for the generous willingness of many of those engaged in the work to give extra hours to the accomplishment of the desired result.
In consequence, appealed cases, involving public lands and pensions, are assigned for consideration within a reasonable time after receipt, and they are adjudicated and disposed of promptly, although given more extended, and it is believed more thorough, consideration than under former methods.
The earliest disposition of appeals consistent with careful and thorough consideration confers substantial benefit upon parties interested in public lands, pensions, etc., and others transacting business before the department.
In the courts sitting in the District of Columbia, 17 cases, in which the department has been made a party, have been disposed of during the last year.
Of these, 3 were decided against the department.
Only one adverse decision, however, is final.
The other two are pending in higher courts.
The 17 cases of which disposition has been made in some court were divided as follows: United States Supreme Court, 1; Court of Appeals, 3; Supreme Court District of Columbia, 13.
There are now pending 21 cases, distributed as follows: United States Supreme Court, 4; Court of Appeals, 3; Supreme Court District of Columbia, 14.
The volume and pressure of the general work is so great that the trial and disposition of cases in court is necessarily carried forward under considerable handicap.
The total area of public and Indian lands originally entered and allowed during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1915, is 16,861,214.69 acres, an increase of 338,362.57 acres as compared with the area entered during the year 1914.
The area patented during the fiscal year is 13,025,427.976 acres, a decrease of 1,365,643.124 acres as compared with the fiscal year 1914.
Of the above area 9,594,973.025 acres were patented under the homestead laws, a decrease of 405,661.975 acres, not including homesteads, and 32,360.89 acres patented as soldiers' additional entries.
The above patented area also includes the following: Enlarged homesteads, 3,972,381.16 acres; homesteads under the Kinkaid Act, 1,263,184.37 acres; with coal reservations, 1,435,071.80 acres.
Area of Indian fee patents, not included in the above, 202,050.06 acres.
The total cash receipts for the sales of public land, including fees and commissions on both original and final entries, and sales of Government property in the local offices, for the fiscal year 1915, were $3,786,319.54 (1914, $4,256,102.96), a decrease of $469,783.42.
Miscellaneous receipts were as follows: From sales of Indian lands $1,556,630.97 (1914, $1,884,802.77); depredations on public lands, $31,203.54; depredations on Indian lands, $38.33; leases, power sites, etc., act of February 15, 1901, $1,116.21; copies of records, plats, etc., made at General Land Office, $14,738.82, and at 13 surveyors general's offices, $4,900.79; making the aggregate cash receipts of this bureau during the fiscal year 1915, $5,394,948.20 (1914, $6,148,367.63), a decrease of $753,419.43.
The total expenses of district land offices for salaries and commissions of registers and receivers, and incidental expense during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1915, were $828,865.71, a decrease of $24,832.89.
The aggregate expenditures and estimated liabilities of the public land service, including expenses of district land offices and surveys made, were $3,008,996.31, leaving a net surplus of $2,384,922.61 of receipts over expenditures.
Field service.
Notwithstanding a 10 per cent decrease in the field force, made necessary by the reduction of the appropriation, the number of cases pending investigation was reduced nearly 2,000 from that pending at the beginning of the year.
Over 20,000 cases were investigated.
Reports are now coming in which will afford a basis for definite action by this office on cases pending in the California oil fields.
It is anticipated that within a few months reports will be received on nearly all the pending cases.
The investigating force has been still further increased over that maintained last year.
Six suits had been brought to recover for trespass on oil lands committed in violation of Executive withdrawal orders.
In most of those cases operations have been continued under receiverships, and in some instances the business has been operated more advantageously than under claimants' own operations.
Fifteen contracts have been entered into permitting the disposition of oil and gas produced from withdrawn oil lands which are embraced in application for patent.
These contracts are authorized by the act of August 25, 1914 (38 Stat., 708).
The form of contract adopted is simple and practical.
The contract is clear in its terms and free from hampering and technical restrictions, yet the interests of the Government are amply protected.
The portion of the gross proceeds of sales of the oil which is released to the operator is regarded as equaling the expense of operation plus a fair return upon the investment.
Public surveys.
The aggregate acreage of accepted surveys for the year past is greatly in excess of that of previous years, being much larger than in any year within the last two decades, the figures showing an area of accepted original surveys of 11,988,387 acres and 2,350,962 acres of resurveys.
In handling resurveys the office has adopted a new procedure under which a more specific showing for the necessity of such survey is required.
This plan works no hardship where the applications are of a meritorious character and serves to eliminate the expense of field examination.
The progress of surveys within railroad land grants is extremely gratifying.
Approximately 3,000,000 acres were surveyed, employing 43 surveying parties.
During the year past a satisfactory conclusion to the long standing controversy over the identification of lands lying north of the third standard parallel in Imperial Valley has been accomplished.
In addition to this, to the west of and adjoining Imperial Valley, resurveys were commenced under departmental authorization of January 26, 1915, and the resurvey of about 90,000 acres accomplished, while to the east of and adjoining the valley resurveys covering 190,000 acres were made under departmental order of February 13, 1915.
Fragmentary surveys, embracing areas of all sorts and kinds of various quantities, involve so many questions of complicated character that one of the supervisors of surveys has been detailed to this special duty, resulting in bringing this class of surveys up to date.
Alaska.
The coal-land surveys made necessary under the act of October 20, 1914 (38 Stat., 741), as a preliminary to the leasing of coal lands in the Territory, have been prosecuted vigorously under a comprehensive field system, by which it is expected to complete during the present season all field work as to the coal areas in the Matanuska, Bering River, and Nenana coal fields.
During the fiscal year public-land surveys were extended over 90,000 acres of agricultural lands in the Cook Inlet district, northeasterly of Knik.
Reviewing the situation in the Territory, it is recommended that Congress be asked for a special appropriation of $50,000 for the survey of public lands in Alaska, to be made continuously available until expended.
Free permits for coal mining of small areas for purely local needs are granted under section 10 of the coal-leasing act, and in pursuance thereof regulations have been adopted under which a number of these permits have already been given.
Supplemental patents.
Under the act of Congress of April 14, 1914 (38 Stat., 355), there have been issued 1,227 supplemental patents in cases where the original patent reserved to the United States the coal deposit in the land, and such lands were subsequently classified as noncoal in character.
Homestead and kindred entries.
During the year past there were approved for patent 41,291 homestead entries, 794 timber and stone entries, 2,830 sales of isolated tracts, and 919 miscellaneous cash sales.
The preferred right of entry under the enlarged homestead act accorded applicants for undesignated lands by the amendatory act of March 4, 1915 (38 Stat., 1162), has met with a remarkable response, there having been filed under the provisions of this act up to the 1st of September 6,621 applications.
Reclamation homesteads.
Notation is made of the fact that farm units embracing areas reasonably required for the support of one family have been established in 19 of the reclamation projects.
In addition to the projects being constructed under the provisions of the general reclamation act, several other projects upon Indian reservations are being constructed, under the provisions of the act applicable to such projects alone.
Ceded Chippewa lands.
There has been no opening to homestead settlement and entry of lands classified as agricultural in the ceded Chippewa Reservation since 1911, due to some necessary changes of Indian allotments.
The next opening will take place as soon as practicable, and will include about 50,000 acres of "cut-over" lands and about 4,850 acres of"pine"lands.
Minnesota drainage entries.
During the past year there were approved for patent 517 entries under the Minnesota drainage law, known as the Volstead Act, as against 245 for the preceding year.
Serious difficulties in the administration of this law is noted, due to differences of views entertained by the State and the department as to the provisions of the statute.
Homesteads in national forests.
In the year past notices were issued under the act of June 11, 1906 (34 Stat., 233), of the restoration of 2,838 lists of lands in national forests, by which approximately 280,000 acres of agricultural lands were opened to settlement and entry.
Abandoned military reservations.
Field work in connection with the survey and classification of the lands in the Fort Assinniboine Military Reservation has been completed, but the office work will not be finished for some time, so that it is impracticable to have an opening before next spring.
Plats of the survey of Fort Grant abandoned reservation have been approved, showing about 13,000 acres.
Nearly 4,000 acres are included in grants to the State of Arizona.
The remainder are to be appraised prior to their public offering.
Town-site and kindred entries.
Lots in 9 town sites were offered for sale at public auction during the months of June and July, 1914, resulting in the sale of more than 1,000 lots, for a sum in excess of $80,000.
The sale of lots in town sites upon public lands in all cases has resulted in prices largely in excess of the appraised valuation.
The town of Anchorage, Alaska, on the Government railroad, was surveyed; 655 lots were sold in July at public sale for the sum of $148,980.
Flathead Indian lands.
The failure to secure, through congressional action, relief for settlers who were insisting upon a reappraisal of farm values, is noted, together with the fact that in the meantime action affecting these lands is suspended.
Regulations for the sale and removal of timber from lands classified as timber lands and the subsequent appraisal and opening of such lands to homestead entry have been approved.
Notices issued for the sale during August of 78,116 acres of agricultural lands under the act of April 23, 1904, and for 46,635 acres of barren and burnt-over lands.
Indian allotments.
During the past year 2,324 trust patents issued embracing 284,713.33 acres of land.
During the same year 1,699 patents were issued conveying title in fee to Indians found competent to assume charge of their own affairs and to purchasers of allotted lands.
The issuance of these fee patents operated to relieve 202,050 acres of land from restriction against alienation and rendered that amount of land subject to taxation.
Flathead villa sites.
Tracts set aside as villa sites under the act of April 12, 1910 (36 Stat., 296), were offered for sale at public auction during July and August.
There were 889 parcels of land, not less than 2 nor more than 5 acres in area, fronting on Flathead Lake, subject to sale for the minimum price of $10 per acre.
These lands, having a minimum valuation of less than $35,000, sold for approximately $125,000, some tracts bringing about $300 per acre.
A general law authorizing the entry of public lands in the form of villa sites is recommended.
Railroad grants.
The total area certified and patented under railroad and wagon-road grants was 1,624,142.27 acres.
In the adjustment of railroad grants, the adjudication of Carey Act propositions, and right-of-way applications, the work of the past year has been exceedingly satisfactory.
There were finally adjudicated and closed 5,065 cases of all kinds, as against 4,245 cases of the year previous.
Rights of way.
Substantial progress has been made in the past year in clearing the records of approved railroad rights of way, where the roads have not been constructed, and requiring proof of construction in other cases.
During the year 714 railroad right-of-way grants have been investigated.
Of these, 302 were declared to be forfeited under the several forfeiture acts; in the remainder of the cases the grantees were called upon to show cause why the grants should not be declared forfeited for failure to file evidence of construction.
In this line of work the following States have been fully covered: Washington, Oregon, California, Idaho, Nevada, Arizona, New Mexico, Montana, and Wyoming.
Power-site reserves.
During the past year 56 withdrawals were made for this purpose, covering 292,134 acres.
Of lands theretofore withdrawn, 55,646 acres were restored.
At the end of the fiscal year 2,228,105 acres were included in withdrawals for power sites and 182,653 acres as public-water reserves.
State desert-land segregation.
A marked increase of work under Carey Act segregations is noted for the past year.
Applications for withdrawal under the act of March 15, 1910, covering 1,048,654.80 acres were finally disposed of, as against 315,209 acres during the year previous.
Segregation lists to the amount of 108,464 acres were acted upon, as against 15,069 acres in 1914.
Patents were issued under Carey Act projects during the past year for 146,079 acres, as against 4,244 acres the year previous.
Desert-land entries.
Radical changes were made during the past year in the regulations under which desert-land entries are allowed, by which all applications are referred for a field examination as to feasibility prior to final action.
For the relief of those who had made entries but could secure no adequate water supply the Land Department recommended, and Congress passed, the act of March 4, 1915 (38 Stat., 1138).
The necessity for a change in regulations and the remedial legislation is apparent from the fact that during the past two years upwards of 5,000 applications for extension of time within which to submit final proof have been considered wherein the claimants were unable to secure water for the irrigation of their lands within the period prescribed by law.
The amendment of the desert-land law by which entries shall be restricted to 160 acres is recommended.
During the past fiscal year 2,711 desert-land entries were patented, embracing 488,752.80 acres, as against 2,127 entries, embracing 346,794.74 acres during the prior year.
Irrigation projects.
Under the practice now in vogue irrigation projects alleged as sources of water supply in the case of desert-land entries are investigated in the field, wherein the examination covers all engineering features of the project involved.
This work is not only for the protection of the interests of the Government, but also that of public-land claimants, inasmuch as it discourages the construction of projects without full information on the vital matters concerned and tends to prevent the promotion of fraudulent enterprises.
During the past year 253 reports of this character have been disposed of by this office, favorable action having been taken on 167 projects, adverse action on 58, and 28 cases closed without definite action.
State selections.
During the past fiscal year 16,277.38 acres of indemnity school-land selections and 840,606.36 acres of selections under grants in quantity for specific purposes received departmental approval and have been certified to the States making such selections.
Swamp and overflowed lands.
A statement is submitted showing the acreage patented to the several States as beneficiaries under the swamp-land grant, amounting in total to 63,832,583.06 acres.
The same States received as cash indemnity under amendatory acts the sum of $2,095,468.79 and land indemnity to the extent of 743,939.39 acres.
A study of the swamp grant and the manner in which the trust has been administered by the several States by whom it was received leads to the conclusion that none of the large land grants made by Congress has more completely failed of its purpose, in this that the proceeds of this grant have not been applied to secure the reclamation of the land, as was the intent of Congress.
For this reason, and the further one that with the lapse of time the adjustment of the grant becomes more and more difficult, it is recommended that Congress enact legislation declaring that after a date fixed, preferably six months after the bill becomes a law, no new claims to swamp and overflowed lands be received or recognized by the Land Department.
Patents for 19,219.63 acres of swamp and overflowed lands and 252.32 acres of swamp-indemnity lands were issued, and claims aggregating 16,639.71 acres were rejected during the past year.
National forests.
Since the issuance of the last annual report, 12 national forests have been reduced.
Certain inter-forest transfers have been made involving three national forests, and the Zuni National Forest, Arizona and New Mexico, has been consolidated with the Manzano National Forest.
There are now 162 national forests, embracing 184,240,596 acres, of which area approximately 89 per cent is public land.
The decrease in area of national forests since the beginning of the fiscal year is 1,080,606 acres.
During the fiscal year the public lands subject to disposition in 1,277,536 acres, excluded from national forests in this and previous years, have been restored to settlement and entry.
During the past year nine administrative stations, embracing 1,742 acres and 1 right of way, have been withdrawn, and 365 withdrawals for such purposes revoked, covering 62,251 acres.
There are now 25 rights of way for wagon roads and 2,777 administrative sites withdrawn, embracing 352,689 acres.
Contest work.
The gradual reduction in the area of the public domain has not resulted in the diminution of litigated claims before the Land Department.
In the year past 1,421 decisions were rendered on cases coming before the office on appeal.
Repayments.
There were stated during the last fiscal year 1,689 accounts, allowing repayment of $305,310.83, and during said period there were denied 799 claims.
This number of claims allowed and the amount repaid includes 42 accounts, allowing repayment of $147,825.14 received in connection with pending claims for coal lands in Alaska and repaid under section 3 of the act of October 20, 1914 (38 Stat., 741).
State development.
The commissioner submits a compilation of the public-land grants made to a number of the States, illustrative of the care taken by the National Government to secure the permanent establishment of our free institutions in the new States, on their admission to the Union.
Recent .
A brief summary of the legislative enactments of the Sixty-third Congress affecting the public domain is included in the commissioner's report, together with a similar statement of proposed legislation, receiving the approval of the Land Department, but failing of enactment.
Homestead law.
A study has been made in the General Land Office to determine the actual investment made by homestead entrymen prior to final proof, as well as the extent of cultivation.
The requisite data was secured by a compilation from the final proofs submitted on 10 homestead entries, taken at random from each of the 95 districts of the public-land States, in comparatively recent cases, by which it was found that a total of 26,297 acres were cultivated in the entire 950 claims, and the total value of the improvements placed thereon estimated at $751,151.
The average cultivation thus disclosed is 27 acres, and the average value of improvements thereon $790.
This is regarded as a fair demonstration of the general good faith of claimants under the homestead law.
Needed legislation.
1) A special appropriation for surveys in Alaska.
2) Repeal of the swamp grant.
3) Consolidation of the various right of way acts.
4) A legislative definition as to the public-land laws applicable in Alaska.
5) Amendatory legislation with respect to the disposition of title conferred under right of way acts, in the event of subsequent abandonment or forfeiture of such rights of way.
The Indian Bureau has laid great emphasis on its industrial program, and its achievements along this line stand out prominently, and the year has witnessed a marked advancement for the betterment of conditions under which the Indians shall be led to selfsupport.
Educational facilities and opportunities.
Beginning in the schools, stress has been laid on industrial and vocational training.
At the Carlisle School a plan has been developed promoting special training along these lines, cutting off here and there the superficial and enlarging on the practical subjects.
As the plan thus outlined is successfully developed at Carlisle, it will be extended to the other Indian schools.
It is interesting to note that 19 Indian boys have been placed in the Ford Motor Co. establishment at Detroit, where they will receive actual industrial training.
In connection with Indian schools, the largest possible use has been made of the public schools in the several States convenient to the Indian population, and the attendance of Indian pupils in the public schools has been greatly increased during the past year, in many instances without drawing on the appropriation of $20,000 provided by Congress for the payment of Indian pupil tuition in those States where the public schools are not otherwise available to Indian pupils.
When necessary, and in localities where large nontaxable Indian population reside, recourse has been made to this appropriation.
In the past attention has been given principally in an educational way to those Indians residing on reservations where they come closely in contact with the white population, and the field has been fairly well covered by the establishment of nonreservation schools for the more advanced pupils, boarding schools, and reservation day schools; and this applies, as a rule, to the entire Indian population, excepting the Navajos and Papagos in Arizona.
Schools are being constructed in the Navajo country, and educational facilities of an average character are being given to these Indians.
The Papagos occupy a territory practically 120 miles long by 90 miles wide and extending from Tucson, Ariz., westwardly nearly to the Colorado River, and southerly from the line of the Southern Pacific Railroad to the northern boundary of Mexico.
Scattered over this territory are approximately 6,000 Indians, the population centering around 20 widely separated villages.
This population has received little or no attention from the Government and practically no facilities for education.
There has been expended for these Indians during the year $50,000 in the erection of school buildings at seven of these villages, and it is purposed to promote their education in an aggressive manner.
Health conditions.
With regard to the health of the Indians, it is shown that there are employed, approximately, 200 physicians.
During the past year there were constructed six new hospitals, and plans have been made for the erection of others as rapidly as funds will permit.
A vigorous campaign is being waged for the eradication of tuberculosis and trachoma, the two principal diseases with which the Indian population is afflicted.
In conjunction with the hospitals for the treatment of the serious cases, the construction of school buildings is so planned that there will be available outdoor sleeping accommodations for the pupils for the promotion of the health of the children and to aid in the suppression and inroads of tuberculosis among the younger population.
Promotion of farming industry.
It is noticed that there has been a marked increase in the number of Indians engaging in farming, and that further increase is measured principally by the ability of the bureau to furnish the necessary equipment.
Much good has resulted from the agricultural fairs which have been held on the various reservations, stimulating among the Indians a healthy desire to compete successfully with their white neighbors.
At some of the State fairs the Indians have successfully competed with the whites and have carried off some of the principal prizes.
The farms connected with the several schools on the reservation have been practically converted into demonstration and experimental stations, and at each one farming is made an object lesson for the surrounding Indian community.
It is in connection with the promotion of the farming industry that the reimbursable fund, so called, is used to splendid purpose.
There was appropriated by Congress at each of the past two sessions $600,000 to be used in promoting industry among the Indians.
From this fund farming equipment is purchased and sold to the Indians on credit.
The system has worked out successfully and has promoted financial integrity among the Indians, and has demonstrated that they possess the highest conscientious qualities.
In some instances the Indians paid for this equipment before it was due under the contract, and no losses have yet been noted.
Aside from the farming equipment, and probably to a greater degree, this fund has been used in the purchase of live stock, and on reservations principally valuable for grazing purposes there have been placed herds of tribal cattle, thus permitting the Indians to utilize the resources of the reservations for their own benefit.
It has heretofore been the policy to lease large areas of these reservations to white stock raisers, the Indians profiting only through per capita payments made from the lease moneys.
The Indian Bureau looks with disfavor on per capita payments and discourages it, except where such payments are mandatory by law, or where the payments would manifestly promote the Indians' industrial advancement.
The placing of tribal herds on Indian reservations has materially lessened the area to be leased by white stock raisers.
The loss to the Indians, however, is not in the exact proportion of the area to be leased, as it is found that the demand for pasturage lands increases in proportion as the area to be leased diminishes, and where permits were formerly granted for $1.50 per head the Indians are now receiving from $2 to $2.50 per head.
At the Sacaton Experimentation Farm in southern Arizona, located on the Pima Indian Reservation, there has been developed a new type of cotton of the long staple Egyptian variety.
This new type is extra fine, and has been given the name of"Pima."
The whites in the locality, as well as the Indians, have been planting this grade of cotton, and last year there were received for the product approximately $1,000,000.
It has been shown that the climate and soil in the vicinity of the Pima Indian Reservation, in Arizona, are particularly well adapted for cotton growing, and it is gratifying to note that the Indians have developed a new type, which is equal, if not superior, to the best produced in the world.
Improvement in home conditions.
Improvement in home conditions is reported by the Indian Bureau.
Plans of model houses have been prepared and introduced on the several reservations, and in the construction of houses for Indians from the reimbursable appropriation, where the Indians pay for the house as they procure funds, the new type of house is introduced.
The cost of these houses varies from $400 to $600, according to locality and accessibility of lumber markets.
Irrigation of Indian lands.
On the Uintah and Ouray Indian Reservation, in Utah, there are thousands of acres of irrigable land, which have been allotted to the Indians and on which have been constructed irrigation systems.
The Ute Indians are not among the more progressive type, and it has been a problem to the Indian Bureau how to induce these Indians to engage in agricultural pursuits.
In addition there is danger of losing the water rights attached to these lands through nonuse under the State laws.
To overcome this discouraging outlook vigorous efforts are being made to place these lands under cultivation and make beneficial use of the available water.
To this end over $300,000 has been set aside from what is known as the"Ute judgment fund."
This fund arose through a judgment in favor of the Ute Indians against the United States for $3,000,000, and the money belongs to the different tribes of Utes, of which those under the Uintah and Ouray Agency have the largest share.
The allotments are being leveled and prepared for water under the supervision of the superintendent, and where possible the lands are being leased to white settlers on the lowest and most advantageous terms.
It is hoped in this way to bring into cultivation a very considerable part of the thousands of acres of irrigable land on this reservation.
Among the most important agencies for the industrial advancement of the Indians are the various irrigation projects.
More than one-fourth of the whole Indian population reside upon reservations with an insufficient rainfall to make possible successful agriculture.
Approximately 400,000 acres are now irrigable through works already constructed upon more than 60 reservations, but this area is only a small part of that which must eventually be provided to allow all the Indians of these reservations means of self-support.
Investigations have been made of possible additional irrigation projects, notably on the Colville, Southern Ute, Western Shoshone, Wind River, Gila River, and several other reservations.
Especial attention has also been given to improving the water supply for the Navajo and Papago Indians, thereby greatly aiding the cattle and sheep industries upon which these thrifty peoples depend.
There has been a notable increase in the utilization of irrigation facilities by the Indians of the various reservations.
The Indian Service is emphasizing industrial activities and employing effective means to arouse an interest in farming by even those tribes which have heretofore neglected their opportunities.
Among the reservations upon which have been gratifying progress in area actually irrigated are Yuma, Crow, Uintah, Wind River, Klamath, Gila River, and many others.
The rapid enlargement of the irrigated area not only increases the ability of the Indians to become useful, self-supporting citizens, and makes productive the large expenditures for irrigation construction which have in the past been only partially utilized, but also more thoroughly establishes the Indian ownership of the valuable water rights upon the possession of which the protection of the various investments for irrigation depends.
The questions connected with water rights here suggested have been the subject of earnest study and upon several of the reservations exhaustive and extensive investigations have been carried on under the supervision of both legal and engineering experts.
The importance of this work can be realized when it is remembered that the value to the Government of the expenditures already made of more than $12,000,000, and even the continued existence of the Indians upon these reservations depends upon the proper safeguarding of the ownership of the water supply for these irrigation projects.
Although the fire risk on Indian forests during the past year was very high because of unusual meteorological conditions in the Northwest, the situation was effectively controlled and the actual loss from fire was relatively slight.
During the year the first real step toward a systematic and comprehensive inventory of the timber resources of the Indians has been taken.
On the Quinaielt, Klamath, and Menominee reservations parties have been engaged in examinations which contemplate not only detailed estimates of the stands of timber but also the preparation of reliable contour maps as a basis for the administration of the timber lands.
The timber resources on these three reservations are very extensive.
The Indian Service plans to extend the work to other reservations during 1916.
Improvement of liquor situation.
The liquor situation is reported as improving through the active campaign which has been carried forward against this traffic on Indian reservations and in the Indian country.
The Indians themselves seem to be aroused to the evil effects of the use of intoxicants, which is evidenced by the fact that at several large gatherings of Indians during the past year no liquor of any kind could be obtained.
This is particularly pleasing, in view of the fact that heretofore it has been common that such Indian gatherings were associated with much drunkenness.
The wave of reform in the use of intoxicants, which has been spreading over the whole country, seems to have reached the Indian reservations.
Oil and gas industry in Oklahoma.
The oil and gas industry in Oklahoma has a wide bearing on that industry as it affects the Nation at large.
The production was so enormous during the past year as apparently to affect the price throughout the Nation, and difficulty was experienced in properly caring for its transportation and storage.
The price of crude oil fell to as low as 40 cents per barrel, but at this writing, owing to the decrease in production, prices have advanced to 75 cents per barrel.
These prices refer to the Mid-Continent oil field, the grade being somewhat higher than that of the Healdton field.
The production for the past fiscal year in Oklahoma was approximately 34,654,645 barrels, valued at $3,180,816.
In the Osage Reservation the proven oil lands are covered by what is known as the “Foster lease," embracing 680,000 acres.
By its terms this lease expires in March of next year.
Last year there were produced from these lands a total of 7,476,209 barrels, from which the Osage Indians received royalty in the sum of $560,155.62.
The leasing of this area, after the expiration of the Foster lease, has been the subject of conference with the Osage Indians through their council and this department, and on August 26 there were approved regulations governing the leasing of lands in the Osage Reservation for oil and gas.
Under these regulations royalty has been fixed at 16 per cent of the gross proceeds from sales, after deducting oil used for fuel.
The gas is subject to the payment of royalty at the same rate.
In connection with the probate work in the Five Civilized Tribes in Oklahoma, it is noted that there were 53,433 cases, of which there were disposed of during the year about 1,400.
The attorneys appeared in over 10,000 cases, and instituted 213 civil actions, involving $1,525,000, and 37 criminal actions.
Distinction between Indian citizen and white citizen.
The distinction between the Indian citizen and the white citizen lies mainly in the exercise of the function of governmental supervision.
That some Indians, both citizen and noncitizen, are as fully qualified to manage their own affairs as the average white citizen, is patent to everyone claiming the least knowledge of Indian matters.
For the purpose of determining what Indians belong to the competent class, and thereby entitled to assume full control of their property freed from governmental supervision, a commission has been created and has been instructed to proceed with the examination of Indians on their reservations, naming those particular Indians who possess the necessary qualifications to entitle them to the unrestricted use of their moneys and properties entirely free from governmental control.
When this commission shall have reported, it is then proposed to separate those so qualified from governmental control through the issuance to them of patents in fee for all lands now held in trust for them by the Government, and to transfer to them all funds to which they are entitled, and finally sever the bonds which now hold them as Government wards, either upon application of the individual Indian or by departmental authority, as shall hereafter be decided upon.
By the Indian appropriation act approved August 1, 1914, effective September 1, 1914, the offices of the Commissioner to the Five Civilized Tribes and superintendent of Union Agency in Oklahoma were abolished, and in lieu thereof the President of the United States was authorized, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to appoint a Superintendent for the Five Civilized Tribes, with his office located in the State of Oklahoma, with authority to reorganize the department and to eliminate all unnecessary clerks.
A supervisor was placed in charge of the superintendency on September 1, 1914, and the accounts and mailing divisions of the former offices were consolidated.
A superintendent was appointed December 22, 1914, and entered upon duty January 1, 1915.
April 5, 1915, 14 divisions in the office were consolidated into 7, the field force was reorganized, and 59 employees were eliminated; this reorganization was effected to eliminate duplication of work, but the large reduction in employees was made not so much because their services were not needed as because a deficit of approximately $25,000 had to be averted.
While the bulk of tribal land has been allotted and sold, still the work incident to the supervision of the affairs of approximately 33,000 restricted individual Indians has materially increased.
Enrollment and allotment.
In the Five Civilized Tribes there are 19,525,966 acres of land, of which 15,794,400 acres have been allotted, 139,202 reserved for various purposes, and 2,549,959 acres sold.
Under the act of August 1, 1914, 312 additional persons were enrolled, making a total of 101,521 persons enrolled as citizens of the Five Civilized Tribes, to all of whom complete allotments, or payment of money in lieu of allotments, have been made, except in a few cases; but there remains a large amount of unfinished work in connection therewith, such as the investigation of alleged fraudulent and duplicate enrollments, adjustment of allotments, and miscellaneous details that constantly arise.
The first auction sale of unallotted lands in the Five Civilized Tribes was held in November, 1910.
Since that date there have been sold a total of 32,972 tracts, containing 2,549,959 acres, for $14,652,- 341.32, over one-half of which, together with the interest thereon, has been collected, of which $5,931,984 is on deposit in National and State banks in Oklahoma, bearing interest at an average rate of 41 per cent, the balance being on deposit in the United States Treasury.
There remains unallotted $7,400,000.
There remain to be disposed of 1,042,405 acres, including 823,521 acres of timberland and 184,757 acres of the surface of the segregated coal and asphalt land, all of which is located in the Choctaw Nation excepting 5,860 acres which are scattered throughout the Chickasaw, Creek, and Cherokee Nations.
Town lots.
A total of 309 towns have been surveyed and platted, which towns contain an area of 64,772.16 acres.
Patents to 301 town lots were issued during the year, and there was received during the same period from the sale of town lots $4,668.16, which, together with receipts from sales made previously, makes a total of $4,539,- 911.73 received from this source.
Two thousand four hundred and forty-eight town lots remain unsold, all of which, excepting 168, are located in the segregated coal and asphalt area in the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations.
Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations.
The total area of these two nations is 11,660,951 acres, of which 6,953,048 acres are located in the Choctaw Nation and 4,707,903 acres in the Chickasaw Nation.
There have been allotted a total of 8,091,386 acres, leaving 3,569,565 acres unallotted, of which 98,474 acres have been reserved for various purposes and 2,431,361 acres have been sold for $14,053,760.
There remain to be disposed of approximately 1,042,000 acres and the coal and asphalt underlying the segregated coal and asphalt land and other tribal property, including over 2,000 town lots and six boarding schools, the estimated value of which is $16,000,000; also the distribution of all the funds of these tribes to citizens entitled to participate therein.
Cherokee Nation.
The total area of the Cherokee Nation is 4,420,- 068 acres, of which 4,346,203 acres have been allotted to 40,193 citizens, 22,880 acres reserved for town-site and other purposes, and the remainder, consisting of 50,905 acres, have been sold, except 80 acres.
The tribal affairs of this nation are completed, with the exception of the disposition of the 80 acres of land now in litigation, 226 acres included in what is known as“Big Lake," the delivery of approximately 750 deeds and the completion of the per capita and equalization payments.
Creek Nation.
The total area of the Creek Nation is 3,079,095 acres, of which 2,997,114 acres have been allotted to 18,712 persons, 16,016 acres reserved for town-site and other purposes, and 63,470 acres sold, leaving 2,495 acres unsold.
During the year two suits have been instituted in the United States district court to recover certain lands for the Creek Nation, estimated in value from $2,000,000 to $4,000,000, allotted to Barney Thlocco and Thomas Atkins, who, it is claimed, were not entitled to enrollment.
There has been paid to equalize Creek allotments a total of $1,048,325.
The tribal affairs of this nation have been disposed of, with the exception of the completion of equalization payments delivery of about 500 deeds, the disposition of 2,495 acres of unallotted lands, 168 town lots, the capitol building and lot, and 5 boarding schools.
Seminole Nation.
The total area of the Seminole Nation is 365,852 acres, of which 359,697 acres have been allotted to 3,119 citizens, 1,932 acres reserved for town sites and other purposes, and the remainder sold.
The tribal affairs of the Seminole Nation are practically completed, except the delivery of about 500 deeds, the disposition of the remaining tribal money to the members of the tribe, also of any tracts of land that may be recovered for the nation by reason of double enrollment·and allotment, and two tribal schools with the land on which they are located, each containing 320 acres.
Industrial work.
This important branch of the service is carried on principally by 12 Government farmers.
Through their efforts the Indians are interested and engaged in farming; better and more modern methods of farming have been adopted, including diversity of crops; a larger area of land is being cultivated; a better quality of seed is being planted; the live stock being raised is of better type; and conditions generally very much improved.
The farmers are endeavoring to induce every Indian family to grow a home garden and produce poultry and live stock for its use.
It has been the practice to place exhibits of farm products raised by Indian citizens of the Five Civilized Tribes at the Oklahoma State Fair.
Last fall the Five Civilized Tribes exhibit won first prize, a silver loving cup, for the best Indian exhibit.
Regardless of this progress, the force is insufficient to meet the demands for instruction.
At least four additional positions should be authorized, as there are entirely too many restricted Indians under the supervision of each farmer to obtain the best results.
The work of the farmers should be supplemented by an ample force of field matrons to teach home economics, sanitation, prevention of diseases, and kindred subjects essential to home life and thrift.
Three such positions have been authorized, but they are wholly inadequate.
Not less than 12 are needed.
Restrictions.
When allotments were taken by.allottees of the Five Civilized Tribes, none of the lands were alienable.
By various acts of Congress the restrictions against alienation have been removed upon various classes of this land and, under the acts of May 27 and 29, 1908, 12,225 applications for removal of restrictions have been filed.
Of this number, 8,138 have been approved, 1,401 have been denied, 2,011 have been dismissed for various reasons, 312 orders have been canceled, 28 are now pending in the department, and 335 are pending in the office of the superintendent for the Five Civilized Tribes.
Where restricted allottees are found to be competent to manage their affairs, the restrictions are unconditionally removed, but where they are not believed to be competent, but have more land than they can handle or are in need of medical attention, improvements, live stock, or farming equipment, a portion of their land is sold and the money disbursed under supervision.
Since May 27, 1908, 4,457 tracts have been sold under supervision, comprising 329,638.56 acres, for a consideration of $3,274,623.26.
During the fiscal year 1915 the sum of $545,958.11 was expended and 260 houses and 72 barns were constructed from land sale proceeds.
This money is held in 43 separate banks, and on June 30, 1915, there were 1,273 separate accounts.
Inherited land.
The status of inherited lands is practically the same as on June 30, 1914, as there is very little which can be done pending a decision in the case of Mallory v. Bushyhead now pending on appeal in the United States Circuit Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit.
Oil and gas leases on allotted land.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 1915, there were filed 1,480 leases and 829 assignments.
Three thousand three hundred and thirty-seven leases were canceled by the department during the year, a greater number than heretofore canceled in any one year.
This is apparently due to the generally demoralized condition of the oil market in this field.
The total of 31,300 oil and gas leases have been filed for departmental consideration.
The status of these leases is as follows: Surrendered or canceled by the department after approval, 12,187; canceled by agreement after approval, 226; expired, 484; removed from departmental supervision after approval, 4,640; withdrawn or disapproved by the department, 6,978; canceled for failure to refile, 537; returned to lessee because of lack of jurisdiction, 121; pending action by the department, 1,012; leaving 5,115 approved and at this time in force and effect.
Mineral leases, tribal.
Under the provisions of the act of June 28, 1898 (30 Stat. L., 495), there were in force June 30, 1914, 109 leases approved by the Secretary of the Interior, covering 99,800 acres.
The act of Congress approved March 4, 1913 (37 Stat. L., 1007), authorized the Secretary of the Interior to grant to the operator of any coal mine or mines in the State of Oklahoma the right to lease additional adjoining or contiguous acreage from the unleased segregated coal land of the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations.