Washington, D. C., November 20, 1917.
SIR: This has been a year of adjustment and expansion within this department as within the Nation.
The acceptance of Germany's challenge and the realization that the national life was now at stake brought at once a new sense of the relative importance of what we did, what we had, and how we used it.
Things fell away as of little value which had hitherto been accepted without questioning as worth while, and ideas, resources, powers which had hitherto been slightingly regarded rose in their stead into matters of prime national concern.
Unless we could transmute gold and silver into coal and iron they could no longer be called the precious metals, and unless men had the power to convert skill strength, and imagination into some form of shield or spear they could not play in the great game.
Therefore we made new appraisal of ourselves in terms of ability to do something that would hasten the great day of peace.
We judged each other by primal standards of proved capacity, not by the standards of a superficial social system.
For this is the curse and the glory of war—that it has but a single scale of measurement, it puts but one simple question:"What can you do to serve me?—for now I am the nation."
It is the directness and the fullness of this challenge that gives war its spell and likewise gives birth to its horrors.
What can you do to serve me?"
To that question each individual and each department of the Government must give answer.
The answer of this department is that it has put every agency and activity which it has at the service of those departments more directly concerned with war making.
Our men of scientific knowledge—metallurgists, chemists, engineers, topographers—have found new work at their hands.
The Reclamation Service on a million and a quarter acres of irrigated lands and the Indians on a hundred reservations joined in the campaign for more meat and more wheat.
The Patent Office has been searched for new devices that could be brought into use to kill the submarine or limit its destructiveness, for the plans of heretofore unused lethal weapons, and for the formulæ of improved or unknown sources of power.
Before war actually came this department had compiled the data which showed the power of the Nation in mineral and chemical resources, our possible needs, and how they could be met at home or where abroad.
Prepared lists of those men who had special knowledge or were of skill along the lines of our own activities enabled us to expand as the call was made.
Under the imperative mandate of war that all things shall become subject to a new classification according to their usefulness in carrying on the Nation's struggle, certain phases of our work have fallen into the background, while others have been brought into the high light of national importance.
We are thinking less, for instance, of the amount of public lands that are being taken by homesteaders and are absorbed deeply in the scientific work of more recently established branches of the service.
Yet if we search for the foundation of our strength, the reason that America is an invaluable ally to the western powers, it will be found in the adventuresome spirit and the exploiting energies of those who pushed their way into the wilderness and"took up"Government lands.
On these the nations rely for the foods and the minerals which make possible the war's continuance.
All others who work on what these produce—the manufacturer, inventor, even the soldier—are impotent without the coal operator, the oil driller, the iron master, the farmer, and the miner, on whom this"war between resources" ultimately rests.
The homesteader, with his covered wagon, was indeed the pioneer in preparedness for this war, and that his work has been well done is testified to by such figures as these: This year the United States will produce roughly five hundred and fifty million tons of coal, three hundred million barrels of petroleum, seventy million tons of iron ore, and over three billion bushels of corn, an increase of over six hundred million bushels over last year.
But the making of war to-day is far more than a test of primal resources; it tests the full powers of the Nation in every resource and capacity and especially along lines of scientific knowledge.
And here again we find that the ways of peace have given something in the way of preparation for war.
The scientific bureaus of the Government found themselves converted over night into adjuncts and auxiliaries in the great international contest.
Men who had regarded themselves as modestly useful only in the discovering and revealing of new sources of material strength found that their years of experience in the mountains and on the desert, in laboratories and in mines, called them at once into the thick of the European struggle.
It was not long after our entrance into the war that one of our geologists came into my office, proudly dressed in an Army uniform.
The last time I had seen him he had come to make report on the tungsten fields in Alaska, almost within the Arctic Circle.
He had spent more than 20 summers in that distant Territory, taking here and there a sample of rock, studying the peculiar upstanding and twisted beds of coal in the Matanuska and Bering fields, rushing from one placer gold field to another, reporting on each new find of metal, until he had become identified with the rise of Alaska and was the embodiment of its hopeful spirit.
I have come to say good-by," he said.
My next address will be somewhere in France as a member of Gen. Pershing's staff.
I naturally asked the kind of work that an Alaskan geologist would be called upon to do with an army.
His answer illustrates how much of science has gone into war.
My work," he replied, "is to be concerned with the location of trenches and dugouts. We must have trenches into which the country will not drain. These slashes in the earth can be made so that they will do their own draining. Mud, mud, mud! That is the trench curse which brings on trench feet and puts the soldier out of business."
And then on a sheet of paper he drew the slope of a hill and explained how if located in one place, because of the peculiar stratification of the earth, the trench would act as a cesspool or reservoir, gathering in all the waters of the neighboring terrain, while if placed elsewhere it would be immune from this disadvantage and through certain strata furnish a natural waste pipe for the superficial waters.
So was the American soldier to be given a healthier place in which to live and work and be more efficient.
A short time later came a group of topographers, chief of whom was another of Gen. Pershing's staff.
They, too, were in full khaki and bound for Europe.
Theirs was to be the game of surveying, platting, and most vividly and accurately presenting to the eye the land over which the new railroads would run, the railroads that would carry men, supplies and munitions to the front, and carry back the wounded.
From their maps the artillery officers could determine the heights and the hollows where the big guns would be placed, the rivers that must be crossed, their fords and banks and bridges, the roads, the ferries and forests, and all the details of a landscape that changes from day to day under the pressing advance or the forced retreat.
For now they fire guns"unsight and unseen" and men by the million move by the map.
The major who led this squad of scientific men had spent most of his life upon the rivers and in the mountains of the far West.
He and his men had been for years platting the lands of the United States, showing drainage and elevations, what the farmer calls"the lay of the land;" and these modest American map makers were on their way to join a force for the remaking, possibly, of the map of Europe.
Out of the work of building our great dams upon the Rio Grande and the Colorado Rivers there also came a by-product for war making.
To be sure, no large dams were needed to impound the waters of France, but the engineers who build such dams know the newly discovered art of mixing concrete as few men do.
There is not so much difference, after all, between a trench and an irrigation ditch, and hundreds of miles of such smooth-surfaced, water-conserving ditches have been built upon our reclamation projects.
For the construction of the dugout and the bomb proof, the gun foundation and the trench, there was need for these men of expert experience, and so to the Yakima Valley and that of the Colorado went the call of the war.
Another curious illustration of the war use of peace machinery was brought to light when a group of chemists, representing the gathered genius of the country in this science met in this office to discuss the problem of toxic poisoning by gases.
When the Bureau of Mines was created by Congress five years ago, it was hardly to have been imagined that the methods used for the saving of life in the coal mines of the United States would become of vital use in the problem of saving lives and destroying lives in a world war; yet this is just what has happened.
Germany, which has been foremost for some years in the science of chemistry, and out of its extensive experience has developed a form of warfare which had not before been known, a modern expression of those diabolical inventions such as the cervi and stimuli which made Cæsar's campaign in Gaul to be characterized as a war of science.
To meet this new method of attack by deadly gases, the western powers promptly provided gas masks which contained chemical absorbents or other agents that would negative the effects of the gases sent adrift by their enemies.
The soldier's kit, which was so simple a thing in other wars, had to be increased by a gas mask not unlike the helmet of a deep-sea diver, with a box of chemicals adapted for offsetting the effect of the various kinds of gas the enemy was known to use; and for special use in dugouts and saps filled with concentrated gas, an oxygen supply was furnished.
These outfits were not new to the world.
For some years there has been keen rivalry between the great mining nations as to the one which provided the best.
They were put on by those who went into the mine where poisonous gases from explosions or fires were known or supposed to exist.
Every rescue gang wore them.
This country claimed that it had improved upon the English, German, and French in the mask which it provided.
At any rate when we came into the war we found ourselves prepared with the knowledge, the machinery, and the men to promptly meet the need of gas masks in great quantity and of a superior type.
Thus the men who had been on this work of meeting the gases compounded in nature's laboratory were found to have a reserve of knowledge as to what gases will kill and what will choke and what will burn and what will hasten disease, which in a war of cumulative frightfulness would make the United States modestly distinguished if it wished to so shine.
As one of the group said, "We chemists in America have never turned our minds to the destruction of human life. Our work has been constructive—the chemistry of the soil, of cement, of printers' ink, of the by-products from petroleum and tar, of 10,000 things which will make for a longer, a happier life for man. But if the world is to be turned upside down and instead of staying death and disease, and making new things that man can use for his own ennoblement, we are wanted to push forward the work of the destruction of man and all his works, we can become rivals of the worst in such enterprise."
This is not the time to present the things done and the things doing by these men of the necromantic science, but when the day comes for casting up accounts and giving credit their work will not go unrecognized.
In this department we have during the past year had a glimpse of the expanding romance of chemical study.
We have found adventure in the search for the hidden secrets of petroleum, natural gas, and coal tar, of coal smoke and the refuse from a hundred furnaces and smokestacks.
We appear to have suddenly driven into a chemical age, or perhaps it would be more accurate to say that we have suddenly realized that we are in such an age.
America has been a wholesaler in raw materials.
Our boast has been in the millions of tons of steel or coal or barrels of oil or of feet of lumber that we could produce.
We dealt in things of magnitude, that we took greatly as they came out of nature's storehouse, not thinking or not caring how much of any mysterious value they concealed.
The chemist finds that nothing is simple; he tears all things apart to find things that are not patent to the eye, and out of the infinitely little and obscure creates a new world of things useful and beautiful.
This is the conversion that is going on in America in all fields.
We are entering upon the quest for the minor metals, our rarer woods, our select places of beauty and of exceptional climate or fertility.
In all the domain of this great country extending from the semitropics across the desert and the most forbidding wastes into the far Arctic we have come to believe that there is no land that is entirely valueless.
War forces a nation to an intensive study of what it can do.
Thought and work—these are the answers to the problems of material insufficiency.
We of America have had no little to boast of through the quick century of our march across a continent.
And without doubt our ability to stand alone, depending on ourselves for the things that make a modern industrial nation, is something of which we may be proud, not so much because we have this land as because we have found out its worth and made it ours by putting it to use.
But we soon realize when thrown into such a struggle as this war how far removed from entire independence we are.
Coffee, rubber, and manganese from Brazil, chrome from South Africa, tea from the Orient, sugar from Cuba, sisal from Mexico, nitrates from Chile, hides and meat from the Argentine, wool from Australia, pyrites from Spain—these are of the raw materials we need and for which the ocean must be kept open, unless our dependent industries are to weaken.
Yet it is hardly an overstatement to say that we could live alone with some substitution for a few of these things.
For we do not know or have not developed what we have.
One illustration will make this clear.
We have great use for sulphuric acid and our developed sulphur mines have not furnished a full supply.
Certain of our industries largely depend on the sulphur that we can roast out of pyrite ore that comes from Spain.
The ships that have carried our wheat abroad have loaded back with Spanisk pyrite.
But ships, as we have found, are not to be created by rubbing Aladdin's lamp, so our pyrite supply fell short of the demand for the sulphuric acid that cuts the phosphate rock into fertilizer for southern cotton.
In studying a map of southern ore deposits with relation to the placing of a nitrate plant it became evident that pyrite was to be found in a stretch of the mountains running from northern Georgia to central Alabama.
And just when this was found there came into the office one of the most forceful of southern manufacturers, who entered with a statement that he was looking for a place—"not under the spotlight,""I'm not a prima donna; just a man's job; something somebody else would shy at."
Why not find the pyrite ore in your southern hills?"
I asked.
Never heard of the stuff, but if it's there and you say we need it for the war I'll get it.
30,000 tons a month is more than 15 good ships could bring from Spain to our coast if kept in a continuous circle.
These straggling incidents will suggest the picture of a people struggling to equip itself for war.
Other departments of this Government will doubtless reveal to you more completely the extent to which this Nation has proved itself adequate to.
For we have the strength that comes from the vital, dynamic force released under free institutions where personal initiative has free play, and we have, too, the weakness that comes from a lack of the realization of the necessity for coordinated, purposeful effort.
A democracy making war is never an agreeable sight, for it is not in its normal line of life.
And those who sneer or jeer because it does not play the game as well as might be, pay an unconscious compliment to the merits of free institutions.
It takes time to accustom men to the short, hard words of command, and to the surrender of personal judgment.
It is not easy, either, for a nation to turn its back upon the conception of a world where justice works out its ends by quiet processes, and in its stead come to the stern belief that the ultimate court is a battle field.
So if there is wrenching and sideslipping and confusion there should be no surprise.
The surprise to me has been with what comparative ease the transition has been made, and how much unconscious preparation for the new work had been already made.
Now, that our problem is to produce more than ever before, it is clearly to be seen that the physical resources of the United States are to-day almost completely at the command of the world's needs.
If, indeed, for the past forty years this Nation had been planning to make war upon its neighbors, and so seize the continent for itself, what more would have been done to make our resources available for such an adventure?
This is, perhaps, the hardest test to which the problem of our internal development could be put.
Yet the answer must be that very little more could have been done or would have been done by a people necessarily doing so much.
Modern industrialism may be epitomized as power plus iron.
We lack neither.
It is the unprecedented and the not-to-be-anticipated burden of providing not alone for ourselves, but for nearly all of western Europe and part of Asia and Russia which makes the great demand.
For our own needs we have coal and iron and nearly all the rich line of less common minerals in abundance.
It sounds most boastful to say that the most paternal of governments, intent upon a dynastic purpose, would hardly have found ways to supply itself more liberally with the fundamentals of the great war industries than has been effected by the quiet searching and working of this free people.
And what is true as to minerals is equally true as to the products of the soil.
The large liberty of life and the casting of responsibility upon the individual, allowing personal ambition to be a substitute for direct command, and curiosity to be the spur to knowledge—these have put under crop the greater part of the continent and made this the relief depot of starving nations.
Of one thing, however, we may be sure, that a nation intent upon its own self-sufficiency would not be holding under what is tantamount to Government withdrawal the two newest sources of power substitutes for that coal which costs the labor of a million men and is the greatest of all the burdens of our railroads—water power and petroleum.
It may be expected surely that Congress in its coming session will release these resources by passing those leasing bills which have so long been pending in both Houses.
But this war is not to be won by the measuring of resources, for if wars were to be so won China possibly would be our only rival.
The spirit of the people is the making of the Nation, in war as in peace.
The extent to which a people can cooperate marks the point of civilization they have reached.
Now, the greatest outstanding fact of the past year, as clearly shown in the work of this department alone, is that under the crystallizing influence of a common danger and under the inspiring impulse of a common purpose, Americans are quick to come together.
The very rush made upon Washington at the beginning of war by those who wished to help in any form of war work was evidence of the consciousness that life and its conduct were no longer matters of individual concern but preeminently of communal value.
Industry itself, which has been thought to have no soul above the selfish acquisition of money, was foremost in its willingness to serve when shown how it could.
And whenever men come to perceive something better and bigger than they are themselves, they are in the way of coming into the full light of a new sun, under the influence of which changes that are miraculous take place—in religion they call it regeneration, in industry socialization, the gaining of a new sense, a social as distinguished from a personal sense.
It is all a matter of vision, of seeing clearly, clearly enough to convert speculation into conduct.
Men are already thinking of the greater America that they believe to be coming when the war is done.
We are in this war as the trustees of social and political ideals, most of them unformed, even embryonic, and these we hope to realize through the strength of the Nation.
Our nationalism, intense, virile, and of the fighting kind, is a part of the machinery through which we are working to make all men our debtors.
Our national purpose is to transmute days of dreary work into happier lives—for ourselves first and for all others in their time.
This is the large view, the idealistic view, if you please, of America's mission.
It is the subconscious philosophy of all our history—our wars, our public-school system, our conservation schemes, our enterprise.
This greater America is not to be the filmy product of a nation's fancy, the day dream of a monumental national ego.
It is to be as substantial as hard thought and hard work can make it, a thing of good roads, ships, and railroads, well-fertilized farms and wellorganized industry, regulated rivers put to use, and schools and schools and schools, and laboratories and more laboratories!
War has taught England and France much, one thing perhaps above all others, how all important in this day is the man who has the new kind of savoir faire.
If we are to meet the full rivalry of the world, we must rest chance for success upon our ability to produce men who, in character, in trained capacities, and in radioactive imagination will outmatch those whom they are to meet.
This new America as the old, will contribute to the world raw products with most generous hand.
But the ultimate .
Therefore out of the struggle and torture that we shall pass through, and the reverses and triumph that we shall meet, there should evolve the conception of America as the center of the world's thought, an America that will give that leadership and direction to the scientific, literary, and social thought of the world that we pride ourselves we have recently given to its political thought.
Our status in this war gives us a place of moral ascendency from which if we are great enough to be humble we can become real masters of men, conquerors of the invisible kingdom of man's mind.
Secretary.
1. Allowed during the fiscal year original entries of public and Indian lands, an area of 16,201,794.34 acres.
2. Collected from all sources $6,149,630.54, as against $5,470,466.81 the preceding year, an increase of $679,163.73.
3. Collected and turned into the United States Treasury as the result of the work of the field service $109,656.02.
4. Restored to the public domain as the result of field investigation, 115,488.64 acres.
5. Secured as escrow deposits under contracts entered into under the act of August 25, 1914 (38 Stat., 708), with claimants for oil lands, pending the determination of title thereto, the sum of $1,519.923.21.
7. Approved and accepted resurveys for 2,917,871 acres, the record acreage of resurveys for the office.
8. Secured three coal leases in the Matanuska coal fieid, Alaska, aggregating 3,440 acres, calling for a minimum investment of $364,000.
9. Examined as to their validity 71,448 applications for entries under the homestead, desert-land, and other laws.
10. Issued supplemental patents, eliminating coal reservations, in 2,673 cases under the act of April 14, 1914 (38 Stat., 355), as against 1,120 the year previous.
11. Approved for patent 34,085 homestead and kindred entries.
12. Acted upon 5,179 applications for second homestead entry under the act of September 5, 1914 (38 Stat., 712), as against 4,891 the year previous.
13. Received 22,909 petitions for designation under the enlarged homestead act of March 4, 1915 (38 Stat., 1162), as against 17,041 the year previous.
14. Approved for patent 812 final reclamation homestead entries.
15. Approved for patent 1,142 entries under the Minnesota drainage act, embracing an area of 182,500 acres.
16. Patented 1,586,807 acres under railroad and wagon-road grants.
17. Classified in the field 900,000 acres of the Oregon and California grant lands revested by the act of June 9, 1916 (39 Stat., 218).
18. Collected and deposited in the Treasury in connection with power permits $8,407.33, as against $2,918.30 the year previous.
19. Eliminated 132,074 acres from Carey Act segregations and restored to entry under the homestead and other laws.
20. Patented 1,752 desert-land entries covering an ,area of 277,432 acres.
21. Approved for certification 1,233,926 acres of lands selected under State grants as school indemnity or under grants of quantity, as against 1,046,730 acres the year previous.
22. Adjudicated finally 1,268,962 acres of State selections, as against 1,145,167 acres in 1916 and 950,830 acres in 1915.
23. Effected a final adjustment with the State of California in the matter of excess indemnity school lands received by the State.
24. Issued 5,839 trust patents to Indians, embracing 945,874.73 acres, an increase of 439,913.01 acres over the year preceding.
25. Issued 2,014 patents in fee to Indians, embracing 246,230.16 acres, as compared with 2,298 such patents, embracing 300,391.71 acres, the year previous.
26. Excluded 437,461 acres from national forests, and the public lands subject to disposition in 353,788 acres opened to settlement and entry.
27. Established “The Land Service Bulletin," a mimeographic monthly publication, made up of current orders, instructions, and decisions of the General Land Office and Department, and decisions of the courts relating to the public lands.
28. Sold 1,399,752 acres of Indian lands in various ceded reservations for $2,445,582.50.
29. Sold 2,447 town lots, outside of the Territory of Alaska, for $113,900.
30. .
Sold town lots in six Alaska town sites for $385,645.
31. Established the town sites of Nenana, Wasilla, Matanuska, and Moose on the line of the Government railroad in Alaska.
1. Adopted policy of treating as competent to manage their own affairs Indians of one-half or less Indian blood, which policy will it is believed, place during the year a very large number of Indians upon the same plane of business equality with the white people surrounding them.
It will also begin the reduction of expenditures and permit closer attention each year to the diminishing number who will need further protection.
2. Made a successful registration of all Indians under the conscription act and aroused great patriotic interest, as shown in the subscription of $4,707,850 in Liberty bonds by Indians and the voluntary enlistment of 1,000 students and ex-students in some branch of the military.
3. Established uniform examinations under the new vocational course of study and issued certificates of competency to a considerable number of graduates.
Increased the enrollment of Indian children in the public schools under tuition contracts to three times that of last year, exclusive of 18,185 pupils in 2,285 school districts of the Five Civilized Tribes.
4. Continued the health campaign with special effect against tuberculosis, trachoma, and infant diseases with remarkable improvement in sanitation of Indian homes and great increase of cases treated in sanatoria.
Established healthy baby contests in all Indian fairs.
5. Accomplished greatest results yet made in suppressing intemperance and breaking up bootlegging, aided much by prohibitory laws in 16 States where Indians reside or contiguous thereto and by Federal legislation controlling interstate commerce in the liquor traffic.
6. Waged an intensified farming campaign, following war with Germany, which has increased the cultivated acreage of Indian lands from 25 per cent to 50 per cent and will place from 40,000 to 50,000 additional acres under leasehold cultivation next year.
Purchased approximately 5,000 additional stock above the natural increase under a new system of inspection that saved $20,000.
Inaugurated a reporting system for the improvement of all dairy herds.
Made grazing leases of tribal lands in many places at about double the rate per head for stock.
7. Reports largely increased numbers of students employed in agricultural and industrial lines, with results especially successful among automobile and other factory workers and unusual activity on the part of returned student associations.
8. Shows 456 allotments covering over 132,000 acres on the Fort Peck Reservation; 15,000 acres in allotments from the public domain approved to the Turtle Mountain Indians and large allotment work on other reservations.
Over 8,000 acres purchased for 4,100 homeless California Indians, with other like purchases for homeless nonreservation Indians in Nevada.
Closes the banner year in leasing of Indian lands for oil, gas, and mining purposes, with over 219,615 acres of unallotted lands under approved leases, outside of the Five Civilized Tribes and Osage Nation and 24,080 acres of tribal lands so approved.
9. During the year 2,203 applicants for fee patents carrying 275,553 acres, worth approximately $5,000,000, were approved.
Reports are rapidly reaching us respecting Indians entitled to competency under the declaration and are being promptly investigated.
10. A new system of bookkeeping recommended by the Bureau of efficiency is now fully installed, differing from the old practice by showing the actual cost of the various activities by expenditures of money and property rather than by cash disbursement alone.
11. At several of the large reservations extensive sales of timber have been made at advantageous prices, and at the Menominee Indian Mill, where 17,000,000 feet of lumber was manufactured under Government management, Indians earned more than $80,000 in wages during the year.
12. In addition to irrigation projects practically completed during the year that will yield some 230,000 acres for cultivation, important underground developments for stock-watering purposes have been made in the arid Southwest.
Wells and springs thus provided are proving of great value to the Navajo Indians and the Papagos in southern Arizona.
13. There were sold at public auction leases covering scattering tracts of Osage oil lands aggregating 9,120 acres, which were being drained by wells on adjacent property to the depletion of their mineral value, for which was received a bonus consideration of $1,997,600 and royalties of 16% per cent and 20 per cent, depending upon the size of tracts and daily production.
The Osage reservation at the close of the year had wells producing 9,943,919.45 barrels, of which the Osage Tribe received as royalty 1,643,223.68 barrels, and total receipts from oil and gas leases for the year approximating $5,000,000.
14. In the Five Civilized Tribes were purchased for Indian homes more than 2,000 acres of land costing over $52,000, and erected 180 home buildings; sold nearly 500,000 acres of tribal and allotted land for over $2,000,000; disbursed $7,429,066.10 in per capita payments; removed restrictions against alienation from 155,428 acres of land; collected $4,407,909.62 in royalties for individual Indians; prevented losses to Indians through court proceedings in the sum of $1,514,314, and conserved for them through bank deposits and investments $3,424,226, exclusive of large savings to minors.
15. The bureau shows comparative facts as follows: In 1911 the Indians cultivated 388,025 acres and last year 678,529 acres; in 1911 they raised crops valued at $1,951,000, sold stock valued at $900,000, realized from native industries such as basket making, blanket weaving, etc., $847,556; and last year they raised crops valued at $5,293,719, sold $4,583,083 worth of stock, and increased the value of their native wares to $1,206,826.
The Indian wage earners for private-individuals in 1911 were 3,204, and last year the number thus engaged increased to 6,902, while the value of all live stock owned by the Indians has risen from $17,971,209 in 1911 to $28,824,439 last year.
1. Paid for pensions, $160,895,054.
2. Returned to the Treasury $2,174,856.63 of the amount appropriated by Congress for the payment of pensions.
3. Returned to the Treasury $72,004.81 of the sum appropriated for maintenance and expense of the pension system, including salaries of special examiners.
4. Reduced the number of employees by 24 persons without the necessity of dismissing any employee.
5. By the act of April 27, 1916, providing for the Army and Navy Medal of Honor Roll, a special pension of $10 per month for life, payable quarter yearly, in addition to any other pension under any existing or subsequent law, was granted to every person over 65 years of age who was placed on said roll.
Under this law there were entered on the pension roll 351 names.
The amount paid in 1917 on account of this act was $41,582.
6. Under the first section of the act of September 8, 1916, the pensions of 157,248 widows have been increased from $12 to $20 per month.
Under the second and third sections of said act 51,481 claims have been filed, of which 11,811 were admitted and 5,445 rejected.
In the other claims filed under said act, calls have been made for testimony and the claims are still pending.
7. Under the act of March 4, 1917, known as the Indian War survivors' act, 6,517 claims had been filed up to June 30, 1917.
8. Up to June 30, 1917, only 11 claims had been filed based on service in the war of 1917, but they have materially increased at the time of writing this report.
9. Convictions were obtained in 30 criminal cases of the 31 tried during the year, because of violations of the pension laws.
The total number of applications received for patent in 1916 was 70,303, and in 1917, 71,620, an increase of 1,317 over the prior year.
The total number of applications awaiting action on June 30, 1916, was 16,559, and the number of applications awaiting action on June 30, 1917, was 16,058, a decrease of 501.
The total number of patents granted in 1916, 46,133, and the total number in 1917, 44,179, a decrease of 1,954.
The total receipts of the office were $2,317,519.72, and the total expenditures for all purposes were $2,095,138.68, the net surplus of earnings over expenditures being $222,381.04 for the year.
1. Collected, tabulated, and summarized returns from 20,759 schools and school systems throughout the United States.
2. Printed and circulated 422,063 copies of printed bulletins, reports, and other documents, and approximately 1,000,000 copies of printed circulars and duplicated letters.
3. Carried on extensive correspondence with school officers and others, mainly in answer to specific questions of educational policy.
In all 137,805 letters were received at the bureau, an increase of more than 17,000 over the previous year.
4. Made, at the request of State and local school authorities, 16 educational surveys, including: Colorado (administration and support) ; Arizona (entire State system) ; University of Nevada; Elyria, Ohio; Falls and Walker Counties, Tex.
5. Completed and issued a comprehensive report covering the entire field of Negro education, following a three-year field study of existing colored schools.
6. Cooperated with other Government agencies in the task of enlisting schools and school officers in special war work, such as increased food production and food conservation, and led in the movement for maintaining school attendance during the war.
7. Completed investigations of rural-school supervision and ruralteacher training in secondary schools.
8. Held three national conferences on rural education, three conferences on industrial training, and two on home economics.
9. Introduced the bureau's plan of home gardening directed by the schools into 100 cities.
Supervised intensive home gardening by the school in 8 cities in Virginia, North Carolina, and Tennessee.
10. Mantained 68 schools for natives in Alaska with an enrollment of 3,600.
1. Concentrated its geologic force on'investigations of oil fields, published during the year 10 reports pointing out areas believed to be favorable for testing with the drill, began the publication of 16 similar reports, and prepared for publication 11 others.
2. Continued the field examination .
3. Began the intensive field study of deposits of"war minerals," such as manganese, pyrite, platinum, potash, antimony, and chromite.
4. Prepared for the War Department, with the cooperation of several State surveys, 23 summary reports on underground waters available for the use of large military camps, and at the request of the War or Navy Departments made special investigations of local water supply.
5. Mobilized the topographic surveys to meet military needs by adopting early in March a program determined by the General Staff, thus postponing indefinitely the continuation of all topographic work in interior States, except the surveys of cantonment sites.
6. Contributed to the Engineer Officers Reserve Corps 61 topographic engineers, 7 hydrographic engineers, and 1 geologist, with other applications for commissions pending at the close of the fiscal year.
7. Furnished the Council of National Defense with manuscript statements on production, sources of supply, etc., of every mineral product of importance; and to serve the needs of committees under the council began the issue of monthly reports of petroleum production and weekly reports of coal production; and to meet similar needs also prepared for publication a new map of the United States showing the oil and gas fields and pipe lines, and State maps outlining the coal-mining districts.
8. Printed for the War Department 96 editions of maps needed for military use and for the Navy Department 906 editions of charts.
9. Published a bulletin on the use of the panoramic camera in topographic surveying, with a special chapter on the application of photogrammetry to aerial surveys.
10. Continued geologic investigations throughout the United States, examining mineral deposits of all kinds but specializing as stated above.
11. Continued topographic surveys throughout the United States until March, when military surveys only were conducted as a part of the program of national defense.
12. Continued stream gaging at 1,197 stations in the United States, including Alaska and Hawaii.
13. Classified 3,900,000 acres of public lands as to mineral character and 252,000 acres as to their value as power or public water reserves.
14. Classified 13,133,851 acres in 14 States as nonirrigable for designation, action being thus concluded upon 8,868 petitions from intending entrymen.
15. Cooperated with the General Land Office by reporting on 5,462 cases other than enlarged-homestead petitions.
17. Distributed to the public 607,526 topographic maps, a notable feature being the 20 per cent increase in sales of both geologic folios and topographic maps.
18. Collected statistics of production for more than 75 mineral products from 92,000 producers and continued in increased volume the special correspondence, bringing producers and purchasers together.
19. Conducted general correspondence with the public, largely in answer to inquiries for technical information, the total number of letters received showing an increase of 7 per cent and the letters sent of 30 per cent over the previous year.
1. Developed, stored, distributed, and delivered irrigation water to over 1,000,000 acres of arid land in 13 States, or an area larger than the cultivated acreage of either Connecticut or New Hampshire at the census of 1910, and producing crops valued at nearly $35,000,000.
2. Operated irrigation works, including 40 reservoirs, with a total capacity of over 9,000,000 acre-feet; over 10,000 miles of canals, flumes, and tunnels; 81,000 structures, including dams, head gates, weirs, checks, and other irrigation devices.
4. Built 450 miles of canals, 150 miles of drains, 600 bridges, 560 culverts, 57 miles of pipe line, 37 miles of roads, 8,880 canal structures, and excavated 9,468,000 cubic yards of earth and rock.
5. Cooperated with other departments of the Government, with other bureaus of the Interior Department, with State governments, and with numerous local organizations in the furtherance of reclamation work and in the interests of the water users.
6. Aided several State legislatures, through the expert advice of the legal division of the service, in the enactment of irrigation-district laws.
7. Cooperated with 30,000 water users on the reclamation projects, not only in the delivery of wat'er to them for their land but in the furtherance of better living conditions, by means of helpful suggestions wherever possible.
8. Issued the Reclamation Record, a monthly publication of the service, devoted to the interests of the settlers on the project's and containing numerous articles by experts of the service and of other bureaus of the Government and by the water users, dealing with matters especially adapted to the needs of the settlers.
9. Cooperated with the various water users' associations on the projects, chambers of commerce, boards of trade, and railroad and State immigration officials in securing competent settlers, and in so far as is proper under the law assisted in disposing of excess lands held in private ownership on the project's.
10. Organized community storage houses on several of the projects to take care of perishable crops until market and transportation facilities are favorable for distribution.
11. Conducted a campaign of publicity on the projects which resulted in an increase of 200,000 acres in food crops, a large part of which was due to war propaganda.
Stimulated farm operations for a larger increase in 1917.
The Service by its own efforts prepared and assisted in the harvesting of crops from approximately 5,000 acres and extended aid with tractor plows and seed in preparing 10,000 acres more.
12. Prepared numerous press bulletins and gave frequent illustrated lectures dealing with the activities of the service.
13. Subscribed for $90,950 worth of the bonds of the first Liberty Loan of 1917 and $175,800 of the second.
14. Contributed over 250 employees as commissioned officers or enlisted men to the armed forces of the United States.
1. Cooperated with the Council of National Defense and with other Government bureaus in work necessary for the successful conduct of the war.
2. Investigated the fixation of atmospheric nitrogen and the oxidation of ammonia to nitric acid, for the purpose of aiding the Government to obtain a supply of nitrates for use in agriculture or the manufacture of explosives.
3. Investigated sulphur and pyrite supplies to ascertain the possibility of providing, from domestic sources, the sulphuric acid needed in many lines of industry, especially the manufacture of explosives and fertilizers.
4. Investigated the noxious gases used in warfare and developed masks to protect men exposed to such gases.
5. Investigated the use of smoke screens in warfare and the methods best suited for producing such screens.
6. Investigated methods for increasing available supplies of necessary minerals and metals hitherto largely imported, such as manganese, nickel, and potash.
7. Ascertained how losses in the treatment of quicksilver ores can be lessened and the production of quicksilver increased.
8. Trained more than 4,800 miners in mine rescue and first-aid methods.
On June 30, 1917, the total number of miners trained by the bureau since its organization was 46,873.
9. Sent its mining engineers and trained rescue men to the scene of 57 mine accidents throughout the United States to make investigations and to assist in recovery and first-aid work.
Through the efforts of volunteer miners, company officials, and rescue crews, and State mine inspectors 103 men were rescued.
10. Aided in reducing the accident hazards in California mines.
11. Continued to investigate the prevalence, causes, and abatement of miners' consumption.
12. Investigated conditions in mines at Butte, Mont., with reference to the health of miners and the danger from mine fires.
13. Developed further improvements in oxygen breathing apparatus for use in rescue work after mine disasters.
14. Showed how the cost of using shale or rock dust to arrest or prevent disastrous explosions in coal mines can be materially reduced.
15. By tests and investigations continued the improvement of mine lamps.
As a result of such investigations on permissibility, to date more than 100,000 portable electric lamps have replaced the dangerous open-flame lamps in the mines of this country.
16. Began work intended to increase the use of Illinois coal for the manufacture of illuminating gas.
17. Continued its activities for the protection of the miner from the dangers attending the use of explosives.
Ten more explosives were tested and approved as permissible for use in dusty or gaseous mines.
At the end of the year the permissible list included 151 explosives.
18. Made substantial advances in investigations for the elimination of noxious fumes and gases from smelter smoke.
As a result of investigations made in cooperation with the bureau, one copper company is expending $1,600,000 in equipment for recovering dust and fume from the smoke of its smelter.
19. Worked out a process for leaching lead from oxidized ores with an acid solution of common salt.
It is believed this process will enable many lead carbonate ores now neglected to be worked at a profit.
21. Obtained encouraging results in the development of a leaching process for low-grade zinc ores.
22. With a view to developing domestic supplies of potash, ascertained the potash content of waste products, such as mill tailings, at many plants throughout the West, and continued to investigate the recovery of by-product potash at cement kilns and blast furnaces.
23. Through its investigation of the viscosity of blast-furnace slags, obtained information that should facilitate the smelting of the lean and complex ores that will be used in increasing quantities as supplies of high-grade ores diminish.
24. From tests with experimental boilers, ascertained how steam boilers can be designed so as to utilize a larger proportion of the heat from the fire.
25. Showed how coal could be used with greater efficiency in many Government plants.
26. Developed an accurate and convenient electrical device for detecting inflammable gas in mine air.
27. As a result of its investigations of radium in cooperation with the National Radium Institute, acquired $200,000 worth of radium, which will be used for scientific and medical research.
28. Demonstrated that excellent ferro-uranium, an alloy used in special steels for making machine tools and ordnance, can be prepared from the uranium oxide obtained as a by-product in the recovery of radium.
29. Brought about a wider application of well-drilling methods that minimize waste of oil and gas.
30. Showed that enormous quantities of oil are left underground in many oil fields and indicated how a larger proportion of the oil could be recovered from the oil sands.
31. Showed how the recovery of gasoline from natural gas can be increased by the use of an absorption process.
32. Collected data showing what great quantities of gasoline have been wasted at oil wells, and determined the best types of gas traps for preventing such waste.
33. Investigated the losses of petroleum during storage in tanks or reservoirs and the losses by fires, and prepared reports on proper methods of storage and of fire protection.
34. Examined types of gasoline sold throughout the United States, determined their relative suitability as motor fuel, and developed specifications for the purchase of gasoline.
35. Conducted investigations that demonstrate the feasibility, under present conditions, of obtaining petroleum and petroleum products from the oil shales of Utah and Colorado.
During the year the Alaska Railroad has been completed from Anchorage to Chickaloon in the Matanuska Valley.
This is a distance of 75 miles.
By this construction the Matanuska coal fields are made available for commercial development.
The grade is down hill from the valley to tidewater, and a rate of $1 a ton on coal has been established.
100 tons a day for the use of the railroad.
Two leases have been made of other large tracts to private parties, who are now actively preparing to start operations early next spring.
The Government is also developing a mine at Chickaloon.
It was from this tract that the coal wos obtained on which the Navy made its test.
The Matanuska and Susitna Valleys are being filled with homesteaders, who this year produced several hundred tons of potatoes and a large quantity of other vegetables and exported 300 tons of a new variety of turnips to Seattle.
The main line of the railroad is being pushed north through the Susitna Valley, and rail is now laid to Montana Creek, a distance of 96 miles from Anchorage.
Rail has also been laid a distance of 22 miles south of Anchorage to Rainbow Creek.
From Kern Creek to Seward, a distance of 71 miles, the road is being reconstructed, but is in operation.
It is the expectation of the engineers that the work along Turnagain Arm will be finished in the summer of 1918.
This will give a continuous rail route from Seward into the Matanuska and the Susitna Valleys for a distance of 248 miles.
By the end of next season it is also expected that the road will be completed as far as Hurricane Gulch, just south of Broad Pass, an additional 75 miles.
Work has also been carried on from Nenana on the Tanana River, south toward the Nenana coal fields, a distance of 50 miles.
Next year will see this portion of the road.completed from the coal fields to the river and well under way from here toward Fairbanks.
The small line of railroad running out of Fairbanks to the northeast, known as the Tanana Valley Railroad, has been acquired by the Government.
This is some 39 miles in length, and makes the Fairbanks goldmining district directly tributary to the Government railroad.
When the work in this division is completed these mines will be served with coal from the Nenana coal fields.
1. Organized National Park Service as ninth bureau of the department under recent act of Congress authorizing its establishment and appropriation for salaries of its officers.
2. Held conference in Washington where, during the first week in January, legislators, officials, scientists, educators, and other men and women of national prominence met to consider national parks needs, and advise the officials of the new service.
3. Organized the first exhibition of national parks paintings; 28 canvasses by artists of distinction were exhibited in the National Gallery from January 2 until after inauguration.
4. Prepared and distributed 128,000 circulars of information relating to national parks and monuments; 117,000 copies of Glimpses of Our National Parks distributed free of charge.
5. Prepared and distributed 83,000 maps showing automobile routes to national parks and road systems within parks.
6. Prepared second edition of National Parks Portfolio; also a guide book of Rocky Mountain National Park and other illustrated park publications.
7. Circulated the equivalent of 348,000 feet of motion-picture film and the equivalent of 3,431 slides of scenes in national parks and monuments among universities, colleges, schools, churches, commercial organizations, outing clubs, etc.
8. Travel to national parks heavier during 1917 season than ever before.
Total number of visitors, 487,368; 1916 visitors, 358,006; 1915, 335,299; 1914, 240,193.
9. Very large increase in automobile travel in national parks during past season.
The licenses issued during 1917 in parks where automobile permits are required totaled 22,286, as against 15,536 in 1916, 12,609 in 1915, and 4,455 in 1914.
10. Assumed control of Mount McKinley region included in the national parks by act of Congress approved February 26, 1917.
11. Arrangements completed under authority of act of June 12, 1917, for establishment of a national park to include Grandfather Mountain, N. C.
12. Verendrye National Monument, N. Dak., established.
Includes Crowhigh Butte, from which Explorer Verendrye first beheld territory beyond Missouri River.
13. Assumed jurisdiction of area of 25,265 acres added to Rocky Mountain National Park by act of Congress approved February 14, 1917.
14. Reorganized concessions in Yellowstone National Park in manner that made economical and efficient operation possible.
All important concessions since reorganization are handled by Yellowstone Park Hotel Co., Yellowstone Park Camping Co., Yellowstone Park Transportation Co., and J. E. Haynes, official photographer.
All concessions under strict Government regulation.
15. Substituted comfortable 10-passenger touring cars in Yellowstone for former horse-drawn stagecoaches.
16. Added Dunraven Pass and Tower Falls regions to regular circle trips in Yellowstone National Park.
17. Formally opened southern gateway to Yellowstone National Park by installation of automobile service to the Jackson Hole.
Yellowstone an important all-summer resort instead of a four or five days' excursion point, as in the past.
19. Arranged with Bureau of Fisheries to stock many lakes and streams in Yellowstone National Park not inhabited by trout.
20. Made important permanent improvements in Glacier National Park road system.
21. Constructed many miles of new trails for tourists' use in Glacier National Park.
22. Accepted gift of 160 acres of land for new administrative site on Flathead River opposite Belton, Mont., the western gateway to Glacier National Park, and began improvement of same.
23. Under a concession granted last year the Rainier National Park Co. completed and operated new hotel and camp in Paradise Valley, Mount Rainier National Park.
24. Made Glacier Basin on northwestern side of Mount Rainier accessible by reconstruction of Storbo road.
25. Widened and improved entire road system in southern part of Mount Rainier National Park.
26. Built broad new trail from rim of crater to lake shore, Crater Lake National Park.
27. New Glacier Point Hotel, Yosemite National Park, completed and operated.
28. Continued construction of new El Portal road in Yosemite National Park.
29. Assumed control of Wawona toll road system and eliminated charges for travel thereover, except regular automobile fee.
Completed important improvements in entire road system of Yosemite National Park.
30. Completed new hydroelectric power plant in Yosemite National Park; total capacity, 2,000 kilowatts; total cost, $210,000.
Will furnish power for lighting hotels, camps, roads, and footpaths in Yosemite Valley, National Park Service buildings, and for heating and cooking at the hotels and camps.
31. Perfected important exchange of timber under which splendid forest growths along certain sections of Big Oak Flat road in Yosemite Park will be forever safeguarded.
32. Improved camp grounds and extended water system in General Grant National Park; also installed shower baths for convenience of campers.
33. Completed purchase of large private holdings in Giant Forest, Sequoia National Park, under congressional appropriation of $50,000 and contribution of $20,000 by National Geographic Society.
34. Erected stairway leading to top of Moro Rock, Sequoia National Park, from which view of entire park and surrounding mountains may be obtained.
35. Prepared large areas in Giant Forest, Sequoia National Park for public camp grounds.
Made same accessible and extended water and sanitation systems for convenience of public.
36. Began continuation of Giant Forest road to join with county road now being constructed to connect Sequoia and General Grant National Parks.
Built this year to Marble Fork River, thus making available extensive camping area, in good fishing region, for next season.
37. Began development of Mukuntuweap National Monument (Zion Canyon), Utah, by granting concession to National Park Transportation & Camping Co. to establish permanent camp and transportation line from Lund, Utah.
Completed construction of several miles of automobile highway in Mukuntuweap National Monument.
38. Completed, under direction of Smithsonian Institution, excavation and improvement in ruins in Navajo National Monument.
39. Completed extensive improvements in Muir Woods, Petrified Forest, Montezuma Castle, El Morro, Sieur de Monts, and other national monuments.
40. Investigated projects for creating national parks in the Indiana Sand Dunes and the upper valley of the Mississippi River.
Published comprehensive report on the Sand Dunes proposition.
The following table shows the number of matters received and disposed of during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1917, which were docketed or recorded.
From the above table it will be noted that out of a total of 15,049 matters referred to this office, only 931 were pending and undetermined at the close of the fiscal year.
It is also gratifying to note the substantial reduction as compared with the previous year which closed with 1,228 matters pending.
While this gain is confined largely to public-land appeals and miscellaneous matters, there are no undue arrears.
Motions, petitions, and miscellaneous matters are taken up for consideration promptly upon receipt, and appealed cases, involving both public lands and pensions, are now reached for action within a reasonable time after docket.
All are adjudicated and disposed of as promptly as is consistent with careful consideration of the questions presented.
The court work for the year shows a considerable increase in litigation in which the Secretary is involved.
On June 30, 1916, there were pending in the courts locally situate 47 cases to which the Secretary was a party; Supreme Court of the United States, 9; court of appeals, 6; Supreme Court of the District, 32.
During the year ended June 30, 1917, 24 new suits were instituted in the Supreme Court of the District and one original action was brought in the Supreme Court of the United States.
In another case in the Supreme Court the department appeared as amicus curia.
Of cases disposed of in the Supreme Court of the District, 25 in all, the plaintiffs were successful—and that only in part—in but 1 case, which is now pending in the court of appeals.
Three -interlocutory matters were also decided, all in favor of the department.
In the court of appeals 9 cases were argued and submitted.
The department won 6 and lost 3, the latter being now before the Supreme Court of the United States for review.
In the Supreme Court of the United States 4 cases against the Secretary were decided.
One original action was won; another, on writ of error, was dismissed by appellant; and 2 cases were lost.
None of the cases in this court was handled by this office except a fifth case in which the department appeared as amicus curiæ.
That case was decided squarely on the ground advanced in the department's brief.
There are now pending in the courts situate in Washington 55 cases against the Secretary.
Of these, 12 are in the Supreme Court of the United States, 12 in the court of appeals, and 31 in the Supreme Court of the District.
Of the cases in the Supreme Court of the United States the Secretary is appellant in 4; in the court of appeals in 1.
Area of land entered and patented.
The total area of public and Indian lands originally entered and allowed during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1917, is 16,201,794.38 acres, not including 240,158.67 acres embraced in finals not heretofore counted as original dispositions of land.
This latter area is constituted as follows: Public auction, 180,844.05 acres; abandoned military reservations, 1,767.88 acres; cash and private sales, individual claimants, and small holding claims, 32,586.80 acres; preemption entries, 221.40 acres; and soldiers' additional homesteads, 24,738.54 acres.
The area of 16,201,794.38 acres is a decrease of 2,841,358.54 acres as compared with the area originally entered and allowed during the fiscal year 1916.
The area patented during the fiscal year is 11,313,362.24 acres, a decrease of 848,45.75 acres, as compared with the fiscal year 1916.
Of the above area, 7,544,055.27 acres were patented under the homestead laws, a decrease of 179,682.96 acres, not including as homesteads 22,464.50 acres patented as soldiers' additional entries.
Cash receipts and expenditures.
The total cash receipts from the sales of public lands, including fees and commissions and sales of Government property for the fiscal year 1917 were $3,632,192.89 (1916, $3,428,588.20), an increase of $203,604.69.
The total receipts from sales of Indian lands were $2,445,582.52 (1916, $2,000,516.17).
Other receipts aggregated $71,855.13.
The total receipts of this bureau during the fiscal year 1917 were $6,149,630.54, as against $5,470,466.81 for the preceding fiscal year, an increase of $679,163.73.
The total expenses of district land offices for salaries and commissions of registers and receivers and incidental expenses during the fiscal year ended June 30,1917, were $863,224.66.
The aggregate expenditures and estimated liabilities of the public land service, including expenses of district land offices and surveys made from the appropriations for surveying the public lands outside of railroad land-grant limits, were $2,959,801.24, leaving a net surplus of $3,189,829.30 of receipts over expenditures.
Disbursements from the following special deposit trust funds and reimbursable appropriations are not included in the above figures as receipts or expenditures: From deposits by individuals for surveying the public lands, $179,962.67; from surveying within land grants (reimbursable), $74,992.82; from opening Indian reservations (reimbursable), $14,572.13; from surveying and allotting Indian reservations (reimbursable) for surveying, $33,938.26; and from proceeds of labor, Oklahoma Cherokees, $88.62.
Field service.
The total amount of cash collected as a result of the work of the field force during the fiscal year was $109,656.02.
In addition, there has been turned into the Treasury $11,491.07 as royalty for coal mined during the past year from a tract in Colorado.
As a result of investigations 115,488.64 acres have been restored to the public domain.
Of this amount 103,680 acres represent fraudulent entries, canceled through proceedings on special agents' reports, and 11,808.64 acres restored to open range by abatement of unlawful inclosures.
Judicial proceedings were had in 240 cases, as a result of which $50,773.88 was recovered and 14,408.85 acres were restored to the public domain.
Of the criminal cases tried during the year 19 resulted in conviction, under which 10 prison sentences were imposed and fines amounting to $3,135.75.
The average number of agents employed during the fiscal year was but two more than for the preceding year, yet the number of cases closed was over 2,300 more than last year.
The investigation of oil-land cases in California has been actively prosecuted during the year, in which 46 new trespass suits and suits to quiet title in the Government, for accounting, etc., were brought, involving an acreage of 7,700.
The total number of oil-trespass suits in California is 71 and the acreage involved 13,107.
In Wyoming additional withdrawals of 165,421 acres of oil lands have been made, and 32,700 acres have been restored as non-oil, leaving 934,295 acres covered by existing withdrawals at the end of the fiscal year.
There has been little change in the situation in the State so far as pending oil-land applications are concerned.
At the present time there are 48 oil contracts under the act of August 25, 1914 (38 Stat., 708), pending in California, embracing 4,160 acres.
The production on the tracts covered by these contracts up to June 30, 1917, was 2,963,143.47 net barrels, and the escrow deposits arising under these contracts $217,352.54.
In Wyoming there are 25 oil contracts, covering an acreage of 6,330, on which the production up to the end of the present year was 5,547,788 net barrels.
Public surveys.
The surveys and resurveys for the year past covered 10,205,111 acres.
Of the surveys, Montana was at the head of the list, with a total of 2,643,518 acres, while of the resurveys, Nebraska led with 1,220,029 acres.
The increasing demand for resurveys in the States of Colorado, Wyoming, and Nebraska has called for the allotment of the survey funds up to the 20 per cent limit fixed by the joint resolution of June 25, 1910, leaving no provision for resurveys in other districts.
To meet the growing demand for resurveys in cases where the title to the greater portion of the land is vested in private ownership special legislation is recommended.
Special attention has been given to the matter of systematizing and working out a uniformity of procedure and comparison of costs of surveys in the offices of surveyors general, with very satisfactory results.
Surveys in Alaska.
Surveys of land in Alaska suitable for agricultural purposes were executed during the fiscal year under the policy of expanding the rectangular net in accordance with the requirements of both present and prospective settlement in the Tanana Valley, in the valley of the Susitna, east of the river, and in the region between Knik Arm and Turnagain Arm, west of the foothills, under the Seward base and meridian.
Legislative authority is recommended for the survey at Government expense of homestead entries in Alaska under such conditions as will restrict them to bona fide settlement claims.
Coal-leasing law in Alaska.
The award of three leases in the Matanuska field, under the leasing act of October 20, 1914, is announced, covering an acreage of 3,440, with a proposed total minimum investment of $364,000 in mining operations upon the lands.
The extension of the coal-land surveys in the Territory so as to include such deposits as are not dependent upon railway transportation for exploitation must not be overlooked in the coming year.
Map compiling and drafting.
A new map of Alaska was completed and issued during the year, and a new map of Montana has been complet'ed and is nearly ready for issuance.
Homesteads and kindred entries.
The number of cases of all kinds approved for patenting was 34,085, as against 36,178 of the previous year.
Of this number, 30,829 are final homesteads, 2,179 commut'ed, and 336 under the forest-homestead act of June 11, 1906.
Under the second homestead law of September 5, 1914 (38 Stat., 712), there were 5,179 applications, of which 4,184 were accepted.
Under the act of March 4, 1915 (38 Stat., 1162), granting preference rights to petitioners under the enlarged-homestead act for lands theretofore undesignated, 22,909 petitions were received, as against 17,041 of the previous year.
Stock-raising homestead act.
The act of December 29, 1916 (Public, No. 290), authorizing a 640-acre stock-raising homestead on lands designated as chiefly valuable for grazing and raising forage crops, has not yet reached a point in its administration where a proper estimate can be placed upon the policy that led to its enactment.
The delay in providing funds for the necessary field examination as a basis for designation until some months after the passage of the act led to the accumulation of a large number of applications and petitions for designation, resulting in some cases of hardship.
The work of designation, however, now well in hand, will presently relieve the situation in this respect.
Reclamation homesteads.
During the past year farm unit plats of 36 townships in the Salt River and Yuma irrigation projects in Arizona were approved and filed and public notices issued announcing the availability of a water supply for the irrigation of the lands shown on these plats.
Farm unit plats have also been approved and filed and public notices issued opening to entry large tracts within the Grand Valley project, Colorado; Boise project, Idaho; Klamath and Umatilla projects, Oregon.
During the fiscal year 1,291 original homestead entries were examined and accepted, 16 assignments of desert-land entries within irrigation projects were accepted, 8 original desert-land entries subject to the reclamation act were examined and accepted, and 12 final desert-land entries approved for patenting.
Forest lieu selections.
There are now pending about 500 selections, involving over 80,000 acres.
During the past year 145 were approved for patenting and 37 canceled.
Adverse proceedings were directed agáinst 13 selections and hearings had in 40 cases.
Decisions in 40 Government contest cases were rendered, 11 of which were in favor of the selector and 29 adverse.
The latter are now pending on appeal in the department.
It is believed that selections have been made for all outstanding base lands for which selection is permissible, excepting about 20,000 acres.
Lieu selections for lands in Indian reservations.
Selections have been made of public lands under the act of April 21, 1904, in New Mexico and Arizona of approximately 1,400,000 acres in lieu of lands in Indian reservations, and patents have issued for these lands.
On June 6, 1916, the department decided not to allow any further exchanges under this act, except in some unusual cases which would be found to be of benefit to the Government or where the selector may have acquired some equity.
Under these exceptions there are still outstanding approximately 50,000 acres of base land in Arizona and approximately 10,000 acres of base land in New Mexico subject to exchange under said act.
Chippewa logging, Minnesota.
Operations in this field are drawing to a close.
The results have been most satisfactory.
The cutting has exceeded the estimates by over 350,000,000 feet, or nearly 50 per cent.
The ninth and probably the last public sale of this timber was held during the past year of tracts left unsold from previous sales, bringing $13,030.19, an average of $5.82 per thousand feet.
The total amount cut during 13 years of logging is 1,268,956,646 feet, for which $8,983,657.22 were paid, and in addition thereto charges for interest amounting to $25,191.54 were collected.
The average stumpage price of the timber scaled was $7.071 per thousand feet.
The total expense of the logging operations for 13 years has been $383,760.76, which is 4.27 per cent of the receipts from the timber.
Minnesota drainage act.
There have been approved for patenting during the fiscal year 1,142 entries, mostly made for 160 acres each, the limit allowed to one purchaser.
The area thus patented was in the neighborhood of 182,500 acres.
There are still pending 125 of these entries.
This act has provided a method by which large areas, open to entry years ago and not taken because of their swamp condition, have been disposed of, and the lands placed on the tax list.
Public sale of Indian lands.
A sale of lands in the Uintah Reservation was held at Provo, Utah, June 18, 1917.
The offering consisted of 386,218 acres, listed for sale in 1,632 tracts.
There were sold at said sale 931 tracts, embracing 200,684 acres, for the total sum of $151,644.50.
On November 22, 1916, the property known as the Ojo Caliente Reservation, in Socorro County, N. Mex., and the buildings thereon, were sold at public auction for $13,000.
All things considered, this was a good price.
Public sales have been announced to take place during the coming season of timber lands in the former Siletz Indian Reservation, Oreg.
Opening of public and Indian lands.
One of the largest reservations opened during the past year was the Fort Assinniboine abandoned military reservation, Mont., under special act of Congress, the entryman being required to pay $2.50 per acre for the land entered.
The schedules described 93,605 acres of agricultural lands, and 2,188 acres of coal lands.
The first reclassification and reappraisement of the Flathead Indian lands has been approved and regulations adopted for the opening of the lands.
The schedules include 2,693 acres of nontimbered lands and 4,983 acres of timbered lands.
The nontimbered land was appraised at $7,150.72, an average of $2.65 per acre; the timbered land at $24,706, an average of $4.95 per acre.
The lands in the diminished Colville Indian Reservation, Wash., to the extent of 422,144 acres, were opened to homestead entry in July, 1916.
Town-site and town-lot entries.
The demand for town lots for business purposes is an indication of the growth and prosperity of the country.
One hundred and sixty-one of such entries were pending at the beginning of the year, and during the year 882 entries were made, 989 were approved for patenting, leaving at the close of the year 54.
In addition, six regular town-site entries were received and approved for patenting.
There were pending at the beginning of the year 21 entries, involving Alaska missions, Alaska sites for trade and manufacture, park and cemetery sites, and 11 additional were received during the year; of these, 19 were approved and 13 are yet pending.
Public sales of town lots in former Indian reservations show an aggregate result of $70,997, while public sales in reclamation projects in Montana aggregate $6,050.75.
Town sites in Alaska.
The town site of Anchorage, on the line of the Government railroad, was surveyed into lots in June, 1915, the first sale of lots being held in July and August of that year, at which 1,887 lots were sold for $177,105.
The terms of sale were onethird cash, the balance to be paid in four equal annual installments, the initial payment derived from the first sale amounting to $60,773.55.
In July, 1916, 1,059 lots were sold in the town site and its additions for $212,020 on the same terms, the annual payments amounting to $82,445.55.
A third addition has been subdivided into lots and will probably be offered for sale during this season.
This town has a population of about 5,000, and there is no reason why, under the present regulations for the disposal of lots therein, the town should not continue to rapidly increase.
Two Government additions to the town site of Seward, Alaska, have been subdivided into lots and blocks, of which 115 lots were sold on September 11, 1916, for $26,630, on terms of one-half cash and the other half to be paid in one year from date of sale.
In July, 1916, 56 lots were sold in the town site of Matanuska for $8,930.
In August, 1916, 354 lots in Nenana town site, at the junction of the Nenana and Tanana Rivers, were sold for $132,525.
June 20, 1917, 47 lots were sold in the town site of Wasilla for $5,540.
Abandoned military reservations.
A number of abandoned military reservations will be disposed of as soon as the preliminary work of surveying, preparing the plats, and appraising the lands is completed.
Most of these reservations are to be disposed of under the act of July 5, 1884, under which the lands are to be offered at public sale for cash at not less than the appraised price.
Among such reservations are Bayside, in Monmouth County, N. J.
Batton Island, Fla.
Virginia Key and Key Biscayne, Fla.
Reservations Nos. 23 and 24 on the Narrows, near Tacoma, Wash.
Railroad grants.
Railroad and wagon road selections were received during the year to the amount of 986,596.05 acres, as against 1,958,444.32 acres in 1916.
There were patented 1,586,807.98 acres, as against 2,208,178.82 acres in 1916.
Rights of way.
During the year 44 applications for railroad rights of way were approved, 37 over unsurveyed lands accepted for filing, and 24 rejected.
Of applications for“all other rights of way," 528 were received, as against 672 the previous year, of which but 17 remain pending office action.
Forfeited rights of way.
The work of clearing the records of outstanding rights of way, which have either been forfeited under the several forfeiture acts, or subject to forfeiture by judicial decree, has been actively prosecuted, and 376 of these cases have been considered, leaving the office up to date on this class of work.
Power permits.
During the year past 5 preliminary and 10 final permits were issued, for which the various permittees paid into the Treasury of the United States a total of $2,918.30.
Permits under the act of 1901 (31 Stat., 790) and easements under the act of March 4, 1911 (36 Stat., 1253), were issued, which, together with second payments on permits theretofore issued, netted the Government $8,407.33.
A list of permits issued accompanies the commissioner's report, together with the respective amounts received thereon.
During the past year 44 applications for permits were received, as against 24 the previous year.
Power site and public water reserves.
During the past year 156,353 acres were withdrawn for power purposes under the act of June 25, 1910 (36 Stat., 847), by 83 orders, as against 161,973 acres during the previous year.
June 30, 1917, 201,708 acres appear withdrawn for public water reserves, as against 193,273 acres the previous year.
On the same date there were 2,429,097 acres withdrawn for power purposes, as against 2,352,652 acres the year previous.
The total withdrawals under the act, including power and waterhole withdrawals, is 2,630,805 acres, as against 2,545,924 acres last year.
The Carey Act.
A general tendency is noted among the States which have Carey Act segregations to eliminate lands which are not susceptible of irrigation, or where the project is of doubtful feasibility, resulting in the restoration of 132,074.25 acres to homestead and other forms of entry.
Applications for patent have been received totaling 47,926.93 acres, and patents have been issued for 43,184.83 acres.
Desert-land entries.
Under the act of March 4, 1915 (38 Stat., 1161), provision was made for the perfecting of desert-land entries, where water was not available for reclamation of the land, either by compliance with the homestead law or by purchase; and since the passage of this relief act 5,590 cases have been disposed of.
During the present year there were patented 1,752 desert-land entries, covering an area of 277,432.33 acres.
Ten chain" lots in Imperial Valley.
During the past fiscal year 183 applications were filed to purchase "10 chain" lots in Imperial County, Cal., under the act of March 3, 1909 (35 Stat., 779), and during that time 70 applications were approved for patenting, involving a purchase price of $8,531.80.
Irrigation projects.
During the past year 130 reports on irrigation projects have been considered, resulting in favorable action on 86 projects, involving 416 desert-land entries; adverse action on 42 projects, affecting 969 desert-land entries; and 38 closed without definite conclusion, because no pending entries were dependent thereon.
Irrigation in Imperial County, Cal.
The execution of a contract between the Secretary of the Interior and the Imperial Laguna Water Co., contemplating the irrigation of the Imperial mesa lands, California, through the diversion of water from the Colorado River at the Laguna Dam on the Yuma reclamation project, is noted.
State selections and State grants.
During the past year 691,831.20 acres of indemnity school land selections and 542,094.81 acres of selections under grants in quantity for specific purposes received departmental approval.
A final adjustment of the overdraft of school indemnity selections standing against the State of California has been effected, a matter which has been pending for a number of years.
A statement in detail as to the several items involved and the result of the settlement in each case is fully set forth by the commissioner.
Swamp and overflowed lands.
Patents issued during the year past to seven States for 22,585.48 acres.
Applications for the identification of 57,795.10 acres as swamp were rejected.
New claims for 3,027.31 acres were filed.
Indian allotments.
Marked progress has been made in setting aside individual holdings for Indians, and during the past year 5,839 trust patents, embracing 945,874.73 acres were issued to Indians.
This is an increase of nearly 87 per cent over the preceding year.
Repayments.
During the past year 1,215 accounts were stated, allowing repayment of $106,888.42, and during the same period 434 claims for repayment were denied.
The number of claims allowed and repaid includes four accounts for the repayment of $4,753.66, money received in connection with claims for coal lands in Alaska, and repaid in pursuance of section 3, act of October 20, 1914 (38 Stat., 741).
National forests.
There are now 152 national forests, embracing 176,252,160 acres, of which approximately 87 per cent is public land.
The net increase in national-forest area since the beginning of the fiscal year is 311,809 acres.
During the fiscal year 437,461 acres have been excluded from national forests, and the public land subject to disposition is 353,788 acres restored to settlement and entry.
Agricultural entry of coal lands.
The act of February 27, 1917 (39 Stat., 944), is a new departure in legislation, authorizing the allowance of agricultural entries for lands withdrawn or classified as coal lands, or valuable for coal deposits in Indian reservations, which may have heretofore or may hereafter be opened to settlement and entry.
Among the coal lands which have been opened by the President's proclamations under this act are lands in the Fort Peck, Crow, and Fort Berthold Indian reservations.
Declaration of policy.
A new and far-reaching policy has been declared in the interest of the competent Indian, who will no longer be treated as half ward and half citizen, but will be recognized as capable of controlling his property and exercising fully his personal rights.
Beyond the general principle, competency or incompetency will, of course, be determined by the facts involved in individual and exceptional cases.
1. Patents in fee.
To all able-bodied, competent, adult Indians there will be given, as far as may be under the law, full and complete control of all their property.
Patents in fee shall be issued to all adult Indians who may, after careful investigation, be found competent, provided that where deemed advisable patents in fee shall be withheld for not to exceed 40 acres as a home.
2. Indian graduates.
Indian students, when they are 21 years of age or over, who complete the full course of instruction in the Government schools, receive diplomas, and have demonstrated competency will be so declared.
3. Sale of lands.
A liberal ruling will be adopted in the matter of passing upon applications for the sale of inherited Indian lands where the applicants retain other lands and the proceeds are to be used to improve the homesteads or for other equally good purposes.
A more liberal ruling than has hitherto prevailed will hereafter be followed with regard to the applications of noncompetent Indians for the sale of their lands where they are old and feeble and need the proceeds for their support.
4. Certificates of competency.
The rules which are made to apply in the granting of patents in fee and the sale of lands will be made equally applicable in the matter of issuing certificates of competency.
5. Individual Indian moneys.
Indians will be given unrestricted control of all their individual Indian moneys upon issuance of patents in fee or certificates of competency.
Strict limitations will not be placed upon the use of funds of the old, the indigent, and the invalid.
6. Pro rata shares—Trust funds.
As speedily as possible their pro rata shares in tribal trust or other funds shall be paid to all Indians who have been declared competent, unless the legal status of such funds prevents.
Where practicable the pro rata shares of incompetent Indians will be withdrawn from the Treasury and placed in banks to their individual credit.
7. Elimination of ineligible pupils from the Government Indian schools.
In many of our boarding schools Indian children are being educated at Government expense whose parents are amply able to pay for their education and have public-school facilities at or near their homes.
Such children shall not hereafter be enrolled in Government Indian schools supported by gratuity appropriations except on payment of actual per capita cost and transportation.
This radical departure from the paternalistic idea in Indian administration will be followed consistently with its underlying purpose to release from governmental restraint those competently worthy of freedom and to prepare by wise supervision the incompetent for such release as rapidly as possible.
This new policy will liberalize administrative practice in various ways and will tend distinctly toward a reduction in governmental expenses.
It will also accomplish a larger attendance of Indian children in the State public schools and place the burden of child education largely upon Indian parents when they are amply able to bear it.
Enlistments and Liberty bond subscriptions.
The bureau, in cooperation with the States, conducted the registration of Indians for the military census, requiring its employees to serve wherever necessary without compensation and directing superintendents to aid in securing full consideration to the exemption claims of Indians.
Aside from voluntary enlistments by citizen Indians fully 1,000 young men among the students and ex-students of the schools offered service in the National Guard or some branch of the military.
The purchase of Liberty loan bonds from individual Indian moneys not drawing more than 31 per cent greatly interested many Indians not only as a safe investment but as a concrete expression of patriotism.
The following subscriptions were definitely reported: By 525 adult Indians, $3,273,450; by 851 Indian minors and students, $1,334,400; to which 1,147 employees in the Indian Service added $178,750, making a total of 2,623 subscriptions for $4,780,400 worth of bonds.
Education.
Substantial progress has been made in reducing to a working basis the tentative course of study and, by the aid of visiting inspectors, working out such plans and reorganization in the various schools as approximate a uniform system for Indian education.
Examinations and promotions of pupils under uniform test were conducted at the close of the year on the same dates for all schools, which was generally satisfactory, barring the necessity for some 17 of the schools to close before the end of the year, because unable to comply with the law limiting annual expenditures for support and education to $200 per pupil.
It is very difficult for some schools to keep within this limit and pay recent prices for all necessary supplies.
The process of eliminating children not properly entitled under the declaration of policy to the privileges of Government boarding schools has been initiated and will lead to the larger enrollment of pupils for whom no other school facilities are afforded and to the closing of some schools in certain localities with consequent reduction of expense.
It will also increase largely the attendance in public schools of children of nontaxpaying Indians on contracts for payment of tuition by the Government.
This attendance outside of the Five Civilized Tribes was nearly trebled during the year.
The educational qualification for competency recognized by the new policy will materially increase the number of Indians to be released from control or given fee patents under the law, and will prove a strong incentive to pupils to acquire independence by completing a full course of training.
Seventy-five graduates were reported at the close of the year as candidates for certificates of competency.
Two thousand two hundred and eighty-five public-school districts enrolled 18,185 Indian children in the territory of the Five Civilized Tribes during the year.
Farming and stock raising.
An intensive food campaign was waged in contribution to the national resources during the world war, resulting in a general awakening and endeavor among the Indians to do their part in the emergency, and in an increase of cultivated acreage from 25 to 50 per cent greater than ever before.
Reports show that on 73 reservations the Indians cultivated this season 472,156 acres as compared with 358,796 acres last year, an increase of 113,360 acres, or 31.6 per cent.
Practically every reservation showed a gain, the highest being 100 per cent and the lowest 5 per cent.
Following aggressive and anticipative measures, between 40,000 and 50,000 acres of additional surplus land will be leased for next season's crop.
The conservation feature of the campaign was emphasized by forwarding to the different reservations and schools for distribution among employees and Indians 12,000 copies of pamphlets issued by the Department of Agriculture and the National Emergency Food Garden Commission on canning and drying fruits and vegetables.
A woman expert in canning and drying was also sent to a number of places to give special instruction to the Indian women and girls.
The agricultural interest, strengthened by Indian fairs, is extending to State fairs, where Indians have won many premiums, including first prize on wheat in South Dakota, awarded to a full blood.
Experimentation in the Southwest has developed increasing Indian culture of cotton.
Besides the natural increase of live stock on the various reservations, there were added last year 610 bulls, 3,127 heifers, 522 cows and calves, and 376 mares under a new plan of purchase, resulting in a saving of some $20,000.
Systematic measures were begun for the improvement of all dairy herds, including scientific care, treatment, and test of their product.
The suppression of contagious diseases among Indian live stock was carried on aggressively during the year, with special progress in the eradication of dourine among the horses.
Reimbursable funds.
Indians on about 85 reservations are now availing themselves of reimbursable funds for the purchase of live stock, farming implements, and supplies.
The Government controls the purchases under this plan, saving in many cases one-half of the cost over purchase by the Indians individually.
Tribal herds of cattle developed from these funds in previous years have proven profitable and will eventually yield an increase for making repayments to the Treasury of the sums expended.
They will, moreover, greatly further the self-support of the Indians when the time comes for turning the stock over to them.
Health and employment.
The health problems of the Indian Service are concerned with tuberculosis, trachoma, infant welfare, and epidemics of contagious diseases.
The great need is for better sanitary conditions in Indian homes, and strenuous efforts are continually made to accomplish this.
The work of the various sanitoria is making steady gains against disease and the conditions producing it.
The forces are prepared for an active educational campaign, with special vigor against tuberculosis among the Five Civilized Tribes from which important results are expected.
The difficulty in the control of trachoma is that the disease is fed from the older Indians, who are slow to submit to treatment.
However, returned students from the schools where treatment of pupils is compulsory are doing much to overcome the prejudice of the parents.
The handling of epidemics is much more difficult among the Indians than among the whites, because the former do not understand the need of quarantine and other precautions against the spread of disease.
They are learning the value of such preventatives as vaccination, however, and in many localities are accepting encouragingly the teaching of sanitary preparedness.
The unabated efforts for infant welfare have brought most gratifying results.
Baby contests" have become the star attractions at all Indian fairs, so much so that this year they will receive more systematic attention, and standard score cards will be issued and used for registering the children contesting.
These will be carefully graded by physicians and suitable certificates issued thereon to the parents.
Employment for Indians is becoming more stabilized, especially for those of educational training, and the vocational instruction of the schools is bearing fruit in the mechanical occupations.
The number of young men in agricultural pursuits has rapidly increased, but a more recent and very significant fact is the large number entering tractor and automobile factories, electrical and engineering plants, and many other lines where they must compete with the best of white workmanship and develop both technical skill and a certain moral steadiness of character in order to advance.
This they are doing in a surprising degree, as reports on many individual cases show.
Suppression of intoxicants.
This work is making more successful headway by the aid of increasing legislation.
Prohibition is now, or soon will be, in legal effect in the following States wherein Indians reside or contiguous thereto: Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Idaho, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Montana, Nebraska, North Carolina, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon, South Dakota, Utah, and Washington.
That portion of section 5 of the act of Congress approved March 3, 1917, known as the Reed amendment, will prove most helpful because of its prohibitory effect on the liquor traffic in interstate commerce into any State or Territory the laws of which prohibit the manufacture or sale therein of intoxicating liquors for beverage purposes.
Several of the States mentioned have also passed laws controlling the sale of peyote and other narcotic preparations.
It is noteworthy that in some instances where the Indians were allowed to vote on the question of prohibition, their suffrage was registered strongly in its favor.
Special success has been won during the year in breaking up bootlegging in certain localities which had hitherto been offensive strongholds for this practice.
In the distribution of approximately $9,000,000 as per capita payments to Indians in Oklahoma, and in other like payments to Indians throughout the country, special safeguards were instituted against their use of these funds for intoxicating purposes and with generally very gratifying results.
Allotments, fee patents and purchases.
In addition to allotments continued on the various Sioux reservations and the Gila River and Colorado River reservations in Arizona, 456 allotments comprising over 132,000 acres were made to the Fort Peck Indians, 20 allotments covering 15,000 acres made on the public domain were approved to Turtle Mountain Indians, and a large number of reallotments were made on various reservations, usually securing to the Indians a better character of land.
During the year 2,203 applications for fee patents were approved, involving 275,553 acres valued at $5,000,000.
Of these, 576 were full bloods and 1,627 mixed blood allottees.
Although work under the declaration of policy was only commenced, 470 Indians with 37,600 acres of land were released from Government control.
Reports are rapidly reaching the office for furtherance of the work under this policy and are being investigated.
Purchases of land have been made for numerous bands of homeless, nonreservation Indians and some 8,000 acres for about 4,100 homeless California Indians.
Indian heirship.
The department acts as a probate court in determining heirs to Indian estates, and in considering wills acts also as a guardian of the Indian and his estate.
During the last fiscal year 2,851 estates were finally determined and 123 wills received approval, this exclusive of Osage wills which are considered under a law applicable to them alone.
Oil and gas interests.
Scattering tracts of Osage oil lands in Oklahoma, aggregating 9,120 acres, which were being drained by wells on adjacent property to the reduction of their mineral value were sold at public auction for a bonus considerartion of $1,997,600 and royalties of from 16% per cent to 20 per cent, depending upon the size of tracts and daily production.
The Osage Reservation at the close of the year had wells producing 9,943,919.45 barrels of oil, of which the Osage tribe received as royalty 1,643,223.68 barrels and total receipts from oil and gas leases for the year approximating $5,000,000.
In the last few years the oil and gas industry outside the Five Civilized Tribes and the Osage Nation has had a steady increase.
The advance in the price of oil has stimulated the leasing of Indian lands and made 1917 the banner year for such industry.
Exclusive of the Osage Nation and the Five Civilized Tribes, leases were approved on seven reservations in Oklahomia and one in each of Washington, Wyoming, and South Dakota, involving 219,615 acres, with leases pending in these districts on 27,550.93 acres.
Leases on 24,080 acres of tribal lands were also approved.
In addition to rentals and royalties, bonuses are paid directly to the Indian lessors varying in amount from a few dollars to several thousand dollars.
Forestry.
The efficient lookout and patrol system now maintained on Indian reservations having large timber areas is largely instrumental in preventing heavy annual fire losses.
Appraisal of timber resources involving much incidental data has been conducted during the year, and among the large sales of timber made were two on the Klamath Reservation of about 430,000,000 feet at the unit price of $3.57 per thousand feet, board measure, for yellow pine; two of 60,000,000 feet on the Flathead Reservation at prices from $3.65 to $4 per thousand; about 18,000,000 feet of mixed species in northern Michigan, besides other smaller sales.At the Menominee Indian mill, where 17,000,000 feet of lumber were manufactured under Government management Indians earned more than $80,000 in wages during the year.
The assets of the Menominee Indians have now been increased equal to the value of this whole manufacturing plant inventoried at more than $1,000,000.
Irrigation.
During the year the Wapato Dam on the Yakima River was completed at a total cost of about $144,000, estimated to irrigate 120,000 acres, of which 57,000 are now in cultivation, yielding a product for the year estimated at a value of $6,000,000.
Steps have been taken to supply water from the storage provided by the Roosevelt Dam for 631 allotments on the Salt River Reservation.
A diversion dam across the Truckee River completed at a cost of over $26,000 will irrigate 3,000 acres on the Pyramid Lake Reservation, Nev.
On the Crow Reservation, in Montana, irrigation projects costing $1,000,000 are now supplying 69,000 acres.
On the Wind River Reservation, Wyo., the irrigable area is now 80,777 acres, on which the value of crops grown last year was $264,700.
Important underground developments in the Southwest have produced during the year wells and springs for stock-watering purposes of great value to the Navajo Indians and the Papagos in southern Arizona.
Miscellaneous activities.
The demand for blankets made by the Navajo Indians exceeds the supply more than usually because the better price for wool makes its sale in the raw state more profitable than when woven into blankets.
In the leasing of tribal lands grazing fees have been increased wherever conditions justified.
Practically all available lands on the San Carlos and Fort Apache Reservations formerly leased at $1.50 per head now bring $2.40 for cattle and $3 for horses.
Important road and bridge work has been in construction in the Navajo, Kaibab, Shoshone, and Fort Yuma Reservations.
The active demand for motion pictures of Indian life is encouraged only to the extent of permitting pictures of present-day scenes.
Complaints regarding nonpayment of debts by Indians are diminishing.
The employment of Indians for exhibition purposes has been uniformly discouraged.
The payment of cash annuities, except where mandatory by law, has not been generally encouraged, but during the year a per capita payment of $300 was made on the Crow Reservation and $200 to the Fort Peck Indians, chiefly to aid them in larger farming operations favorable to the food campaign.
The small funds provided for relieving distress among Indians have been chiefly used for the benefit of the needy on reservations, placing as far as possible the burden of caring for nonreservation Indians on the white communities in which they reside.
The majority of Indians on the various Sioux Reservations, as provided by the act of March 2, 1889, and amendments thereto, have received issues of implements and stock or the cash value thereof, from which excellent results have followed.
Recent legislation affecting the prorating of tribal trust funds permits the withdrawal of shares of noncompetent, able-bodied Indians for expenditure under supervision for their benefit.
This opens the way for thousands of noncompetents to be established on their allotments with supplies furnished to start them toward selfsupport.
There has been an increasing demand for individual Indian money, due principally to the high cost of living, but largely for minors funds by parents or guardians, who have expended their own and now seek the use of the children's money.
These cases require careful study according to their individual merits to the end that the minor's funds shall be retained at interest for his future benefit except under circumstances which fully justify their present use.
The new system of bookkeeping, as recommended by the Bureau of Efficiency and designed to show the actual cost of the various activities by expenditures of money and property rather than by cash disbursements alone, has been adopted and is adding effectiveness to the accounting work of the office.
Indians in Oklahoma.
During the year the Office of the Superintendent of the Five Civilized Tribes handled 1,000,000 pieces of mail and $42,000,000, involving the erection of 180 houses and barns at a cost of $126,492.11; the purchase of more than 2,000 acres of land for homes, costing $52,437.10; the sale of nearly 500,000 acres of tribal and allotted lands for over $2,000,000; an investment of $1,741,550 in Liberty loan bonds for individual Indians, besides investments in other loans and purchases; the disbursement of $7,429,066.10 in per capita payments; the removal of restrictions against alienation from 155,428.39 acres of land; the collection of $4,407,909.62 on account of royalties from leases; and much other work pertaining to leases, investigations, miscellaneous matters, etc.
The enrolled members of the Five Civilized Tribes now number 101,506, of which 26,774 are full bloods; 10,393 are mixed, having one-half or more Indian blood; 40,934 are of less than onehalf blood, and include intermarried whites; and 23,405 are freedmen.
Twenty-five thousand one hundred and sixty-seven are still under restrictions.
Under the laws of Oklahoma, every enrolled minor of the Five Civilized Tribes has a share in the tribal lands and moneys, which accounts for the great number of guardianships the nearly 53,000 probate cases now docketed in the county courts of eastern Oklahoma, and the consequent heavy work of probate attorneys, who in the past year appeared for the Indians in 25 criminal actions, 261 civil suits, involving property worth $474,000, besides over 18,000 regular cases; issued citations to 4,470 delinquent guardians, resulting in the removal or discharge of 1,762 guardians and the filing of nearly 3,000 new bonds, amounting to $3,331,693; prevented losses to Indians in the sum of $1,514,314; conserved for them through bank deposits and investments $3,424,226; and saved to minors and others $1,514,314.
Comparative data.
The bureau shows comparative facts as follows: In 1911 the Indians cultivated 388,025 acres, and last year 678,529 acres; in 1911 they raised crops valued at $1,951,000, sold stock valued at $900,000, realized from native industries, such as basket making, blanket weaving, etc., $847,556; and last year they raised crops valued at $5,293,719, sold $4,583,083 worth of stock, and increased the value of their native wares to $1,206,826.
The value of all live stock owned by the Indians has risen from $17,971,209 in 1911 to $28,824,439 last year.
The Indian wage earners for private individuals in 1911 were 3,204, and last year the number thus engaged increased to 6,902.
New legislation.
The work in the Pension Bureau has during the year been considerably affected by new legislation.
Medal of honor roll.
By the act of April 27, 1916, providing for the Army and Navy Medal of Honor Roll, a special pension of $10 per month for life, payable quarter-yearly, in addition to any other pension under any existing or subsequent law, was granted to every person over 65 years of age who was placed on said roll.
By that law it was made the duty of the Secretary of War and the Secretary of the Navy to certify to the Commissioner of Pensions the names of persons entered on said roll, and that certificate is made full and sufficient authority to the Commissioner of Pensions for the payment by him to the beneficiary named in each certificate.
Under this law there were entered on the pension roll 351 names.
The amount paid in 1917 on account of this act was $41,582.
Final removal of Confederate disabilities.
Section 4716, Revised Statutes, provided that no money on account of pension should be paid to any person, or to the widow, children, or heirs of any deceased person who in any manner voluntarily engaged in or aided or abetted the late rebellion against the authority of the United States.
That limitation was removed in specific cases by numerous statutes, and on August 29, 1916, it was finally repealed.
Ashbrook law.
The act of September 8, 1916, known as the Ashbrook law, increased the pension of a large number of widows from $12 to $20 per month, and extended the limitation of marriage to the soldier from June 27, 1890, to June 27, 1905, thus giving title to pension to many widows to whom former laws denied it, and also made ample provision for the remarried widows of soldiers of the Civil War.
The work under this law was entered upon in the Pension Bureau with great vigor for the purpose of expediting and distributing the generosity of the Government to the widows who were made beneficiaries by said act.
Up to and including June 30, 1917, pensions of 157,248 widows have been increased under the first section of the act.
Under the second and third sections 51,481 claims have been filed, of which 11,811 were admitted and 5,445 rejected.
In the other cases calls were made for testimony and the claims are still pending.
Indian war survivors.
On March 4, 1917, there was approved an act to pension survivors of certain Indian wars and the widows of those engaged therein.
This act, in connection with the acts of July 27, 1892, and February 19, 1913, grants pension at the rate of $20 per month from the date of its passage.
Up to and including June 30, 1917, under this act 6,517 claims were accepted and classified by the Law Division, almost all of which are still pending awaiting detailed information called for as to identity of party and character and length of service.
War of 1917.—Up to June 30, 1917, 11 claims had been presented based on service in the present war.
At the time this report was written the number of such claims had very materially increased, and it is feared that, because of military operations which are anticipated, the number may further increase very rapidly.
Even if peace should be declared, the mere fact of the existence of such a large number of men as are in the Army, Navy, and Marine Corps would alone give reason to expect many claims on account of injury from accident and disability from disease.
The pension laws are applicable to all those who serve in the present war in the Army, Navy, or Marine Corps.
When any officer or enlisted man of the National Guard is drafted into the service of the United States, the law passed June 3, 1916, provides that he shall be entitled to all the benefits of the pension laws.
That same provision is made applicable to any officer or enlisted man drafted into the service of the United States pursuant to the provisions of the joint resolution of July 1, 1916.
Where disability or death is due to aviation accident in the Navy or Marine Corps, a double pension is allowed.
No special provision has been made with reference to such service in the Army.
Number of pensioners.
There were on the roll at the end of the fiscal year 673,111 names, a net loss of 36,461 from the total of 709,572 on the roll at the beginning of the year.
The number of Civil War soldiers on the roll June 30, 1916, was 362,277, and on June 30, 1917, 329,226, showing a decrease of 33,051.
The number of deaths of Civil War soldiers in 1917 was 33,232, which lacked 1,020 of being as many as occurred in 1916, when the number of such deaths was 34,252.
The number of Civil War widows on the roll June 30, 1916, was 286,080, and on June 30, 1917, 284,216, showing a decrease of 1,864.
The deaths of widows, minor children and dependents numbered 20,130 in 1917, as against 19,957 in 1916.
The highest number of Civil War soldiers on the roll was in 1898, when there were 745,822.
The highest number of Civil War widows on the roll was in 1912, when there were 304,373.
Of the War of 1812 there were surviving on June 30, 1917, 109 widows.
Of the War with Mexico there were on June 30, 1917, 384 survivors and 3,422 widows.
Of the War with Spain the total number of original claims allowed by the bureau is 39,564.
The number of Spanish War soldiers on the roll at the end of the fiscal year is 28,275.
Unexpended balances of appropriations.
Disbursements for pensions.
The amount disbursed in the payment of pensions during the year was $160,895,054, as against $159,155,090 for the preceding year.
The amount appropriated for payment of pensions for the fiscal year 1916 was $163,000,000, as against $164,000,000 for the preceding year.
A deficiency appropriation of $5,000,000, largely due to the act of September 8, 1916, was made in addition to the original appropriation of $158,000,000 for the fiscal year.
The number of pensioners residing in foreign countries in 1917 was 4,085.
The amount paid to pensioners in foreign countries was $929,768.
There were received and classified in the law division during the year 98,759 applications of all kinds, 51,481 of which were under sections 2 and 3 of the act of September 8, 1916.
Military bounty land warrants.
During the last year there was issued one warrant for 120 acres.
There were 5 claims on hand at the beginning of the year and 11 received during the year, of which 1 was allowed, 6 were rejected, 1 was abandoned, and 8 are still pending.
Special acts granting pension or increase of pension.
During the year 25 omnibus bills were passed granting pension or increase of pension, representing 4,178 individual cases.
In 62 of such cases the beneficiary died prior to the approval of the bill granting the relief.
Requests to the number of 3,211 by the pension committees of the Senate and House of Representatives for the transmittal of claims were complied with.
Division of pension.
Under the act of March 3, 1899, providing for division of pension of resident pensioners of the United States who have deserted their wives or children, or who are inmates of soldiers' or sailors' homes, altogether 16,627 claims have been filed; in 9,449 of them the division of pension was allowed, and in 7,060 the division was denied.
On July 1, 1916, there were 178 such claims pending, and during the year 438 claims of this class were filed or renewed; 359 were allowed, 139 were denied, and 118 were pending on June 30, 1917.
Under the act of August 8, 1882, of claims of wives and children of pensioners undergoing imprisonment, or insane without a guardian, 23 were allowed and 16 were not allowed.
Of claims under the act of February 2, 1909, of the dependents of pensioners confined in St. Elizabeths Hospital 13 were allowed and 4 rejected.
Offenses and recoveries.
During the year 32 cases were presented to the Department of Justice for prosecution on account of offenses against the pension laws.
These were in addition to those which had been presented in the prior year and not all of which had been acted upon.
The acquittal was in the case of a man charged with impersonating an officer of this bureau.
Five cases were disposed of by nolle prosequi; in 7 cases presented to the grand jury no indictments were found; at the close of the year there were 57 cases pending for prosecution.
Two civil suits were compromised for $2,000 and $900, respectively, under the direction of the Department of Justice.
The sum of $3,018.40 was recovered without resort to court proceedings.
The foregoing does not include recoveries, through the board of review, from pensioners on former wrongful adjudications.
This has amounted in two years to the sum of $120,663.05.
Economies.
Letters are now single spaced; and since many thousands are written in the Pension Bureau each year, it will be a considerable saving.
Where whole manila sheets were used with the files of cases, half sheets are now used, serving the same purpose.
Thousands of file slips which were used and discarded have been again utilized by crossing out the marks on the side once used and using the opposite side of the slip.
In other respects efforts are made to effect savings where they will in no manner interfere with the efficiency of the work.
Reduction of the force.
The legislative, executive, and judicial appropriation act for the fiscal year 1918 made provision for 24 fewer employees than for the year ending June 30, 1917.
The appropriation act of 1918 limits appointments and promotions to 25 per cent of the vacancies occurring in any grade during that fiscal year.
Fourteen appointments were made during the fiscal year in the classified service, 12 in the Pension Bureau, and 2 in the secretary's office.
For the next fiscal year there are 1,091 employees, as against 1,115 for the past year.
Attorneys.
There are 27,628 persons or firms entitled to recognition as attorneys or agents before the bureau, 352 of whom were admitted, and 5 restored during the fiscal year; 8 were disbarred; 8 relinquished their right to practice; 2 were suspended from practice; 13 were prohibited under section 109 of the Criminal Code; 64 died; and in one case the admission to practice was canceled and revoked.
Powers of attorney and fee agreements examined numbered 10,484.
Contests between attorneys for recognition in claims were settled in 946 cases.
Nonpayment of pensions to residents of Germany.
Prior to the beginning of 1917, because of the difficulty in transmitting mail to pensioners residing in Germany, the Pension Bureau had made arrangements with the Secretary of State by which pension vouchers and checks were transmitted in the diplomatic pouch.
Difficulties continued to multiply, and when diplomatic relations were suspended, February 3, 1917, the bureau was unable to deliver such checks.
Therefore, on February 5, 1917, an order was issued providing that all such vouchers, checks, and any other communication for persons within the limits of Germany should be withheld during the discontinuance of diplomatic relations with that country, and that for the present consideration need not be given to pending claims from applicants residing in such country.
There was also in said order the statement that the same order should apply to any other foreign country upon the discontinuance with it of diplomatic relations.
The rights of pensioners residing in Germany were not determined by the Commissioner.
In the absence of any other regulation by Congress, payment of accumulated pension would be made to them upon their being in territory where they could be reached by the ordinary course of mail.
Photostat.
Photostat copies of documents were made aggregating 12,006 pages, making a total of 21,801 pages since the photostat machine was installed, December 4, 1915.
During the year the sum of $406.70 was received for photostat copies of documents furnished under the act of August 24, 1912.
During the fiscal year ending June 30, 1917, there were filed 68,690 applications for patents for inventions, 2,666 applications for patents for designs, 264 applications for the reissue of patents previously granted, 8,714 applications for registrations of trade-marks, 884 applications for registration of labels, and 320 applications for registration of prints, the total number of such applications being 81,538.
This represents an increase of 917 over the applications filed in 1916.
There was, however, an increase of 1,342 in the number of applications for inventions.
In addition, 2,158 appeals and 34 disclaimers were filed.
During the year 44,179 patents (including 1,686 designs and 165 reissues), 6,126 registrations for trade-marks, 781 registrations for labels, and 342 registrations for prints were granted.
The number of patents which expired during the year was 24,777.
The number of allowed applications which forfeited for nonpayment of final fees was 10,504.
The total receipts of the office during the year were $2,317,519.72, and the total of expenditures were $2,095,138.68, the net surplus of earnings over expenditures being $222,381.04.
The grand net surplus since the establishment of the present patent system in 1836 is now $8,219,071.35.
Scope of the bureau's work.
The work of the Bureau of Education comprises two types of service.
The first consists of reporting on the status of education and educational progress in the United States and in foreign countries.
This involves the collection and compilation of statistics, the maintenance of an extensive educational library, the carrying on of a voluminous correspondence, and the publication in reports, bulletins, miscellaneous documents, and circulars of the information collected by the bureau.
The second type of service is in the nature of special projects.
These are in part educational investigations, in part propaganda for improving educational conditions, and in part administrative.
They are carried on primarily by the bureau's specialists, with occasional assistance from workers in education outside the bureau.
This phase of the bureau's work has increased considerably in recent years.
Statistics.
During the year the bureau collected, tabulated, and summarized returns from 20,759 schools and school systems, including 48 State school systems, 1,241 city school systems, 574 universities and colleges, 530 professional schools, 12,003 public high schools, 2,203 private secondary schools, and other institutions of miscellaneous type and grade.
Correspondence.
First-class mail matter received by the bureau during the year amounted to 137,805 pieces, as compared with 120,078 pieces in 1916, and 86,817 in 1915.
This increase of nearly 60 per cent in the work of the bureau has been accompanied by practically no increase in the facilities for handling it.
Library.
The Bureau of Education Library is the most extensive educational library in the United States.
During the year the library collection was increased by 2,014 volumes and pamphlets, 6,200 numbers of serial publications, and 7,950 numbers of periodicals.
Publications.
There were 422,063 copies of reports and bulletins distributed during the year, and approximately 1,000,000 copies of brief mimeographed or printed circulars.
The printed documents included the Annual Report of the Commissioner for 1916, 49 issues of the Bulletin, and 434 miscellaneous circulars and reprints.
The bulletins issued during the year dealt with such subjects as State pension systems for public-school teachers, the Wisconsin county training schools for teachers in rural schools, public facilities for educating the alien, accredited secondary schools in the United States, vocational secondary education, commercial education, the social studies in secondary education, university training for public service, manual arts and home-making studies in typical cities, adult illiteracy, the cooperative system of education, gardening in elementary city schools, recent movements in college and university administration, rural school supervision, the district agricultural colleges of Georgia, together with the reports of the educational surveys of Iowa, North Dakota, Washington, Wyoming, Colorado, and colored schools.
Educational surveys.
Numerous agencies have made educational surveys in the past five years.
This service is, however, most appropriately rendered by the Bureau of Education, because the bureau represents no locality or special interest, because its officers have the widest acquaintance with educational conditions, and because it is a public instrument supported by the whole country.
The growing recognition of these facts brings an ever-increasing demand for the bureau to render this service.
Sixteen different survey projects have been carried on during the year.
In every case the surveys made by this office have culminated in constructive recommendations.
For the most part these recommendations have received the serious consideration of local school officers and of legislatures.
Many of them have already been incorporated in educational legislation.
Other projects.
In the field of higher education several studies have been brought to completion and published, including a bulletin on the statistics of State universities and colleges and a study of registration and student records in smaller colleges.
Decisions have been rendered by the specialist in higher education as to 530 universities, colleges, and schools for inclusion in the list of institutions to be accredited by the United States Military Academy.
In school administration three projects have been undertaken—a study of the current practice of city school administration, a study of school legislation in 1916, and a digest of State laws relating to libraries.
The campaign for the improvement of rural school conditions was continued during the year.
Important rural conferences were held at Lincoln, Nebr., Philadelphia, Pa., Rock Hill, S. C., to be followed by similar conferences at St. Paul, Minn., Hot Springs, Ark., Denver, Colo., Helena, Mont., and Chico, Cal.
Conferences on industrial education were held under the bureau's direction at Nashville, Tenn., Indianapolis, Ind., and Kansas City, Mo.
Conferences on home economics were held at the bureau's call in Washington and in Boston.
North Carolina, and Tennessee by one of the specialists in school and home gardening.
Another specialist was detailed for some weeks to Atlanta, Ga., where he successfully introduced gardening under school supervision.
Courses for the training of garden teachers were given by specialists of the bureau in several of the summer schools.
The war has given special point to the bureau's plan of home gardening directed by the school.
Two studies have been carried to completion by the division of kindergarten education—one a bulletin on kindergarten legislation, the other a study of the methods of kindergarten supervision.
Important legislation bearing on kindergartens has been passed in five States, largely in response to the bureau's efforts in this field.
The work of the bureau in fostering education in the home has increased considerably.
During the year a new reading course, that in American history, was prepared, and about 1,000,000 copies of reading courses were distributed.
Approximately 6,000 persons are now enrolled in the National Reading Circle.
The bureau is undertaking to promote training in citizenship and the stimulation of civic consciousness through the activities of three separate divisions—civic education, immigrant education, and community organization.
The special agent in civic education has assisted in bringing to completion the report of the committee on social studies in secondary education.
As a result of this and similar studies the States of Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Massachusetts, and New Jersey have enacted legislation providing for the establishment of courses for training in the duties of citizenship.
The division of immigrant education, in addition to its regular work of correspondence and circularization, has organized the National Committee of One Hundred on Americanization, with a view to coordinating the efforts of the numerous committees and associations, National, State, and local, now working in this field.
The work of the.division of foreign educational systems has included, besides the usual section in the annual report of the Commissioner of Education, special studies of secondary agricultural schools in Russia, higher technical institutions in foreign countries, military training of the youth of school age in foreign countries, and a study of vocational education in the countries at war.
Alaska.
In its work for the natives of Alaska the Alaska division of the bureau maintained 68 schools, with an enrollment of 3,600 pupils.
Instruction in matters pertaining to health, industrial training, gardening, and commercial education was emphasized.
Efforts have been made to improve living conditions in the villages, to lessen the death rate, and to render the natives better able to cope with the conditions which confront them.
For the fiscal year 1915-16 Congress appropriated $25,000 to provide for the medical relief of the natives of Alaska; in addition $19,000 of the appropriation for the education of natives of Alaska was used for that purpose, making a total of $44,000 for medical relief during the year.
A well-equipped hospital was maintained at Juneau, with a physician in charge and three nurses in attendance, and small improvised hospitals were continued at Nulato and Kanakanak.
Education and the war.
Immediately upon the declaration of war the Bureau of Education put its facilities for reaching schools and school officers at the disposal of other Government agencies dealing more directly with war preparation.
Cooperation was effected with the Department of Agriculture and the Food Administration and other agencies in the special war tasks of increased food production, food conservation, and industrial preparedness.
The bureau organized and led the movement for continued educational opportunities during the war, specially exerting its efforts in maintaining compulsory school laws and in urging higher education for women and for men below the age of the selective draft.
Reports received at the bureau show that the campaign for school attendance has already met with measurable success, and that this country has been spared, in part at least, the lamentable falling down of educational standards noted in other countries at the outbreak of war.
Kecommendations.
The commissioner recommends increases in the salaries of administrative officers of the bureau.
He asks for an assistant commissioner who shall also be a specialist in secondary education, additional specialists in higher education, specialists in school and home gardening, and additional specialists in commercial education.
He urges more adequate provision for investigation of school hygiene and sanitation, adult illiteracy, child training in the home, school administration in cities and towns, and exceptional children.
He asks for a specialist in educational theory and practices to serve as the director of investigations, additional specialists and assistants in foreign and domestic systems of education, and a comparatively large increase in the numbers of clerks and other employees to make it possible for the bureau to do adequately the work imposed by law and by public demand upon a national bureau of education.
A special recommendation is for funds to enable the bureau to cooperate with State and county school officers in establishing and maintaining demonstration rural schools as a means of solving what is still the most important educational problem of the Nation—the education of the country boy and girl.
For Alaska the commissioner asks a larger appropriation to enable the Secretary of the Interior to provide for further medical and sanitary relief of the natives of Alaska and authority to sell some of the reindeer belonging to the Government.
Scope of the survey's work.
The changes in the scope of the operations of the Geological Survey have been only those needed to make the geologic and topographic surveys and investigations of surface and underground waters throughout the United States contribute more directly to the national problems of preparedness.
The special utilization of the statistical work of the survey well illustrates this development during the past year, since large use has been made of the data collected through many years concerning the mineral resources available whenever the demand came for increased production.
The total appropriations for the fiscal year 1917 aggregated $1,605,- 520.
The roll of survey members holding appointments from the Secretary numbered, at the end of the year, 934, an increase of 62.
Geologic surveys.
During the year 134 geologists made field investigations in 47 States, Canal Zone, and the West Indies, and 69 per cent of the appropriations were spent in public-land States.
The detailed geologic surveys cover 6,701 square miles, the reconnaissance geologic surveys 28,500 square miles, a total of 35,201 square miles.
Systematic investigations of metalliferous deposits were made in Alabama, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Idaho, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Tennessee, Utah, Virginia, Washington, and Wyoming.
Cooperative work was done with the geological surveys of 25 States and with the Bureau of Mines, Bureau of Standards, Office of Public Roads and Rural Engineering, Bureau of Fisheries, Coast and Geodetic Survey, Forest Service, Weather Bureau, Smithsonian Institution, Lighthouse Service, Office of Indian Affairs, War Department, Navy Department, and Carnegie Institution.
Surveys in Alaska.
Twelve parties at work in Alaska covered 5,100 square miles with reconnaissance geologic surveys, 636 square miles with detailed geologic surveys, 9,700 square miles with reconnaissance topographic surveys, and 65 square miles with detailed topographic surveys.
The geologists also investigated special problems in productive mining districts, the results of which can not be stated in terms of area.
Statistics of mineral production.
The survey continued the policy of making the annual report on the mineral resources of the United States for the calendar year 1916 more than a statistical compilation by recording and interpreting industrial progress, and especially by giving full descriptions of the sources from which the mineral output of the country is obtained.
The separate reports on each mineral product are printed as advance chapters of the volume and widely distributed, and at the close of the fiscal year 11 chapters had been published or were in press.
Mid-year statements covering the first half of the production of 1916 of some of the principal minerals were published early in the fiscal year and preliminary statements of production of the principal minerals for the whole year were given wide publicity in the form of press bulletins during.
The entrance of the United States into the war served to increase the already growing demand for information concerning our mineral resources, and a bulletin entitled"Our Mineral Supplies," has been prepared to meet this demand.
The survey has also been called upon by the Council of National Defense, the Tariff Commission, and other Government institutions for information, most of which was already available or easily obtainable.
The survey began during the year to issue a monthly summary of petroleum statistics, also a monthly statement of rail shipments of coal and coke, and at the close of June, a weekly statement of coal production, with an analysis of causes of change in rate of output.
These are statistics that possess a news value and serve as an index of current industrial conditions.
Topographic surveys.
New areas amounting to 20,103 square miles were mapped topographically, making the total area of the United States surveyed to date 1,257,623 square miles, or 41.5 per cent of the country.
Areas aggregating 2,377 square miles were resurveyed, making the total area surveyed or resurveyed during the year 22,480 square miles.
These surveys were made in 31 States, 16 of which cooperated in the work.
The technical field force numbered 155, and in addition 40 technical field assistants were employed.
The results of topographic surveys in Alaska are given elsewhere.
Water resources.
At the end of the year 1,197 gaging stations for measuring the discharge of streams were being maintained in 41 States, Alaska, and Hawaii.
Investigations of underground waters have been made in 14 States and in Alaska, and investigations of the present and possible use of both surface and underground waters have been made in connection with the classification of public lands, especially with reference to their use for power under Government permit or for agriculture under the enlarged-homestead, desert-land, or Carey acts.
In the hydrographic work 23 States and Hawaii also the Reclamation Service, Forest Service, Weather Bureau, Office of Indian Affairs, Engineer Corps of the War Department, Navy Department, Department of Justice, the city of San Francisco, and the city of San Diego cooperated largely in the study of the flow of certain streams.