Washington, D. C., November 20, 1918.
1) The normal conduct of its many bureaus in their relation to the life of our people: The distribution, survey, and classification of our national lands; the care of the Indian wards of the Nation, their education, and the development of their vast estate; the carrying forward of our reclamation projects; the awarding and issuance of patents to inventors; the construction of the Alaskan railroad and the supervision of the Territorial affairs of Alaska and Hawaii; the payment of pensions to Army and Navy veterans and their dependents; the promotion of education; the custody and management of the national parks; the conservation of the lives of those who work in mines, and the study and guidance of the mining and metallurgical industries.
2) Emergency work arising out of war conditions: This was an extension of the undertakings reported upon last year in which was shown how a nonwar department found itself a base or source for men, information, and effort necessary to the conduct of modern warfare.
The interdependence of two of our scientific bureaus with almost all agencies more directly connected with some phase of war work is graphically shown by two charts which follow this introduction to the report.
3) Looking-forward work: The consideration of those problems suggested by conditions arising out of the war which the Nation will be called upon to meet in the immediate future.
I have taken occasion during the year to call some of these to your attention by letters which are appended and upon which I wish somewhat to comment.
Throughout the war I have sought to learn the significance of its larger phases as affecting our national life with relation to the duties of this office, and I believe that some of those ills which have fallen upon other lands may, in some part at least, be kept from our doors by the development of policies which are already in a small way being carried out by this department.
One of those policies is that our schools shall be made to more completely serve America as a Nation.
The other policy is that the lands of this country shall not lie unused.
Both may be included in the broader meaning of the word"Americanization"for one makes for the development of more helpful American citizens, and the other makes for the development of more serviceable American acres.
For the intensification and extension of these two policies I would make earnest appeal that the high advantages of freedom which we have championed may be the more perfectly realized.
Soon, almost immediately now, the men whom we have drawn into war will return.
Already those here are being prepared for their reabsorption into the normal currents of our life and the two million and more who have had the glory and the experience of making war upon foreign soil in protection of the liberties of the world will be brought back as soon as their work is done.
With conditions as fluent as they are in Europe I presume that no one can foretell when the last man will be once more in America, but whatever the day of their coming their welcome can not be too warm or our appreciation of their service too hearty.
And the question is pertinent: What shall that welcome be?
Is it to be merely one of glad greetings, the emotional outburst of a moment, or shall it take on a more permanent form, one which will be adequate in its largeness and lasting in its nature?
I am quite sure, as I wrote you in May, that we can make of this event something that is real, sómething exceptional and of the most permanent value to the men and to the Nation.
No one can tell what such an experience will have done for these boys.
They have not seen the picture of the war in the broad view that has been given us from day to day.
The map which we have studied has not been theirs.
To them the sector on which they fought, the valley up which they marched, the ruined villages which they saw, the narrow trench in which they lived, the desolate blasted foreground of No Man's Land—these composed their picture.
Life has been a series of incidents, sobering, strengthening, horrifying, democratizing.
Through these they will have grown, all of them.
They will come back other than they went.
They have lived through years in the months they have been gone.
They may not have gained the larger view of the great war, being too near to see, but they will have gained a new view of America.
They will return home as victors; proud, no doubt, and becomingly modest, with a new sense of their individual power and new tests set up in their minds as to the qualities which make a man.
We will hold them at arm's length and look into their eyes to see what change war has made upon them, the doing of daring things, the taking of ordered risks, the prompt recognition of authority, the steady, long companionship of their fellows, the sight and enduring of suffering, the hard life of dust and mud and weary walking and long, sleepless nights.
We will look hard into the sunburned, hardened faces to see what the strange life of a few months has done to these boys, these youngsters of but a day ago.
They will resent, maybe, as soldiers should, the soft sympathizings that will be poured out upon them, just as they will make light of all that they have done.
But out of every mouth and from every heart will come the words,"Well, home sure looks good to me!"
They will be looking at us, too!
And in their look will be a query, one thought over in the trench at night and on the long, slow "slog, slog, slog" of the day's march:"What is my life to be when I get home? Am I to go hustling for a job or will the old place be mine? But if a girl has that place and wishes to be her own mistress in the future—what then? School? Oh, I can't go back to school. When I left I was only 21, but now I'm 31. And I have lived with men, fought with them, been sometimes bested by them, learned to know them in all their many littlenesses and their great goodnesses. Responsibility has been mine, and the still silences of the night have given me chance to think and wonder why I am and why it should make any difference whether I ever saw home again or not. I am back now, back for a man's life. This America that called me out has called me back, and it will have something for me to do. Now, what is to be my chance?"
This will all be implied in the look that they give us as we hold them by both shoulders to find the mark of war upon their young faces.
And what is to be our answer?
What answer is due them, and what answer is worthy of us?
Being Americans and being young, they will not ask or expect pensions.
They will want work.
They will want, if possible, a chance for a home of their own.
They would like to know that while perhaps the fortunes of war did not so turn as to bestow on them the medal for distinguished service, the Nation which they served thought well enough of what they had done to give them some evidence of its appreciation.
Now, these hopes, reasonable and manly as they are, can be met, and in a fashion that will not weaken the fiber of the man, by making him an object of bounty, and that will add permanently to the strength and the wealth of the Nation.
Why not say to this inquiring soldier man: America offers you a farm if you will help in its making and pay for it out of what you make out of it.
1) That of the immediate job for the man himself.
2) That of protecting the labor market against any possible collapse by being swamped with a surplus of labor.
3) That of providing for many lines of reestablished industry an immediate demand for their products.
4) That of staying the movement toward the cities, and thus more completely decentralizing our population.
5) That of affixing to our soil a large number of the best-proved Americans.
6) That of setting up throughout the land the most modern pattern of farm settlement in which the social side of human nature is given consideration.
7) That of bringing into use those great areas of our land which now lie neglected and of no value to the worId.
All of these objects, I apprehend, will be deemed worthy, desirable, and of great concern to the Nation.
The questions that arise in the mind will not involve the value of doing these things, but the practicability of such a program.
To meet this objection I would recall to your attention the fact that all that I have urged is an extension on a large scale, and somewhat more elaborately, of just what this department has been doing for the past 16 years, through the activities of the Reclamation Service.
And Congress has already taken the first step in the direction pointed out by appropriating $200,000 for an examination into the reclaimable land resources of the country, one half that sum to be expended for a survey of possible irrigation projects and the other half for an examination of those lands which need to be drained and of those huge tracts of lands which once were forests, but now are neither forest pasture, nor farms, the logged-off lands of north, east, west, and south.
As soon as this appropriation was made the country was divided into three zones and engineers were set at work gathering the data which Congress desired.
We are prepared to make report to Congress forthwith, giving a general picture of the extent and nature of these lands and advising as to the practicability of their reclamation.
These lands in greater part have passed out of the hands of the Government and are in private hands, though there are several of the largest bodies of lands needing drainage which are in the hands of the States.
On the Government lands alone it would appear now to be unquestionably the fact that we could give employment to every man who would need work, and that almost immediately.
1 Although no complete survey has ever been made of our land resources.
There are, for example, half a million of acres in the Colorado River Basin, which need only irrigation to make them as fertile as the far-famed valley of the Nile.
By far the greater portion of our unused and unproductive lands, however, is comprised in the cut-over or logged off timber land lying largely within the eastern half of the United States.
In their present state these 228,509,000 acres of cut-over land are a picture of desolation calculated to discourage the hardiest pioneer.
Only a vast area of stumps remains to mark the former forest, matted with underbrush and interspersed here and there with saplings.
Perhaps as good anidea as any of the appearance of this waste land may be obtained from photographs of former forests which have been shattered by artillery fire.
Yet when this land is cleared, leveled, and brought under the plow its soil, rich with the accumulated humus of hundreds of years, possesses extraordinary agricultural possibilities.
Lying also largely in the eastern half of the United States and overlapping the cutover lands to some extent are some 80,000,000 acres of swamp lands.
The approximate extent of these lands, by States, is shown in the table in the next column.
Where private enterprise has reclaimed small areas of swamp land, the wonderful productivity of the soil has been amply demonstrated.
Under present conditions the problem of reclaiming these vast areas of irrigable, cutover, and swamp land could never be solved in its entirety by private enterprise.
The if the plan were made adaptable to all the States, so that each State out of its unused lands might carve out farm settlements whereon, if they so chose, the soldiers returning to their home States could be located.
By cooperation between the States and the Federal Government this can easily be effected.
I have been surprised to discover how much land in the older States, such as Massachusetts and New York, for instance, there is that is unused, which once was tilled and which now, with modern methods of farm development and with the advantage of its nearness to the great markets, can be again profitably put to use.
The commissioner of agriculture for Massachusetts has advised of land which, put under intensive cultivation, yielded last year more than $1,000 per acre net.
And there are many thousand acres of such land.
The great public works of the Reclamation Service and of the Panama Canal, for example, stimulating as they are to our national pride in achievement, fall far short of the possibilities involved in the plan of reclaiming an area one-fifth again as large as the State of Texas.
Within 50 miles of the city of Washington, both in the States of Maryland and Virginia, there are large bodies of lands which once were parts of great plantations that can be had for less than any lands within the same distance'of most of the larger cities of the West.
The mind of the country has been turned toward the development of the raw lands, the free unbroken lands, to the neglect of opportunities nearer the center of the country's markets.
In almost every southern State instances can be cited where white men under the wise direction of the Department of Agriculture support their families and make an excellent living upon small farms of from 10 to 30 acres.
Yet between this city and New Orleans there are over 40,000,000 acres of unused lands.
No one, I believe, can make a study of this question without being convinced, as I have been, that this country can support a population of from three to four times that which we now have—if the people will give over their desire to congregate in industrial centers.
The passion for the city is upon us.
It has come from a variety of causes-the lack of society in the country, the distance between farm homes, the remoteness from the post office and the newspaper, the assumed superior status of the"city man," the desire for better school facilities for the children, and many more which have been the theme of books without number seeking to reestablish in the heart the longing for contact with the soil.
But preachments of any kind will not offset stern repellant facts.
There is but one way of dealing with this problem, and that is to answer the questions that are put by developing new conditions.
We must turn, as Europe has in her centuries of experience, to the farm village, the settlement of farmers around a center which is their home, in which can be gathered most of the advantages of the city-the good school, the church, the moving picture, the well outfitted store—and these, with good roads, the rural express, the telephone, the automobile, and the post office will make life on the farm a thing of far different meaning from the isolated life it has been.
Of land, therefore, there is an abundance, land owned by the Government in the West and the South, land owned by private individuals in all the States, which is a burden to its owners and which can be had in great blocks at a very small price.
It will not be for Congress to seek for advantageous places in which to locate these men; the difficulty will rather be in the choosing as between so many opportunities.
My own judgment would be that as an immediate program we should first offer an opportunity upon our present irrigation projects for all who wish work at clearing and leveling the land not now cultivated but for which water is available, or to which water can be brought under the present irrigation system, and that such tracts shall be developed under an appropriate land-settlement plan.
This we can do at once and meet whatever labor problem may be immediate.
As a second step I would urge an appropriation for one or more of the largest irrigation schemes for which surveys are in an advanced state.
Concurrently it would seem to me wise to undertake the draining of the most promising projects—Government-owned land preferred, but, if privately owned, the land to be bought at an appraisement made by the Farm Loan Board and subject to the approval of the Department of Agriculture as to fertility of soil and desirability of location.
There is an alternative method of dealing with private lands which already has the approval of Congress, being incorporated in the reclamation act.
Under this a private owner agrees to sell his land to whoever gets the water right at an appraised price as a condition precedent to our undertaking the construction of irrigation work.
Under such a plan there would be no difficulty whatever in securing control of any-sized bodies of cut-over or swamp lands that might be desired; the Government would not buy the land, but the owner would look to the new settler for the price, and take it on such terms as the Government itself would exact for its own expenditure upon the land.
Supplementing this there should be an opportunity given for the cooperation of all the States upon limited tracts which would be dealt with under State control and subject to the closest Federal supervision.
This would be an adoption in the development of farms for soldiers of the method taken by Congress for the construction of national highways.
With such a national program under way there need be no solicitude as to caring for the returned soldier.
Before he left France he could be preparing for his work.
More than one-third, probably nearer one-half, it is estimated, of the men who are in Europe have come from farms.
They are not farm owners, many of them were farm hands, some of them tenant farmers.
Those who thought of taking up this life as independent farmers under the most modern and approved system could be given an agricultural education while still in the foreign camps.
Canada indeed is already at this work.
Then after their return and when they have received the greetings of home, if the old position is not open or they wish to turn to an independent life, they can have their chance.
For each there can be a position at the current rate of wages.
The energy and the talent which he has been expending for an ideal and $30 a month he can now use to make a home for himself.
There would be laid before him a number of projects which the Government had undertaken in the different sections of the country.
Let us assume no more than three, one an irrigation scheme, another a drainage project, a third the development of a body of cut-over lands.
The one would need to have great dams constructed to impound and divert waters, a hydroelectric plant, miles of canal and tunnel, perhaps, thousands of acres to be cleared and leveled, fenced and broken.
This would mean years of work at good wages, work in the open under housing conditions that would seem palatial to the soldier of the trench, and at the end a piece of land on which would be erected a house and barn, a farm home in a group of farm homes.
For this he must pay.
But already he has received wages out of which he can have saved the necessary first installment on his place of 10 or 15 per cent.
The balance with interest he can pay in 40 yearly installments, or earlier if he can.
He should not be limited to a choice of farms upon the one project on which he works.
If the life in Arizona, let us say, is not to his liking he can have the same opportunity after building the Arizona irrigated project to take up a farm upon another Government enterprise in South Carolina where men have drained the old rice swamps or in Wisconsin on a tract of what once was swamp but has been converted into rolling prairie farms.
Four things are the essence of this program—that there shall be work ready for the men on their return, that this work shall be for the making of America, that the money expended shall be returned with interest to the Government which advances it, and that the land shall be platted so as to be a part of an organized community.
A farm as a going concern to be a part of a community that is a going concern—this is the ideal toward which we should work; and such settlements, a few of which already exist in Wisconsin, North Carolina, California, and elsewhere, should be the models for the future land developments of the country.
There is one other feature which should be incorporated in any such scheme of land development—the acreage should be limited to that which will be sufficient to reasonably support a family.
This is politically wise, socially and economically advisable.
The spirit of a democracy does not thrive where men live without the hope of land ownership.
There is something peculiarly subtle in the feeling that a bit of the soil is one's own.
It makes for a stronger, higher citizenship.
It gives birth to loyalties that are essential to national life and to a healthy home life.
To be able to say that a living is assured, no matter what one's opinion may be, is at the very center of the free life of a democracy.
So these farms should not only be so small that they would not be speculative ventures in unearned increment, but they should be nontransferable to anyone holding any equally large tract of land in the same State.
This will prevent their being aggregated in the course of years into great estates.
To compel their use the owner might well be required to live on the land for five years before gaining sufficient title to make any transfer, and during the full period prior to the last payment three years of idleness should make the land subject to forfeiture to the Government upon repayment of the payments which have been made.
This is not suggested as an infallible nor an ultimate plan, but it would save to the Government the opportunity to hold in its own hands the fate of these lands and see that they were made to serve.
We wish no slacker lands.
Enough land for a family, but not enough to make a new draft on the labor supply.
I have attempted here to give a broad sketch of a plan that has found favor generally as one that meets the needs of the moment and reaches far into the problems of our Nation.
It is not a fixed program, the whole of which must be taken or rejected.
It has the virtue of elasticity.
So much of it as is needed can be used to meet the possibilities of the next few months or years.
Once entered upon, its benefits and its defects will be made manifest.
How great will be the cost?
As much as we wish to spend; as much as we need to spend.
Less than many a strike has cost this country.
Would it be unreasonable to ask for as much as we will spend this year for pensions to the veterans and their dependents of wars that ended 20 and 50 years ago?
Would it be unreasonable to ask that we spend in the next two years on these veterans of the great war as much as it' cost us to conduct that war for a single week?
Would a people that gave out of hand, out of a noble sense of charity to quasi public organizations, $500,000,000 for the entertainment and care of these boys hesitate to buy the bonds of this country for a like amount to provide peace work, home work, and homes for these same boys, who will ask the question, What is to be my chance?
A loan!
Not a gift this time!
A loan on interest.
Those who deal in money tell me that this can be done.
But be the amount great or small, the plan can be made to fit our needs—raise it as you please, by taxes or by a bond issue (a mortgage on the very land that it reclaims)—is there a better way to insure the future than to direct these strongarmed, big-chested soldier men into a battle against the wanton wastefulness of nature?
We have spent largely for this war and largely we must spend for many years to come.
We are to economize that we may meet our debts; this must be the national policy.
But to stop growth is not economy.
To stand paralyzed in the presence of a debt is to become its victim.
England is planning in the hundreds of millions of pounds sterling for housing and land schemes.
Canada with less than 7,000,000 people is offering to each man 160 acres of land and $2,500 with which to improve it.
Surely the United States, which has escaped with so slight a comparative loss in life, will not do less.
There is one way to pay out, and that is by harder work and more faith.
These are the reasons for our self-confidence.
We shall coin work and faith into new wealth and make the new wealth meet the debts.
This has been our policy from the first in all great enterprises.
To waste is not sound economy; to save is; but sounder still is the economy that invests to create; this is the sowing of seed.
And this land is yet but in its infancy.
It has 2,000 years to run before it reaches the age of that country which still holds Verdun and is planning now the reconstruction of 350,000 homes destroyed by the invader.
There can be no surer insurance for the Nation than to put its men upon the soil, and there can be no wiser investment that a nation can make than to add to its territory by taking from desert and waters and desolation land that is now useless.
Nations make war upon each other that they may have new lands—lands in tropical Africa, in remote Asia.
They spend life and go deeply into debt that they may gain small domains already filled with an unprogressive people.
And here, under our own flag, we have land as rich as the Valley of the Nile, not ours yet, for it does not serve us, which we can conquer with a little thought and the lending of a little money.
This is conquest worthy.of a democracy, giving free men their chance to make themselves economically free without the shedding of blood or the breaking of hearts.
I wish now to turn to the consideration of that other phase of Americanization to which I earlier referred—the need for a larger sense of our responsibility as Americans, both in view of the grcater part which this Nation is destined to play in the world's affairs and in view of our manifest obligations at home; and to urge that we make a fresh and strong demand upon the schools of the country to meet the needs of the day that has come, to give inspiration to a wider Americanism and capacity for it.
America threw the world into a daring maze of possibilities by its entrance into this war upon lines more idealistic than any other national venture in history.
And in doing this we challenged the world to a contest for supremacy, not upon the field of battle but in the much larger field of intellectual, moral, and social leadership.
Whether we can make good before the world depends upon our willingness and our ability to see the problems that we must meet and our will to meet them forehandedly.
For clearly our right to world leadership in the new day is not to be measured by the number of men who have gone to France or the things they have done, but by the use we now and from this time forward make of the freedom we have secured for ourselves and others.
The world has taken us at our word.
We said that the institutions which we enjoyed were those which the world should enjoy, for they were based upon rights inherent in man.
We announced ourselves as coming to the rescue of imperiled democracies, and as the war progressed we came to the point where we would discuss peace only with those whose government, like our own, came from the people.
Beaten upon land and frustrated upon sea, those sole surviving autocracies with which we fought broke into fragments before the mandate of an idea, and the map of Europe changed more in a few days than it had changed in centuries.
The aggregating process which had gone on throughout many hundreds of years, and which had been deemed essential to national self-protection, was not only stayed but set at naught, and nations fell into pieces like a child's picture puzzle, to be replaced in the general picture along lines of racial desire and a common culture.
This is an unprecedented thing in history.
Enemy nations came to an "about face," professing themselves converts to the new faith, willing pupils in a new school.
Thus out of an international struggle which we entered upon unwillingly we find ourselves emerging with a greater burden of national responsibility and a larger sense of the meaning of America—America as a leader in a world of democracies, if not a world democracy.
What change in national policies is involved in this world change?
Who are these reborn racial groups who now come forward to their places at the family table?
What is our duty toward them and upon what are they to live?
What economic independence is essential to national existence?
To what extent are we trustees for other peoples?
What national purposes have we that should be made secure by international pact or union?
Such questions go deep into problems to which even the ripest statesmen have in the past given little thought.
And how much less the great body of the people!
Yet now it is the duty of the American citizen to know of these things; to talk of them, as a process of whipping his own choatic notions into shape; to project himself into a world where all horizons are new.
While yet we may hardly be said to have learned to think nationally, we are compelled to give serious concern to the affairs of people of whom we had not heard four years ago.
Most removed and isolated of all nations, living on and to ourselves, America has overnight moved into the center of the world's stage and become subject to every scrutinizing and critical eye.
This is a test for all that we have of dignity and wisdom.
A wholesale challenge has been given as the result of our own idealism—how now may we meet it?
Clearly we must set about making ourselves adequate to think in the larger terms of this greater life.
Yet we must hold fast to that which makes possible any such broad conception—the ability of men and women to live together under the proved form of our own Government.
To think in terms of many democracies or of mankind, we must work in terms of Ameriça.
For all thought of making good in a greater sphere must be checked, qualified, and limited by our capacity to prove ourselves first of all strong and capable and purposeful at home.
Our international value depends upon our national strength, unity, and vision.
And this in turn must in a democracy rest upon the intelligence, the capabilities, and the character of the individuals who make the Nation.
Now, the question that we must put to ourselves is: Are we doing all that can be done to develop these?
Our war experience has taught us, among many things, the value of a strong national spirit, the vital importance of national ideals, the impotence of ignorance, the dependence of this modern world upon skilled men and organizing ability, the need for and the possibilities that lie in the extension of cooperative effort of all kinds.
Are we making full use of the facilities that we have for the promotion of these ends?
Are we making out of America as a growing crop all that might reasonably be expected or that is demanded by our position in the world?
The vitality of this question was put strongly to the Nation during the past year in a form that was not altogether agreeable.
For the draft revealed the astonishing percentage of those in this country who were unable to speak our language or to read or write any language.
Yet, I take it, there is no one thing so supremely essential in a government such as ours, where decisions of such importance must be made by public opinion, as that every man and woman and child shall know one tongue—that each may speak to every other and that all shall be informed.
There can be neither national unity in ideals or in purpose unless there is some common method of communication through which may be conveyed the thought of the Nation.
All Americans must be taught to read and write and think in one language; this is a primary condition to that growth which all nations expect of us and which we demand of ourselves.
What should be said of a world-leading democracy wherein 10 per cent of the adult population can not read the laws which they are presumed to know?
What should be said of a democracy which sends an army to preach democracy wherein there was drafted out of the first 2,000,000 men a total of 200,000 men who could not read their orders or understand them when delivered, or read the letters sent them from home?
What should be said of a democracy which calls upon its citizens to consider the wisdom of forming a league of nations, of passing judgment upon a code which will·insure the freedom of the seas, or of sacrificing the daily stint of wheat or meat for the benefit of the Roumanians or the Jugo-Slavs when 18 per cent of the coming citizens of that democracy do not go to school?
What should be said of a democracy in which one of its sovereign States expends a grand total of $6 per year per child for sustaining its public-school system?
What should be said of a democracy which is challenged by the world to prove the superiority of its system of government over those discarded, and yet is compelled to reach many millions of its people through papers printed in some foreign language?
What should be said of a democracy which expends in a year twice as much for chewing gum as for schoolbooks, more for automobiles than for all primary and secondary education, and in which the average teacher's salary is less than that of the average day laborer?
What should be said of a democracy which permits tens of thousands of its native-born children to be taught American history in a foreign language—the Declaration of Independence and Lincoln's Gettysburg speech in German and other tongues?
What should be said'of a democracy which permits men and women to work in masses where they seldom or never hear a word of English spoken?
Yet, this is all true of the United States of America in this year of grace·1918, wherein was fought the second Battle of the Marne and the Battle of the Argonne Forest.
These figures and facts look discouraging.
They seem to present a picture that bodes ill for the Republic.
But in reality they present an outlook that is far from disturbing, and that is the one cheering thing about such a Government as ours, wherein we can do as we will.
And our will to do is never wanting when we see clearly the difficulty and know the way out.
Already there have been devised methods by which these conditions may be remedied in large part, and these methods have been worked out practically by experiment and in no little detail.
If once we realize that education is not solely a State matter but a national concern, the way is open.
And what argument that could be advanced would be more persuasive that education deserves and must have the consideration of the Central Government than the figures that are given?
If men can not be converted readily into soldiers but must be held in camp while they receive a primary education, surely no one can hold that this is a matter deserving of merely State attention.
The Nation's life may not have been imperiled by the presence in the Army of a considerable percentage of men who could not be equipped for service promptly, but this is the minor part of the reason why this humiliating condition should not obtain in this country.
The greater reason is that we can not govern ourselves while in ignorance.
We can not have a small portion of our population unable to sense the movement of our times save through the gossip of the corner and altogether unable to check the idle rumor and the slogans of demagogues, without putting at hazard the success of our system of government.
And if we lag others will lead.
The American must be the exemplar of democracy.
We are training boys and men to be farmers out of Federal funds, preparing to advance vocational education on a large scale, promoting the construction of solid highways within the States as part of an interstate system, subjecting the packer, the canner, and the banker to Federal supervision; surely without violation of our fundamental law we can find a way by which the Nation can know that all of its people are able to talk and read our own language.
I do not suggest Federal control, but I would strongly urge Federal cooperation with the States toward definite ends.
A little money, the cooperation of the States, and of the industries of the country—and both can be had—a little money, perhaps as much in a year as we have gloriously spent in five hours in France, and the work could be done.
It could be done without coercion, without trenching on the prerogatives of the State in the slightest.
If we could offer help to those willing to accept it, the end would be accomplished.
Make the same kind of an offer to the States for the education of their illiterates that we make to them for the construction of roads, and in five years there would be few, if any, who could not read and write in this country.
It may be worth while to consider some of the groups that, taken together, constitute the problem.
Adult illiteracy in the less-developed sections of our country is not a proud matter of which to talk, but it is present.
Men who speak in the language of Shakespeare—and this is literally true, for their ancestors came here in his time bringing the language of Shakespeare and the King James version of the Bible on their tongues—tens of thousands of these men and women are to-day, after three centuries in this country, unable to read one line of Shakespeare or to sign their names.
And yet they have fought for this country through every war and have died as heroes for a land that did not concern itself enough about them to see that they were educated.
Those people have not had their chance.
Their condition is a reproach to a republic.
And it is not that they are unwilling to take instruction, or that they feel superior to it.
For the experiment has been made; and, day after day, old, gray-bearded men and eager-eyed women went to the mountain schools when given the opportunity, and their letters tell of the delight that is theirs because the world has been opened to them.
And the children of these American-born people of Anglo-Saxon stock—what of them?
Are they to be left to burrow their way through the darkness—one out of a thousand, perhaps, emerging to the opportunities of a railroad brakeman or a skilled mechanic after a splendid struggle against the handicap of early ignorance?
These boys are expected to vote, and to vote wisely for those who shape not only the destinies of their own land, but, as we now see, for those who are to mold the lives of many peoples.
Are they to vote without knowing that such new nations exist—without the ability to read the names on a map or the text of a treaty?
This would seem to be challenging too strongly the protecting hand of a patient Providence.
Then, we must consider the negro.
For him and his condition we are responsible as for no one else.
He came here without exercising his own will.
He was made a citizen without discrimination and in a large out-of-hand way.
The Indian we feel we are responsible for as a Nation, and we give him an education—a most practical one.
But the Negro, who is a charge upon the American conscience and whose education, I believe, should long ago, in some part, at least, have been a charge upon the American pocket, is slowly, very slowly, coming into that knowledge which is his one chance of developing into a growing national asset—the knowledge of the way of making a living.
When one looks into the effort that is being made to give the Negro the right sort of an education, he finds a much more cheerful picture than he had thought.
The Southern States, for instance, are meeting with no little eagerness the offers that come to them to give some direction to the education of the negro.
The problem is basically one of money.
The way has been found to give our colored citizen an education that will strengthen his fiber, widen his vision, and at the same time make him happy in achieving a useful place in society.
There are no more inspiring and promising reports written in this country than those of the various foundations which are promoting the right method of educating the Negro.
Not only is the response from the States encouraging, but experience has gone far enough forward by this time to demonstrate that with guidance, oversight, and the bearing of only a part of the financial burden, this whole problem of lifting a backward people onto a level more compatible with our hopes for them and with their status as citizens can be realized.
Still, this Nation may learn what education will do for an undeveloped race by the study of its own work in the far-off Philippine Islands.
The next grand division of those who need education, inspiration, and outlook, and for whom we are responsible, is the foreign born.
Our responsibility arises out of our generosity.
These sons and daughters of all the world have been drawn here by the generosity of our laws; the open hand has been extended across the seas.
We have said to them that coming clean they would be welcome.
This was the land of their heart's desire, where men could be their own masters and rise according to the quality that they had.
Here was youth with which they could identify themselves, land which they could own, society of which they could become an integral part, political life which they could help to shape and in which they would have satisfied that world-long yearning for recognition.
The man could here be developed, the full man, for schools were here and a sympathetic environment; others were climbing, too, with whom they could measure their progress.
This was a fair picture surely.
And they came, some for economic reasons, desiring their chance at the good things spread on this rich table that Columbus found.
Others came that they might have the larger satisfactions of an independent, unhampered, unmastered growth as men among equals.
They came in no apologetic Lumor, for they brought something from the older lands which they felt would be a contribution to a new civilizaticn their art, literature, their far-reaching historical perspective, their fervor for the opportunity to experiment, to adventure, to give a cast to this new world's life.
Here was an opportunity.
We met them at the gate with a truly American welcome, which most of them could not understand: "Enter and make a place for yourself."
This had been the greeting we ourselves had received.
There was to be no coddling here.
This was a man's land, a place of test.
The art that was most needed was the art of getting on.
If literature and science and experiment were to come they must be founded upon the solid rock of a self-sustained, unpatronized people.
Dreams of ease and long debate must be cast aside until the right to dream was earned.
The American was to be a journeyman, doing his bit at the making of the land.
If this was not a worth-while job, then there was no place for the stranger.
We had mines to dig, wells to drill, buildings to erect, railroads to construct, farms to plow, sewers to lay, machines to build, and when one had done his share of these there might come the singing.
The Lord had laid on us the responsibility of reclaiming for mankind a large slice of this lost land, and all else could wait in life til this end was reached.
In this steady drive we made ourselves.
We were impatient with those who called out to stop or gc slow.
The pace that we set was that which must be kept.
All men are born free and equal," we called to the newcomer, and went on, forgetful that he was not free, for he had still the limitations of his old life, nor equal, for many reasons.
Manifestly a man without tools is not the equal of the man with, and those here already were men who knew the language of the new land, who knew its spirit and the way to meet it and run with it, who had access to the heart of a people and knew what its call was.
Things did not lie obvious before the eye like a seam of coal on a naked hillside.
This new land was a hunting ground, and those who knew the favorite cover and could blend most quietly into the landscape found themselves best at the game.
So this is America!
A scramble for a living!
Much to see, but no one to interpret it all.
So thought this new American.
Then the padrone came forward as a savior.
Life was not to go out anyway.
And, with others in like situation, possibly from his own country, equally ignorant, equally handicapped, the new American starts his life.
It takes a brave and a very ambitious man to lift himself out of such an environment.
Easily he becomes a victim to the shrewd, predatory padrone or boss.
He falls into debt and becomes mortgaged to ignorance and squalor for years.
His ideal of America has suffered a change.
And is this freedom?" he says to himself, as with tired back he bends to his work, without hope that the burden will be lighter to-morrow.
He can not read the signs which warn him of danger.
He can not read of the opportunities which city and country offer.
In his own land perhaps he had no chance to learn in his own tongue.
In this new land he is too tired, too hesitant to learn this strange, difficult tongue.
Is it any wonder if to this dissatisfied stranger the voice of one who speaks to him in the language of home has authority and carries far?
And if this voice preaches discontent, and violent discontent, as the one sure path to better days, is it strange that he should listen?
Who are the men who master this new world?
Plainly the ones he knows, from whom he has suffered.
Do these same men control everything; are there no sweet places of refuge?
He can find no one to make him see the greater America.
The whole of this continent is to him the cramped apartment, the dirty street, and the sweatshop or the factory.
To the sweep of the great land and its many beckonings his eyes are closed.
And in his isolation and ignorance and disappointment there is fruitful nesting place for all the hurtful microbes that attack society.
This man is our charge.
He needs and deserves care, solicitude, thoughtful consideration.
Ignobly put—it will pay.
More manfully said—it is our duty.
Worthily—it is our opportunity.
Economically that man is a potential asset which we should not waste.
Give him a glimpse into the philosophy which underlies our struggle and he will turn into a cheerful, strong fellow worker in the making of America, as have all the rest who have preceded him.
It is money in our pockets that he should be able to care for himself; that he should know our language; that his body shall be well nourished and his mind hopeful.
So much for the purely selfish side.
As to our duty, it grows out of our'loyalty to ourselves, noblesse oblige.
But we may look beyond these and find a finer reason for doing all in our power to reveal America to this man.
He is a human being whom we can help to a truer view of that which we have said before the world was the most stimulating, invigorating, developing of all atmospheres, that of freedom.
And the test of our democracy is in our ability to absorb that man and incorporate him into the body of our life as an American.
He will learn to play the game, to stand to the challenge that makes Americans; the unfostered, self-sufficiency of the man who knows his way and has learned it by fighting for it will yet be his.
And we will learn from him the viewpoint of those peoples who now are wrestling with all their new-found strength and weakness to realize long-nurtured hopes.
If we are to deal wisely in this larger day we must get within that man and look out with his eyes not only upon this country but upon the land from which he came, for has not America become as a foster mother to these strugglers?
First of all, the hand of friendship for that new American, the voice of a friend who shall be an unselfish adviser, a guide in this strange land of troubles, small and large, but equally incomprehensible.
Then the school, the night school, or if not that, the shop school.
And with these the community center, the gathering place that represents all America.
This is a program that has been well thought out.
It has been tried out in a small way and found successful.
It needs but nurturing to develop into a plan that will make the word "Americanization" one of exceptional pride.
For this plan the great cities of the country, where mostly our foreign born have congregated, are ready.
For it the industries, the business men, are ready.
I am warranted in the statement that all the largest industries in the land will from their own time offer an opportunity for an elementary education to every foreign-born man or woman in their employ.
Some are willing to furnish the teacher if one competent for this class of work can be found.
If the Government will shape the policy and undertake to make the propaganda for this definite end of giving a first insight into American words, newspapers, politics, life, that which has been regarded as the work of generations can be started in a very short time and men put on their way toward real citizenship.
I am not urging the absurdity that men can be transformed into Americans by a course in school.
This is but a beginning.
Knowledge of our language is but a tool.
America is the expression of a spirit, an attitude toward men and material things, an outlook, and a faith.
Our strange and successful experiment in the art of making a new people is the result of contact, not of caste, of living together, working together for a living, each one interpreting for himself and for his neighbors his conception of what kind of social being man should be, what his sympathies, standards, and ambitions should be.
Now, this can not be taught out of a book.
It is a matter of touch, of feeling, like the growth of friendship.
Each man is approachable in a different way, appealed to by very contradictory things.
One man reaches America through a baseball game, another through a church, a saloon, a political meeting, a woman, a labor union, a picture gallery, or something new to eat.
The difficulty is in finding the meeting place where there is no fear, no favor, no ulterior motives, and, above all, no soul-insulting patronage of poor by rich, of black by white, of younger by elder, of foreign born by native born, of the unco' bad by the unco' good.
To meet this need the schoolhouse has been turned into a community center.
It is a common property, or should be.
All feel entitled to its use.
When we were younger this kind of machinery was not necessary, for we were fewer in number, lived in smaller communities, and felt a common interdependence which made each one a trumpet blowing herald of democracy.
Today, however, there must be some thought given and some money expended in even having an opportunity to touch the hand of a fellow man.
I believe that more and more thought will be given to our school system as the most serviceable instrumentality we possess for the development of a better America.
It has been, we must confess, a very much taken-for-granted institution.
It is probably of all our inventions the one of which we are most proud, and like other of our inventions we have not realized the greatness of its possibilities.
We have become accustomed to hearing it spoken of as the heart of the Nation.
But this figure must be taken with very definite limitations.
It is the beginning of things for the boys and girls, but to the man and the woman it is almost a thing outside of life.
This should not be so, for it may be the very center of the social, the intellectual, and in smaller places of the economic life.
This is so, in fact, in Switzerland and in Denmark, and is becoming so in many places in our country.
To the necessity for more thorough education of the people all countries have become keenly alive.
One large part of England's grand plan of reconstruction is the founding and conducting of a great national school system out of which will come more men and women of trained minds and trained hands.
As we move further and further from the war we will discover much that we do not now see.
But this one thing stands out more plainly than ever before, that this world is to belong to the workers those who do and those who direct the doing.
Not merely to those who drive the nail or lay the brick, but also to those who have come to a higher capacity through education and larger experience, the men of scientific knowledge, of skill in the arts, of large organizing capacity.
Ease, sheltered repose, will come only to those who themselves have earned it.
This is the inevitable tendency of democracy.
This thought is not new to America, it is American, for here we have climbed the rough road of experience together, each jostling the other and pushing the weak ones aside.
To the swift and to the strong there will always come the premiums, but to the cunning and to the greedy there will be given less and less of opportunity.
The test is to be in peace as it was in the time of war.
Are you fitted for the fight?
The man who knew how knowledge could be converted into power was the man for whom there was unlimited call.
So it is increasingly to be.
To be useful is to be the test that society will put.
Each man's rights are to be measured not by what he has but by what he does with what he has.
The honors the croix de paix—the richest rewards will go to the capables, those who are not standardized into"men machines,"those who dare to venture and learn to lead.
But all must work, and this duty to work and respect for work should be the earliest lesson learned.
And it should be taught in the school, not as a homily but in a living way, by tieing work with instruction, making the thing learned to apply to something done.
I should like to see the day when every child learned a trade while at school, trained his mind and his hand together, lifted labor into art by the application of thought.
To be useful is the essence of Americanism, and against the undeveloped resource, whether it be land or man, the spirit of this country makes protest.
May 31, 1918.
I believe the time has come when we should give thought to the preparation of plans for providing opportunity for our soldiers returning from the war.
Because this department has handled similar problems, I consider it my duty to bring this matter to the attention of yourself and Congress.
Every country has found itself face to face with this situation at the close of a great war.
From Rome under Cæsar to France under Napoleon, down even to our own Civil War, the problem arose as to what could be done with the soldiers to be mustered out of military service.
At the close of the Civil War America faced a somewhat similar situation, but, fortunately, at that time the public domain offered opportunity to the home-returning soldiers.
The great part the veterans of that war played in developing the West is one of our epics.
The homestead law had been signed by Lincoln in the second year of the war, so that out of òur wealth in lands we had farms to offer the million of veterans.
It was also the era of transcontinental railway construction.
It was likewise the period of rapid, yet broad and full, development of towns and communities and States.
To the great number of returning soldiers land will offer the great and fundamental opportunity.
The experience of wars points out the lesson that our service men, because of army life, with its openness and activity, will largely seek out-of-doors vocations and occupations.
This fact is accepted by the allied European nations.
That is why their programs and policies of relocating and readjustment emphasize the opportunities on the land for the returning soldier.
The question, then, is, "What land can be made available for fårm homes for our soldiers?"
We do not have the bountiful public domain of the sixties and seventies.
In a literal sense, for the use of it on a generous scale for soldier farm homes as in the sixties, "the public domain is gone."
The official figures at the end of the fiscal year June 30, 1917, show this: We have unappropriated land in the continental United States to the amount of 230,657,755 acres.
It is safe to say that not onehalf of this land will ever prove to be cultivable in any sense.
So we have no land in any way comparable to that in the public domain when Appomattox came and men turned westward with Army rifle and"roll blanket"to begin life anew.
While we do not have that matchless public domain of '65, we do have millions of acres of undeveloped lands that can be made available for our home-coming soldiers.
We have arid lands in the West; cut-over lands in the Northwest, Lake States, and South; and also swamp lands in the Middle West and South, which can, be made available through the proper development.
Much of this land can be made suitable for farm homes if properly handled.
But it will require that each type of land be dealt with in its own particular fashion.
The arid land will require water, the cut-over land will require clearing, and the swamp land must be drained.
Without any of these aids, they remain largely "No man's land."
The solution of these problems is no new thing.
In the admirable achievement of the Reclamation Service in reclamation and drainage we have abundant proof of what can be done.
Looking toward the construction of additional projects, I am glad to say that plans and investigations have been underway for some time.
A survey and study has been in the course of consummation by the Reclamation Service on the Great Colorado Basin.
America.
It would mean the conquest of an empire in the Southwest.
It is believed that more than 3,000,000 acres of arid land could be reclaimed by the completion of the Upper and Lower Colorado Basin projects.
It has been officially estimated that more than 15,000,000 acres of irrigable land now remain in the Government's hands.
This is the great remaining storehouse of Government land for reclamation.
Under what policy and program millions of these acres could be reclaimed for future farms and homes remains for legislation to determine.
The amount of swamp and cut-over lands in the United States that can be made available for farming is extensive.
Just how much there is has never been determined with any degree of accuracy.
Practically all of it has passed into private ownership.
For that reason, in considering its use, it would be necessary to work out à policy between the private owners and the Government unless the land was purchased.
It has been estimated that the total area of swamp and overflowed lands in the United States is between seventy and eighty million acres.
Of this amount it is stated that about"60,000,000 acres can be reclaimed and made profitable for agriculture."
The undeveloped swamp lands lie chiefly in Florida, in the States along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts, in the Mississippi Delta, and in Missouri, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Wisconsin, and California.
What amount of land in its natural state unfit for farm homes can be made suitable for cultivation by drainage only thorough surveys and studies can develop.
We know that authentic figures show that more than 15,000,000 acres have been reclaimed for profitable farming, most of which lies in the Mississippi River Valley.
The amount of cut-over lands in the United States, of course, it is impossible even in approximation to estimate.
These lands, however, lie largely in the South Atlantic and Gulf States, the Lake States, and the Northwestern States.
A rough estimate of their number is about 200,000,000 acres—that is, of land suitable for agricultural development.
Substantially all this cut-over or logged-off land is in private ownership.
The failure of this land to be developed is largely due to inadequate method of approach.
Unless a new policy of development is worked out in cooperation between the Federal Government, the States, and the individual owners, a greater part of it will remain unsettled and uncultivated.
The undeveloped cut-over lands lie chiefly in the Pacific Northwest (particularly in Washington and Oregon), in the Lake States (Minnesota, Michigan, and Wisconsin), and in the South Atlantic and Gulf Coastal States (Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, and Texas).
Any plan for the development of land for the returning soldier will come face to face with the faci ihat a new policy will have to meet the new conditions.
The era of free or cheap land in the United States has passed.
We must meet the new conditions of developing lands in advance—security must, to a degree, displace speculation.
Science [should] have gone hand in hand with the settlement of the arid and semiarid country, and all that science could give would have been utilized, first, in the creation of the conditions of settlement, and then in aiding the settler in difficult tasks.
Because nothing was done, these heroic but uninformed souls were bedeviled by the winds, cold, drought, and insect pests.
They wasted their efforts, lost their hopes and ambitions, and a tragic percentage left, impoverished and embittered.
The tragic part of this history is that nearly all this suffering and loss could have been avoided under a carefully thought-out plan of development.
There are certain tendencies which we ought to face frankly in our consideration of a policy for land to the home-coming soldier.
First, the drift to farm tenancy.
The experience of the world shows without question that the happiest people, the best farms, and the soundest political conditions are found where the farmer owns the the home and the farm lands.
The growth of tenancy in America shows an increase of 32 per cent for the 20 years between 1890 and 1910.
Second, the drift to urban life.
In 1880 of the total population of the United States 29.5 per cent of our people resided in cities and 70.5 per cent in the country.
At the census of 1910, 46.3 per cent resided in cities and 53.7 per cent remained in the country.
It is evident that since the war in Europe there has been a decided increase in the trend toward the city, because of industrial conditions.
The adoption by the United States of new policies in its land development plans for returning veterans will also contribute to the amelioration of these two dangers to American life.
A plan of land development, whereby land is developed in large areas, subdivided into individual farms, then sold to actual bona fide farmers on a long-time payment basis, has been in force not only in the United States under the reclamation act, but also in many other countries for several years.
It has proved a distinct success.
In Denmark, Ireland, New Zealand, and the Australian Commonwealth it has completely changed the land situation.
One of the new features of this plan is that holders are aided in improving and cultivating the farm.
Throughout the country a higher and better civilization is gradually being evolved; the young men and women who are growing up are happy and contented to remain at home on the farm and find ample time and opportunity for recreation and entertainment of a kind more wholesome and elevating than can be obtained in the cities.
It may be said that this country outside of Alaska has no frontier to-day.
Of course, Alaska will still offer opportunity for a pioneer life.
And, of course, Alaska likewise has yet unknown remarkable agricultural possibilities, but unless we make possible the development of this land by the men who desire their life in that field, we will lose a great national opportunity.
This is an immediate duty.
It will be too late to plan for these things when the war is over.
Our thought now should be given to the problem, and I therefore desire to bring to your mind the wisdom of immediately supplying the Interior Department with a sufficient fund with which to make the necessary surveys and studies.
We should know by the time the war ends, not merely how much arid land can be irrigated, nor how much swamp land reclaimed, nor where the grazing land is and how many cattle it will support, nor how much cut-over land can be cleared, but we should know with definiteness where it is practicable to begin new irrigation projects, what the character of the land is, what the nature of the improvements needed will be, and what the cost will be.
We should know also, not in a general way, but with particularity what definite areas of swamp land may be reclaimed, how they can be drained, what the cost of the drainage will be, what crops they will raise.
We should have in mind specific areas of grazing lands, with a knowledge of the cattle which are best adapted to them, and the practicability of supporting a family upon them.
So, too, with our cut-over lands.
We should know what it would cost to pull or"blow out"stumps and to put the lands into condition for a farm home.
All of this should be done upon a definite planning basis.
We should think as carefully of each one of these projects as George Washington thought of the planning of the city of Washington.
We should know what it will cost to buy these lands if they are in private hands.
In short, at the conclusion of the war the United States should be able to say to its returned soldiers: "If you wish to go upon a farm, here are a variety of farms of which you may take your pick, which the Government has prepared against the time of your returning."
I do not mean by this to carry the implication that we should do any other work now than the work of planning.
A very small sum of money put into the hands of men of thought, experience, and vision will give us a program which will make us feel entirely confident that we are not to be submerged industrially or otherwise by labor which we will not be able to absorb, or that we would be in a condition where we would show a lack of respect for those who return as heroes, but who will be without means of immediate self-support.
A million or two dollars, if appropriated now, will put this work well under way.
This plan does not contemplate anything like charity to the soldier.
He is not to be given a bounty.
He is not to be made to feel that he is a dependent.
On the contrary, he is to continue in a sense in the service of the Government.
Instead of destroying our enemies he is to develop our resources.
The work that is to be done, other than the planning, should be done by the soldier himself.
The dam or the irrigation project should be built by him; the canals, the ditches, the breaking of the land, and the building of the houses should, under proper direction, be his occupation.
He should be allowed to make his own home, cared for while he is doing it, and given an interest in the land for which he can pay through a long period of years, perhaps 30 or 40 years.
This same policy can be carried out as to the other classes of land.
So that the soldier on his return would have an opportunity to make a home for himself, to build a home with money which we would advance and which he would repay, and for the repayment we would have abundant security.
The farms should not be turned over as the prairies were—unbroken, unfenced, without accommodations for men or animals.
There should be prepared homes, all of which can be constructed by the men themselves and paid for by them under a system of simple devising by which modern methods of finance will be applied to their needs.
As I have indicated, this is not a mere Utopian vision.
It is, with slight variations, a policy which other countries are pursuing successfully.
The plan is simple.
I will undertake to present to the Congress definite projects for the development of this country through the use of the returned soldier by which the United States, lending its credit, may increase its resources and its population and the happiness of its people with a cost to itself of no more than the few hundred thousand dollars that it will take to study this problem through competent men.
This work should not be postponed.
United States.
The war has brought facts to our attention that are almost unbelievable and that are in themselves accusatory.
There are in the United States (or were when the census was taken in 1910) 5,516,163 persons over 10 years of age who were unable to read or write in any language.
There are now nearly 700,000 men of draft age in the United States who are, I presume, registered who can not read or write in English or in any other language.
Over 4,600,000 of the illiterates in this country were 20 years of age or more.
This figure equals the total population of the States of California, Oregon, Washington, Montana, Idaho, Wyoming, Colorado, Utah, Nevada, Arizona, New Mexico, and Delaware.
The percentage of illiterates varies in the several States from 1.7 per cent in Iowa to 29 per cent in Louisiana.
More than 10 per cent of it was in 13 States.
Half of the illiterates were between 20 and 45 years of age.
It has been estimated by one of those concerned with this problem that if these five million and a half illiterate persons were stretched in a double line of march at intervals of 3 feet and were to march past the White House at the rate of 25 miles a day it would require more than two months for them to pass.
Over 58 per cent are white persons, and of these 1,500,000 are native-born whites.
I beg you to consider the economic loss arising out of this condition.
If the productive labor value of an illiterate is less by only 50 cents a day than that of an educated man or woman, the country is losing $825,000,000 a year through illiteracy.
This estimate is no doubt under rather than over the real loss.
The Federal Government and the States spend millions of dollars in trying to give information to the people in rural districts about farming and home making.
Yet 3,700,000, or 10 per cent, of our country folk can not read or write a word.
They can not read a bulletin on agriculture, a farm paper, a food-pledge card, .
An uninformed democracy is not a democracy.
A people who can not have means of access to the mediums of public opinion and to the messages of the President and the acts of Congress can hardly be expected to understand the full meaning of this war, to which they all must contribute in life or property or labor.
It would seem to be almost axiomatic that an illiterate man can not make a good soldier in modern warfare.
Until last April the Regular Army would not enlist illiterates, yet in the first draft between 30,000 and 40,000 illiterates were brought into the Army, and approximately as many near illiterates.
They can not sign their names.
They can not read their orders posted daily on bulletin boards in camp.
They can not read their manual of arms.
They can not read their letters or write home.
They can not understand the signals or follow the Signal Corps in time of battle.
There are 700,000 men who can not read or write who may be drafted within our Army within the next year or two.
Training camps for soldiers are not equipped for school work, and the burden of teaching men to read the simplest English should not be cast upon the officers or others in the camps.
We should give some education to all our men before they enter the Army.
There is even a larger problem than this that challenges our attention, and that is the teaching of the English tongue to millions of our population.
How practical is the need of a language in this country common to all tongues is illustrated by what I saw in one of the great cantonments a few nights ago.
In the mess hall, where I had sat an hour before with a company of the men of the National Army, a few small groups were gathered along the tables learning English under the tuition of some of their comrades, one of whom had been a district supervisor in a neighboring State and another a theological student.
In one of those groups one of the exercises for the evening consisted in practicing the challenge when on sentry duty.
Each pupil of the group (there were four of Italian and two of Slavic birth) shouldered in turn the long-handled stove shovel and aimed it at the teacher, who ran along the side of the room, as if to evade the guard.
The pupil called out in broken speech, "Halt! who goes there?"
The answer came from the teacher, "Friend."
And then, in as yet unintelligible English (the voices of innumerable ancestors struggling in their throats to pronounce it), the words "Advance and give the countersign."
So are those of confused tongues learning to speak the language of the land they have been summoned to defend.
What a commentary upon our educational shortcomings that in the days of peace we had not taught these men, who have been here long enough to be citizens (and tens of thousands of their brothers with them), to know the language in which our history and laws are written and in which the commands of defense must now be given!
May the end of this decade, though so near, find every citizen of our State prepared to challenge, in one tongue and heart, the purposes of all who come, with the cry,"Who goes there?"
What I have said here leads to a respectful request that you give early consideration to House bill 6490, which provides for a modest appropriation for the Bureau of Education to begin and conduct a vigorous and systematic campaign for the eradication of adult illiteracy.
If the bill can be passed soon, special attention can be given to teaching illiterate men of draft age, and especially those who are classified in class A.
1. Allowed during the fiscal year, original entries of Indian and public lands, an area of 9,974,331.61 acres.
2. Patented during the fiscal year, 9,552,482.21 acres.
3. Collected from all sources during the year, $5,431,827.66, and expended during the same period in the public-land service, $2,948,- 360.92, leaving a net surplus of $2,483,466.74 of receipts over expenditures.
4. Collected and turned into the United States Treasury as a result of the work of the field service, $118,916.01.
5. Restored to the public domain 99,038 acres as the result of field investigation.
6. Secured, as escrow deposits, under contracts entered into with oil land claimants under the act of August 25, 1914 (38 Stat., 708), up to the end of the fiscal year, $3,491,544.90.
7. Approved and accepted surveys and resurveys for an area of over 11,000,000 acres, an excess of 1,000,000 acres over the work of the previous year and the third largest output for the last six years.
8. Reduced, by the introduction of more efficient methods, the cost of office work on the public-land surveys in the offices of the surveyors general 61 cents per mile, with a like reduction on mining claims and miscellaneous work.
9. Offered 25 leasing blocks of coal lands in the Nenana coal field, Alaska.
10. Secured a coal lease in the Bering River field, Alaska, covering an area of 2,420 acres.
11. Examined as to their validity 49,419 applications for entry under the homestead, desert land, and other laws.
12. Furnished over 125,000 copies of certified documents, as against 4,100 in 1897, 18,000 in 1907, and 88,000 in 1917.
13. Approved for patent 32,120 homestead and kindred entries.
14. Acted upon 5,243 applications for second homestead entry under the act of September 5, 1914 (38 Stat., 712), as against 5,179 the year previous.
15. Secured the withdrawal for stock driveways under the grazing homestead act of 2,079,979 acres.
16. Patented 913 reclamation homestead entries, as against 824 the year previous.
17. Approved for patent 914 Minnesota drainage cash entries under the Volstead Act, covering an area of 146,240 acres.
Patented under this act to date 590,600 acres.
18. Sold 1,450 town lots in town sites on Indian reservations and reclamation projects for $152,974.50.
19. Issued 3,952 Indian trust patents embracing 1,089,765.62 acres, as against 5,839 patents embracing 945,874.73 acres the year previous.
20. Issued 4,974 patents in fee to Indians embracing 726,969.81 acres, as against 2,014 such patents for 246,230.16 acres in 1917.
21. Patented 943,339.78 acres under railroad grants.
22. Classified in the field 1,600,000 acres of Oregon and California grant lands, revested in the United States by the act of June 9, 1916 (39 Stat., 218).
23. Opened to entry under the homestead law 450,000 acres of Oregon and California grant lands.
24. Sold the timber on 4,197 acres of Oregon and California grant lands, for which the sum of $145,888.28 was received.
25. Ascertained amount of taxes due and unpaid on the revested Oregon and California grant lands and paid thereon the sum of $1,529,957.57.
26. Approved for certification State selections aggregating 2,305,- 676.35 acres, as against 1,233,926 acres in 1917 and 1,145,167 acres in 1916.
27. Issued eight permits authorizing exploration of potash on public lands, under the act of October 2, 1917 (40 Stat., 297).
28. Awarded 12 leases of public lands for the production of potassium; 11 in the Searles Lake Basin, Cal., and 1 in Sweetwater County, Wyo.
29. Collected and deposited in the United States Treasury in connection with power permits $14,622.55, as against $8,407.33 in 1917 and $2,918.30 in 1916.
30. Restored to entry from Carey Act segregations 657,078.31 acres and patented under said act 11,643.96 acres.
31. Patented 2,093 desert-land entries embracing 340,281 acres, as against 1,752 in 1917 covering 277,432.33 acres.
32. Effected, by diligence in field work, a notable reduction of fraudulent efforts to secure public lands.
1. Cooperated actively with the War Department in the policy of mingling Indian soldiers with white organizations, as conducive to their military service and prospective citizenship.
Conducted the registration of June 5, 1918, according to the plan of previous registrations approved by the Provost Marshal General.
Reports 8,000 Indians in all branches of the Army and Navy; approximately $15,000,000 of Indian subscriptions to the first three issues of libertyloan bonds; 10,000 Red Cross memberships; 100,000 garments and other articles made and contributed; and 500 Christmas boxes, besides contributions of live stock, wool, and grain by Indians in Red Cross work.
Promoted active campaigns for coordinating with the various Federal administrations in all agricultural activities, employment of labor, and the saving and consumption of foods at Indian schools and on the reservations.
2. Made a successful application of the"new declaration of policy"by releasing thousands of Indians from guardianship and pushing the work of competency commissions on 16 reservations besides the Five Civilized Tribes, and issued patents during 18 months on nearly as much acreage as was patented in the preceding 10 years.
3. Maintained, despite the loss of many employees for war service, a strong system of vocational education combining academic instruction with productive practice in home economics, farming, and the ordinary trades essential to good agriculture.
Graduated about 100 students in full vocational courses and issued certificates of educational competency to most of them.
Enrolled 18,669 children of the Five Civilized Tribes in the public schools of 2,292 districts, and in other jurisdictions placed 2,436 children in the State schools under tuition contracts.
Increased public-school facilities for Indian pupils made it practicable to discontinue about 20 Indian day schools.
Enrolled 30,000 Indian children in the State public schools.
4. Fully sustained regular health work in the operation of all sanitoria, successfully combating severe epidemics in some localities, notwithstanding the transfer of many physicians and nurses to war service.
5. Made substantial progress in irrigation.
Expended $150,000 for enlargement and extension of canals on the Crow Reservation and brought 3,000 additional acres into irrigated cultivation on the Fort Hall Reservation.
On the Uintah Reservation cultivated irrigable land was increased over 30 per cent.
The Yakima Reservation shows increased returns with crops from 64,000 acres under ditch, having an average value of $100 per acre.
Phenomenal yields of from $300 to $400 per acre have come from irrigable lands in the Salt River Valley, Ariz., and the development of an underground supply of stock water has made successful progress.
6. Continued the intensive food campaign of the previous year with a cultivation of 759,933 acres as compared with 676,691 acres in 1917, an average increase of 12.3 per cent, and practically every reservation showing an increase of from 5 to 100 per cent.
Inaugurated a systematic program for the live-stock industry, covering such important features as water supply, fencing, winter protection and feeding, removal of worthless horses, and the proper disposition of scrub stock.
Enlarged experimentation work and established an experimental date farm on the Malki Reservation, Cal.
7. Began the formulation of definite aims and plans for attention to hitherto neglected tribes and remnants of tribes of Indians.
8. Sold at public auction in the Osage Reservation oil leases aggregating 90,286 acres of scattered tracts for a bonus consideration of $3,258,312, an average of $36 per acre, and carrying a royalty of one-sixth and one-fifth, depending upon the production per quarter section.
The gross production of oil for the year was 10,906,376 barrels, of which the Osage Tribe received a royalty of 1,842,692 barrels.
The total receipts to this tribe amounted to about $8,000,000.
Will soon offer some 43,000 acres additional for oil leases, including 28,000 acres on the“west side," and about 315,000 acres for gas leases.
9. The oil lands of the Five Civilized Tribes produced during the year approximately 13,000,000 barrels from 116,000 acres, yielding a tribal revenue of about $4,000,000.
The best return from other reservations has been from a well on the Kiowa Reservation, Okla., producing several hundred barrels per day.
10. A large number of allotments were made in the various reservations, including 1,385 acres to the Morongo Indians in California, 5,700 acres to the Fort Sill Apaches in Oklahoma, besides about 6,000 acres to Indians on the public domain.
Under the noncompetent act 662 pieces of allotted land were sold, and 438 pieces under the inherited act, at an average of $22 per acre, which is the highest average price ever received for Indian lands.
11. Forestry activities gave special attention to the sale of timber and the production of material suitable for war industries.
Substantial assistance was rendered in supplying walnut for gunstocks and airplane propellers, of spruce for airplane frames, and of construction material for governmental and industrial building.
12. The purchase of all supplies was in cooperation to the fullest possible extent with the Federal Food and Fuel Administrations and the War Industries Board.
13. The suppression of intoxicants received vigilant and active attention, especially in Oklahoma, where it became necessary to hold up quarterly payments of about $2,800,000 to the Osage Indians as a means of promoting a cleaning up of the liquor situation, and where the campaign was waged upon the specific declaration that "the bootlegger must go and bootlegging must cease before another dollar of Osage Indian money is released for expenditure in Osage County."
A very vigorous handling of conditions was followed by marked and apparently permanent improvement.
Public sentiment in Minnesota has become much more friendly to liquor prosecutions and suppression of the traffic has gained effective headway in a large area covered by the Chippewa treaty of 1855.
14. In the Five Civilized Tribes 101,506 Indians are enrolled, of whom 78,101 are citizens by blood, adoption, or intermarriage; 26,774 are full-blood citizens; and 23,405 are freedmen.
Restrictions against alienation of allotted lands have been removed from all but about 18.3 per cent of the 15,794,208 acres allotted.
Twenty-three thousand four hundred and forty-one Indians are still in the restricted class; that is, their allotments and funds are under Government supervision.
There were sold during the year 3,558,165 acres of tribal lands for $20,249,032.58, being $4,505,563 more than the appraised value.
There were constructed during the year 127 houses, at a cost of $134,466.67; 51 barns, at $22,912.95; and 96 wells, at $8,093.94.
There were purchased 472 horses and mules, at a cost of $63,739.78; 494 cattle, at $35,766.84; 509 hogs, at $13,088.66; and 228 wagons, at $35,- 092.15.
Miscellaneous farm implements were purchased, at a total cost of $25,544.10.
There was disbursed on account of per capita payments, improvements, and individual cash payments to Indians, salaries, and expenses a total of $12,455,146.08.
There was received of individual and tribal funds and congressional appropriations a total of $16,175,520.73, showing a grand total of all moneys handled for the Five Civilized Tribes during the fiscal year of $28,630,666.81.
Four thousand Indians of the Five Civilized Tribes have entered the United States military service; $6,923,670 of the individual Indian funds of restricted Indians of the Five Civilized Tribes have been invested in liberty loan bonds and war saving stamps.
1. Paid for pensions, $179,835,329.
2. Returned to the Treasury $3,241,471.90 of the amount appropriated by Congress for the payment of pensions.
3. Returned to the Treasury $141,053 of the sum appropriated for the maintenance and expense of the pension system, including salaries of special examiners.
4. Reduced the number of employees by 129 persons, including 87 transferred to other pay rolls in the department, without the necessity of dismissing any employee.
5. Under section 314 of the act of October 6, 1917, providing an increase of pension to $25 for certain widows of veterans of the Civil War, War with Spain, and Philippine insurrection, 284,608 widows' cases were adjudicated and increased rate allowed.
6. Under the act of June 10, 1918, amending the act of May 11, 1912, and providing increased rates of pension to Civil War survivors, 93,016 cases were adjudicated after the passage of the act and prior to July 1, 1918.
7. Convictions of violations of the pension laws were obtained in each of the 12 criminal cases tried during the year.
The total number of applications for patent, including reissues and designs, received during 1917 was 71,620, and in 1918, 64,979, a decrease of 6,641 over the prior year.
The total number of applications awaiting action on June 30, 1917, was 16,058, and the number awaiting action June 30, 1918, was 14,769, a decrease of 1,289.
The total number of patents granted in 1917 was 44,179, and the total number in 1918 was 40,526, a decrease of 3,653.
The total receipts of the office were $2,103,660.56, and the total expenditures for all purposes were $2,131,616.18, a decrease on earnings over expenditures of $27,955.62.
1. Prepared and installed addressograph mailing list of individual schoolhouses in the United States, comprising more than 200,000 addresses.
2. Printed and circulated 802,835 copies of printed bulletins, reports, and other documents, and approximately 3,560,000 copies of circulars and duplicated letters.
3. Conducted extensive correspondence on educational matters.
In all, 162,479 letters were received at the bureau, an increase of almost 25,000 over the previous year and almost ten times as large as the number received in 1910.
4. Issued, in cooperation with the United States Food Administration, three series of leaflets, containing a total of 96 lessons on community and national life.
More than 3,000,000 copies were sold by the superintendent of documents.
5. Made, at the request of State and local school authorities, 13 educational surveys, including Tennessee (administration, support, and normal schools) ; South Dakota (entire State system); Columbia, S. C.
Bradley Polytechnic Institute, Peoria, Ill.
6. Secured the construction of 2,523 game tables by public-school pupils for use in Army camps and cantonments and naval training stations.
7. Assisted the War Departent in the selection of training schools for Negro drafted men.
8. Assisted the committee on education and special training of the War Department in formulating courses of instruction for enlisted men.
9. Continued efforts for maintaining school attendance during the war.
10. Organized the United States School Garden Army for the purpose of increasing the food supply of the country and to provide profitable educative employment for school children.
School children to the number of 1,500,000 enlisted in the Army in the first few months.
11. Held a conference for the purpose of promoting Americanization of immigrants and largely increased its staff for this work.
12. Passed upon the eligibility of 536 institutions for accrediting by the United States Military Academy.
13. Assisted State school officials in New Mexico, Arizona, and West Virginia in formulating educational legislation.
14. Assisted the State of Massachusetts in the introduction of training in the duties of citizenship in the schools of that State.
15. Maintained 69 schools for natives in Alaska with an enrollment of 3,700.
16. Erected a hospital at Akiak, Alaska, for treatment of natives.
1. Continued its field studies of deposits of "war minerals," such as manganese, chromite, tungsten, molybdenum, platinum, quicksilver, graphite, mica, sulphur, pyrite, potash, and nitrate, in the United States; made field estimates of the available resources of such minerals; and examined deposits containing steel-hardening metals (manganese, chromite, tungsten, and molybdenum) at 1,580 localities in 23 States and in Central and South America and the West Indies.
2. Continued and extended its investigations of oil and gas fields in order to discover areas most likely to afford the greatest immediate increase in production, published during the year 13 reports on areas apparently favorable for tests with the drill, began the publication of 8 similar reports, and prepared for publication 3 others.
Also examined deposits of oil shale and published 2 reports on oil-shale reserves.
3. Made field examinations of oil and gas resources available for the use of a Government armor and projectile plant at Charleston, W. Va., and submitted recommendations to the Navy Department.
4. In view of the shortage of coal made a nation-wide suryey of available power to determine where and to what extent water power can be substituted for power generated by steam, or where coal can be saved by interconnecting electric plants or systems.
5. Made field examinations of porous basaltic rocks to discover such as might be employed in making light-weight aggregates for use in concrete ships.
6. Made laboratory examinations and analyses of minerals, materials, and brines containing potash and nitrate and of ores of chromium, platinum, and manganese, and tested samples of mica to determine their fitness for use in war work and to encourage production of mica of suitable quality.
7. Aided in discovering deposits of glass sand suitable for making lenses for optical instruments required for use in the war.
8. Furnished governmental war boards and other agencies manuscript statements showing the current production, consumption, exports, imports, and source of supply of minerals essential to the successful prosecution of the war, including statistics showing the conditions and prospects of the mineral industries, with forecasts of production in 1918 and statistics of output of some minerals for each quarter, month, and week, and, for coal, daily reports on shipments.
9. Took the initiative in organizing a joint information board, representing 36 divisions and bureaus of Government departments, to act as a clearing house for interbureau inquiries concerning mineral products, in order to make more quickly and fully available for all Government organizations the Geological Survey's store of information, as well as that of other bureaus or boards.
10. Furnished statistical information to United States Shipping Board by which a large tonnage of shipping formerly required for mineral imports has been released for more direct military use.
11. Made studies of mineral and power resources of the world and prepared maps and diagrams showing location and extent of known mineral deposits.
12. Prepared special reports for Capital Issues Committee on mineral properties and power and water-power systems seeking authority for new development or enlargement.
13. Cooperated with the Bureau of Standards, the Bureau of Mines, and the Office of Public Roads in investigations and tests of building stones, clays, and road materials.
14. Continued the metallographic study of ores in cooperation with the Bureau of Mines and placed the results at the service of the War Department.
15. Established an office at Anchorage, Alaska, with a geologist available for consultation with miners or for cooperation with the Alaskan Engineering Commission.
16. Collected statistics of production for more than 75 mineral products from 110,000 producers, continued correspondence designed to bring producers and consumers together, prepared and published 61 reports on mineral production, forming advance chapters 'of the annual volumes Mineral Resources of the United States, and prepared for publication by the technical press several advance reports on mineral production.
17. Contributed to the Engineer Officers' Reserve Corps and other branches of the military service 49 topographic engineers, 7 hydrographic engineers, and 10 other commissioned men, and had in service in France under commission on June 30, 1918, 70 engineers, 1 of whom has received the croix de guerre.
18. Conducted a training school for topographic engineers, in which instruction was given to men sent to Washington from engineering colleges elsewhere and to reserve engineer officers and men detailed for instruction in topographic field methods preparatory to service overseas.
19. Carried on special military topographic surveys along the borders of the United States in cooperation with the War Department and prepared and published maps based on surveys made in cooperation with that department.
20. Made special surveys of sites for munition plants, testing grounds, artillery ranges, aviation fields, cantonments, and other military establishments with respect to drainage, water supply, building and road material, oil and gas, etc.
21. Made special studies at camps and cantonments with a view to publishing maps and descriptions of the sites of the camps and the neighboring country that should emphasize the military uses of a knowledge of topography and geology, published two such maps and descriptions, and prepared four others for publication.
23. Continued work on a panoramic camera for aerial use in topographic mapping, especially military mapping, cooperated with Army engineers in making aerial photographs, and prepared for publication maps made by aerial photographic surveys.
24. Prepared for the War and Navy Departments reports in regard to the supply of ground water at about 50 localities, and prepared and submitted to departments and bureaus engaged in the conduct of the war many reports on water supplies.
25. Surveyed about 60,000 square miles of desert country in southern California and southwestern Arizona, examined practically all watering places in the region surveyed, taking samples of water, and erected 635 signs directing travelers to water.
The maps made and the data obtained were made available to the Army engineers for incorporation in the progressive military map of the United States now in preparation.
26. Drilled exploratory wells in a desert area in Nevada, found potable water, surveyed the area, and obtained information for a full report on it.
27. Continued stream measurements in the Ohio River basin in cooperation with the Corps of Engineers, United States Army, with a view to flood control and improvements in navigation.
28. Continued, in cooperation with the United States Reclamation Service, measurements of streams that are to furnish water to reclamation projects under construction.
29. Continued studies of stream flow in the Los Angeles National Forest in cooperation with the Forest Service, in 18 Indian reservations in cooperation with the Office of Indian Affairs, and in the Yosemite, Glacier, and Yellowstone Parks in cooperation with the National Park Service.
30. Continued stream gauging at 1,182 stations in the United States, including Alaska and Hawaii, a large part of the work being done, as heretofore, in cooperation with 22 States and Hawaii, and published 13 reports on supplies of surface water.
31. Made ground-water investigations in 19 States, in the District of Columbia, and in Alaska, and published 3 reports on ground water.
32. Made analyses of 208 samples of water collected in different parts of the United States and interpreted for publication about 1,500 analyses made elsewhere.
33. Classified 9,972,256 acres of public land as coal land and recommended the withdrawal from entry of 9,369 acres of coal land and the restoration to entry of 1,105,622 acres.
34. Recommended the withdrawal from entry of 171,247 acres of probable oil land and the restoration to entry of 117 acres, and classified 42,097 acres of Indian lands as oil lands.
35. Recommended the withdrawal from entry of 248,030 acres of probable phosphate land and the restoration to entry of 30,034 acres.
36. Classified 5,161,080 acres of public land as nonirrigable, thus concluding action on 8,020 petitions from intending entrymen.
37. Designated 7,538,962 acres of land under the stock-raising homestead act, disposing of nearly 15,000 out of 49,000 applications for stock-raising homesteads.
38. Recommended the withdrawal from entry of 137,505 acres of public land probably available for use as water-power sites and the restoration to entry of 2,230 acres previously so withdrawn.
39. Recommended the withdrawal from entry of 4,756 acres of land probably available as public water reserves and the restoration to entry of 1,830 acres of such lands previously withdrawn.
40. Cooperated with the General Land Office by reporting on 3,871 cases other than those involving enlarged homesteads and stockraising homesteads, and acted on 1,390 reports on field examinations made by that office.
41. Devoted its lithographic plant in large part to work for bureaus and offices of the War and Navy Departments and of other Government departments and boards, printing for military use numerous maps, some of them covering areas on or near the firing line in France and Belgium, as well as charts, diagrams, recruiting posters, and other illustrations.
42. Published topographic maps of 299 areas in the United States in editions aggregating 703,338 copies and geologic maps of 5 areas in editions aggregating 494 copies.
43. Printed maps of more than 2,000 areas for other branches of the Interior Department.
44. In cooperation with the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey and the Army War College translated from the French and published for the use of the Geological Survey's topographic engineers and other American engineers in France a manual of military mapping and technical instruction designed for use in artillery work.
45. Published 163 separate scientific and economic reports, aggregating 14,227 pages, and 304 maps, and distributed 576,655 books and 530,706 maps.
46. Carried on general correspondence with the public, largely in reply to inquiries for technical information.
1. Continued the construction and operation of irrigation works capable of furnishing water to 2,000,000 acres of arid land, and actually irrigated over 1,000,000 acres, covered by project statistics, or approximately 30,000 farms, in 15 States, equivalent to the cultivated acreage of Vermont, New Jersey, or Florida at the census of 1910, and producing crops valued at nearly $60,000,000.
2. Increased the area irrigated by the service 50,000 acres over that irrigated the previous year.
3. Operated irrigation works including 40 reservoirs, several power and pumping plants, over 11,000 miles of canals, as well as drainage systems, pipe lines, flumes, and tunnels, and nearly 90,000 structures, such as dams, headgates, weirs, checks, drops, etc.
4. Continued the extension of the projects, including the construction of 460 miles of canals, 120 miles of drains, over 1,000 bridges and culverts, 7,800 canal structures, and excavated 9,000,000 cubic yards of earth and rock.
5. Standardized the numerous irrigation structures in the interest of economy and the efficient operation of the projects.
6. Turned over to the water users' association the operation of the Salt River project, in Arizona, in accordance with the general intent and spirit of the reclamation act.
7. Opened areas aggregating 10,000 acres to settlement on the Grand Valley and Uncompahgre Valley projects in Colorado.
8. Cooperated with other departments of the Government, with other bureaus of the Interior Department, with State governments.
9. Prepared numerous press bulletins and gave numerous illustrated lectures before various societies and organizations explaining the activities of the service and the opportunities for settlers on Government irrigation projects.
10. Contributed 779 employees as commissioned officers or enlisted men to the armed forces of the United States.
Cooperated with the War Department and the Navy Department, the Department of Agriculture, the United States Fuel Administration, the National Research Council, the United States Shipping Board, the Capital Issues Committee; the Council of National Defense, the War Industries Board, the Bureau of Standards, and with other bureaus of the Interior Department in solving war problems that were of immediate importance.
1. Developed a great experiment station at the American University near Washington, D. C., for devising and testing toxic gases, also toxic and nontoxic smokes, and gas masks, flame throwers, incendiary bombs, and signal lights.
Trained many men in the uses og gases and smokes and flaming liquids.
At the end of the year the organization built up for these investigations was transferred to the War Department to become a part of the Chemical Warfare Service.
2. Organized a staff of chemical engineers, developing processes for the large-scale manufacture of toxic gases, which was later transferred to the Ordnance Department of the Army.
3. Aided the Government in obtaining the services of thousands of experts for special duties.
4. Investigated methods for the treatment of ores and minerals throughout the country to ascertain the available supply of those especially needed in the conduct of the war.
5. Organized a body of engineers and chemists as the war-minerals investigation to ascertain how necessary war materials, such as nitrates, manganese, chrome, magnesite, nickel, tin, and platinum, could be obtained most readily.
6. Cooperated with the War Department in the study of the production of artificial nitrates and in the development of processes and plants for their manufacture.
7. Helped to devise a process much more efficient than any in previous use for the production of nitric acid by the oxidation of ammonia.
8. Investigated methods of increasing the supply of sulphuric acid, needed in the manufacture of explosives.
9. Investigated the extraction of nickel, molybdenum, tungsten, and vanadium from their ores with reference to the use of these metals in special steels.
10. Assisted in the production of special gases for use in balloons.
11. Examined the manganese resources of the country and determined the availability of the domestic ores needed to replace the ores formerly imported.
12. Investigated practice at steel plants in order to determine how manganese alloys made from domestic ores could be substituted for higher grade alloys made from foreign ores.
13. Examined the availability of chromite deposits with reference to obtaining needed supplies of chrome.
14. Determined that the sulphur mines, pyritiferous ores, and pyrite deposits in this country can supply all the raw material needed by manufacturers of sulphuric acid.
15. Studied methods of purifying graphite, in order to ascertain whether domestic graphite can be used in the manufacture of crucibles for melting brass and other alloys.
16. Cooperated with the War Industries Board in measures to reserve an adequate supply of platinum, needed in chemical manufactures, for war requirements.
17. Trained 8,851 miners in first-aid and rescue methods.
18. Investigated the causes of 38 mine accidents, 30 in coal mines, and 8 in metal mines.
19. With the cooperation of the War Department perfected and brought to commercial manufacture the Gibbs breathing apparatus, which is superior to any other type of oxygen apparatus for protesting men entering poisonous or irrespirable gases.
This apparatus is being manufactured on a commercial scale, 600 sets having been made during the year.
20. Sampled a large number of coal mines for the Navy Department and reported on the quality of coal and the methods of mining and preparing it for market.
21. Made further tests of the explosibility of coal dust from different mines in order to ascertain how coal-mine explosions can be prevented or limited.
22. In administering the explosives act appoinied about 14,000 licensing agents, inspected storage magazines, and started numerous prosecutions against violators of the act.
23. Ascertained the practicability of a new method for signalling danger to miners by the injection of ill-smelling substances into the compressed-air lines.
24. With the cooperation of the Public Health Service surveyed sanitary conditions at more than 150 mines, smelters, and mining towns, and made suggestions aimed to improve these conditions.
25. Continued to test explosives to determine their suitability for use in mines and quarries.
Nine more explosives were added to the list of those approved as permissible.
At the end of the year there were 160 explosives on this list.
26. Studied the combustion of fuel in boiler furnaces and the baffling of boilers in connection with boilers for the emergency fleet.
27. Examined and sampled, at the request of the United States Fuel Administration, coal mines in Arkansas and Oklahoma.
28. Assisted in the establishment of a Government coal yard for the supply of all Federal buildings in the District of Columbia.
29. Improved and brought to commercial operation a rocking electric furnace designed to prevent the metal losses that attend the melting of brass and bronze in crucibles.
30. Began the preparation of a series of steels containing uranium, tungsten, and molybdenum to be tested for their suitability for cannon liners.
31. Ascertained that usable grades of ferromanganese, alloys needed in steel making, can be made from low-grade and hitherto unused domestic ores.
32. Worked out a chloride volatilization process for treating oxidized lead ores.
33. Developed a cheap and simple process for the treatment of low-grade and complex zinc ores by leaching.
34. Determined the physical principles governing the flotation of ores and made advances in the treatment of ores by the flotation process.
35. Demonstrated how large wastes of oil under ground may be prevented by cementing oil wells so as to prevent water from entering the oil sands.
36. Studied the rate of decline of oil wells in nearly all the important producing fields of the country, and obtained data of much importance in the valuation of oil lands.
37. Continued to investigate methods of recovering gasoline from natural gas.
38. Found special fuels that promise to make possible a decided increase in the efficiency of aircraft engines.
39. Developed a new method of making a complete analysis of the gases used in warfare.
Substantial progress has been made in the construction of the Alaska Railroad during the year.
The rehabilitation of the Alaska Northern Railway from Seward, the Southern terminal, to Kern Creek, a distance of 71 miles, was continued, and it is expected will be completed during 1919.
The grading along Turnagain Arm was completed and rail connection made between Seward and Anchorage, 114 miles, thus establishing through traffic between Seward and the Matanuska coal field.
Work has been well started on the harbor improvements at Anchorage.
The dredging work was commenced in April.
A trestle to the dock site has been completed and rock has been hauled for riprapping along the trestle.
Grading on the main line north of Montana Creek as far as the mouth of Indian River, a distance of 55 miles, is under way.
Rail has been laid north of Anchorage as far as Talkeetna, 116 miles.
A bridge is now in course of construction across the Talkeetna River.
When it is completed track laying will be continued northward from that point.
The Tanana Valley Railroad, which was purchased by the Government last year, was kept in operation throughout the winter.
Some work on repairing of bridges and trestles and ballasting of portions of the roadbed was done.
On account of unusually high water during the breakup, the Nenana River changed the course of its main channel through what is known as Lost Slough.
This necessitated changing about 20 miles of the main line as originally located and partly constructed.
The survey for this new line was completed and grading and track laying is now in progress, rail having been laid 24 miles south from Nenana.
Five miles of track was laid south from Happy Station last year down Goldstream to a body of timber suitable for ties and firewood and several thousand cords of wood were made available for the mines and communities of the interior.
Clearing has been completed between Nenana and Happy Station.
Grading is under way between these points and track laying has been completed to 7 miles south from Happy Station.
The Alaskan Engineering Commission continued to operate the coal mines at Eska Creek and Chickaloon.
The greatest amount of work was done at the Eska Creek mine, where there were employed throughout the year from 100 to 125 men and the production was from 100 to 200 tons of coal per day.
The work at Chickaloon consisted principally of sinking on a 6-foot bed of coal and doing other development work preparatory to producing coal.
Several hundred tons of coal were mined during the course of development.
The Chickaloon mine produces a good blacksmith coal, and about 100 tons of it were shipped to Nenana in the summer of 1918 for use of the railroad.
These coal mines are operated by the Alaskan Engineering Commission primarily to furnish coal for the construction and operation of the railroad.
A small amount of the coal was sold to the public in Anchorage and vicinity when the privately operated mines were unable to supply the market.
During the winter the Matanuska Coal Co., which has a lease on units 2 and 3 in the Matanuska coal field, mined approximately 3,000 tons of coal and hauled it to the railroad by sleigh.
Some of this coal was sold by the company to the market in Anchorage and vicinity and proved to be satisfactory for domestic use as well as for steaming purposes.
The Chickaloon Coal Co., which has leased units 10 and 11, started active development work in the fall of 1917 and continued work throughout the year.
In August, 1917, a 6-foot bed of lignite coal was discovered near the right of way of the main line of the railroad on the Little Susitna River, 61 miles north of Anchorage.
Private parties secured a free-use permit on a 10-acre tract, and coal was supplied to the local market.
Coal was also discovered on the right of way of the railroad 28 miles south of Nenana.
This is a lignite coal.
It was used in one of the pile drivers of the commission and proved satisfactory.
The bed from which this coal was taken is being developed under a free-use permit under the act of October 20, 1914.
Several beds of coal were also discovered along the right of way on the west side of the Nenana River.
At one place, 49 miles south of Nenana, five different beds ranging in thickness from 5 to 20 feet were found.
Work is going forward on these beds by private parties with a view to developing a producing coal mine.
It is expected that rail will be laid as far south as these prospects and coal supplied for the railroad and other industries of interior Alaska during the coming winter.
There was considerable activity in agricultural development during the year.
In the Matanuska Valley there was an overproduction of turnips and potatoes during the season of 1917, and arrangements were made whereby turnips were shipped to Seattle, Wash., where they sold at from 1 to 11 cents per pound higher than the local turnips.
The steamship companies reduced their rates on potatoes so that they could be shipped to towns along the coast of Alaska in competition with the outside potato.
This resulted in a market for several hundred tons which would otherwise have been wasted.
On account of the overproduction of these root crops the farmers were urged to adopt diversified farming, and as a result more grain crops were put in this year.
Some of the farmers are getting a start with cattle, hogs, and chickens.
It has been demonstrated that in order for the farmers of Alaska to make a success of agriculture diversified farming must be adopted.
1. Continued the work of informing the public about the national parks and national monuments under the jurisdiction of this service.
2. Prepared and distributed nearly 150,000 circulars of information relating to these recreational areas.
3. Prepared and distributed approximately 100,000 automobile maps of the national parks.
5. Arranged for publication of Wild Animals of Glacier National Park, by Vernon Bailey and Mrs. Florence Merriam Bailey; The Volcanic History of Lassen Peak, by J. S. Diller; and Mountaineering in Rocky Mountain National Park, by Maj. Roger W. Toll.
6. Continued circulation of large quantities of motion-picture film and lantern slides of scenes in the national parks.
7. Engaged in close cooperative work with the new Bureau of Service, National Parks and Monuments, established in Chicago by the United States Railroad Administration to inform the public regarding railroad rates and tours to national parks, monuments, and other resorts.
8. Visitors to national parks during 1918 season, 454,841; 1917, 487,368; 1916, 358,006; 1915, 335,299; 1914, 240,193.
9. Automobile travel practically the same as last year.
Licenses issued in 1918 season where motor permits are required reached a total of 23,778.
In 1917, 23,525 licenses were issued, 15,536 in 1916, 12,609 in 1915, and 4,455 in 1914.
10. Casa Grande Ruin placed in grade of national monument, thus reducing number of reservations of national park class to 16.
11. Assumed jurisdiction of Katmai National Monument in Alaska, established September 24, 1918.
12. Assumed control of protection and improvement of Yellowstone National Park, heretofore under jurisdiction of War Department, and combined administration, protection, and improvement features of park government, thus establishing single direction and making possible much more economical and efficient operation.
13. Organized new ranger force to relieve troops on duty in Yellowstone Park.
14. Investigated status of lands embraced in proposed enlargement of Yellowstone National Park by addition of Teton Mountains, Jackson Lake, scenic region north of Buffalo Fork, of Snake River, and headwaters of the Yellowstone River.
15. Prepared 324.4 acres of land for cultivation of hay for animals and seeded 111 acres in Yellowstone National Park.
16. Completed first unit of cottages, water system, and other improvements on administrative site near western entrance to Glacier National Park.
17. Completed Logan Pass Trail, thus opening to public wonderful section of Glacier Park heretofore inaccessible.
18. Began survey and development of transmountain road project in Glacier Park for submission to Congress at end of war.
19. In cooperation with Bureau of Fisheries, built and equipped a fish hatchery near Glacier Park Hotel.
20. Completed extensive improvement of road in Mount Rainier National Park between park entrance and Paradise Valley.
21. Purchased telephone line betyeen Ashford and Longmire Springs and extended same to Paradise Valley; also completed other improvements to telephone system.
22. Continued clearing and improvement of camp sites in Mount Rainier National Park.
23. Built scenic Skyline and Tatoosh Trails from Paradise Valley, thus opening new and attractive side trips for tourists in Mount Rainier Park.
24. In Crater Lake National Park made extensive camp-ground improvements, including purchase of pumping plant and other equipment for water systems, and preparation of same for installation.
25. Under War Department, road around the rim of Crater Lake completed.
26. Continued reconstruction of El Portal Road in Yosemite National Park; completed widening and grading of road system on floor of Yosemite Valley.
27. Completed new hydroelectric power plant on Merced River in Yosemite National Park; and, on September 7, 1918, dedicated same.
28. Rebuilt Ledge Trail, and completed new trail to Ten Lake Basin and new trail between Merced Lake and Tuolumne Meadows by way of Babcock and Emeric Lakes.
29. Leased tract of land in Yosemite Park to State of California for fish-hatchery site.
New hatchery soon to be erected by the State and operated in cooperation with the National Park Service.
30. Began construction of new metallic telephone system between El Portal and Yosemite Valley.
31. Completed timber exchange under which part of the forest along Big Oak Flat Road is acquired by the Government, together with 7,000 acres of patented lands in the park area.
32. In Sequoia National Park discovered beautiful new cave of large proportions, and began improvement of same in the public interest.
33. Constructed in the Giant Forest the first unit of new administrative village, consisting of ranger quarters, storehouse, stable, and garage.
34. Consolidated concessions in General Grant National Park, thus providing higher-class service to visitors.
These concessions are operated in connection with camps and trail transportation facilities in the region proposed as an addition to Sequoia National Park.
35. Opened beautiful Lake Nanita in Rocky Mountain National Park by construction of new trail.
36. Developed Glacier Basin, in Rocky Mountain Park, as camping grounds for automobilists.
37. Conducted the regular winter carnival at Fern Lake in Rocky Mountain National Park.
38. Comprehensive plans for improvement of Hot Springs Reservation submitted; and, under appropriation of $190,000, began arrangements for construction of new Government free bathhouse and administration building.
39. Finished and equipped museum building in Mesa Verde National Park; also placed relics and pictures therein for exhibition purposes.
40. Constructed new road to the top of Mesa Verde, thus eliminating dangerous section of highway around Point Lookout; also built shelter for automobiles and established automobile camp in Mesa Verde Park.
41. Installed electric-lighting system and improved the water system at Spruce Tree Camp in Mesa Verde Park.
42. Improved the highway to Devil's Tower'National Monument in Wyoming.
43. Began the improvement of the Sitka National Monument in Alaska, which will include the strengthening and repainting of all of the great totem poles in this reservation.
44. Under the $10,000 appropriation, organized a ranger force to protect Sieur de Monts National Monument in Maine.
45. Planned and laid out a flying field in Sieur de Monts National Monument.
The following table shows the number of matters received and disposed of during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1918, which were docketed or recorded.
It does not, however, account for a very large number of miscellaneous matters of which no formal record was kept.
Originally the solicitor's office was charged with the adjudication of appeals from the General Land Office, motions for rehearing relating thereto, and the preparation of opinions on miscellaneous questions of law.
Little by little the scope of the work has increased, however, until it now includes many appeals, contracts, leases, and varied miscellaneous matters from the Geological Survey, Reclamation Service, Bureau of Mines, Bureau of Education, Indian and Pension Offices.
In addition to the above this office handles a great amount of correspondence between the department and individuals, also with the other executive departments, especially with the Department of Justice relative to litigation.
In this class may also be mentioned the consideration and preparation of reports on proposed or pending bills in Congress.
Notwithstanding the great number and variety of questions thus presented, it will be noted from the above table that of those formally docketed but 964 matters were pending and undetermined at the close of the fiscal year.
Those remaining, having relation to public land and miscellaneous matters, were less than for a number of years, while the pending pension cases were but slightly greater than last year.
However, all are now reached within approximately 60 days from docket and are disposed of with such dispatch as careful examination of the records and consideration of the questions involved will warrant.
The volume of court work during this year was a little less than that of the preceding year; but the result was uniform success, no case having been determined adversely to the department in any respect.
Seven cases were disposed of in the Supreme Court of the United States; 5 in the Court of Appeals (one appeal being dismissed) ; and 13 in the Supreme Court of the District.
In addition, three interlocutory matters were argued and decided in favor of the Secretary.
In the court of appeals judgment on mandate reversing a former decision of that court against the department was taken, and likewise in the Supreme Court of the District judgment on mandate in two cases was obtained.
Five cases have been argued and submitted but are yet undecided by the courts.
Eleven new suits were filed.
There are now 45 suits pending, 7 in the United States Supreme Court, 3 in the Court of Appeals, and 35 in the Supreme Court of the District.
Area of land entered and patented.
The total area of public and Indian lands originally entered and allowed during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1918, is 9,974,331.61 acres, not including 172,446.46 acres embraced in finals not heretofore counted as original dispositions of land.
This latter area is constituted as follows: Public auction, 144,595.70 acres; abandoned military reservations, 1,131.91 acres; cash and private sales, individual claimants, and small holding claims, 5,964.28 acres; preemption entries, 40 acres; and soldiers' additional homesteads, 20,714.57 acres.
The area of 9,974,331.61 acres is a decrease of 6,227,462.77 acres, as compared with the area originally entered and allowed during the fiscal year 1917.
This heavy decrease in allowed entries is due largely to the fact that the bulk of applications under the grazing homestead act have remained suspended pending designation of the land.
The area patented during the fiscal year is 9,552,482.217 acres, a decrease of 1,760,880.023 acres, as compared with the fiscal year 1917.
Of the above area 6,492,797.816 acres were patented under the homestead laws, a decrease of 1,051,257.454 acres, not including as homesteads 20,906.54 acres patented as soldiers' additional entries.
Cash receipts and expenditures.
The total cash receipts from the sales of public lands, including fees and commissions ($1,160,350.88), sales of reclamation town sites ($48,687.41), and sales of lands in the Oregon and California railroad grant ($161,169.77), for the fiscal year 1918 were $3,420,783.64.
The total receipts from the sales of Indian lands were $1,935,773.73.
Other receipts aggregated $75,270.29.
The total receipts of this bureau during the fiscal year 1918 were $5,431,827.66.
The total expenses of district land offices for salaries and commissions of registers and receivers and incidental expenses during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1918, were $821,758.15.
The aggregate expenditures and estimated liabilities of the public-land service, including expenses of district land offices and surveys made from the appropriations for surveying the public lands outside of railroad land-grant limits, were $2,948,360.92, leaving a net surplus of $2,483,- 466.74 of receipts over expenditures.
Disbursements from the following special deposit trust funds and reimbursable appropriations are not included in the above figures as receipts or expenditures; from deposits by individuals for surveying the public lands, $62,249.09; from surveying within land grants (reimbursable), $19,593,12; from opening Indian reservations (reimbursable), $10,167.37; and from surveying and allotting Indian reservations (reimbursable), $74,- 035.96.
Field service.
The total amount of cash collected and turned in to the Treasury as a result of the work of the field service during the fiscal year was $118,916.01; in addition there was turned in to the Treasury $8,900.46 as royalty for coal mined during the past year from a tract in Colorado.
As a result of investigations in the field 99,038 acres have been restored to the public domain.
Of this amount 93,920 acres represent fraudulent entries canceled through proceedings based upon special agents' reports; 5,118 acres were restored to open range by abatement of unlawful inclosures without suit.
During the year 160 civil suits were tried in court, of which 93 were won and 67 lost; as a result of these suits, $55,720.16 were recovered and 157,874.95 acres were restored to the public domain.
Of the criminal cases tried during the year 32 resulted in convictions under which there were 10 prison sentences imposed and fines amounting to $6,426 paid.
As the result of constant vigilance on the part of the field service a notable decrease in fraudulent entries has been effected.
Wyoming.
In this State additional oil withdrawals aggregating 160,835 acres were made during the fiscal year and 117 acres restored as nonoil.
On June 30, 1918, 1,053,900 acres were embraced within existing withdrawals; at the end of the fiscal year 61 applications for patent, embracing approximately 9,500 acres, were pending.
Oil contracts.
Contracts are pending entered into under the act of August 25, 1914 (38 Stat., 708), by oil-land claimants under which escrow deposits were received to the amount of $3,491,544.90.
Public surveys.
The area of accepted surveys and resurveys during the past year exceeds 11,000,000 acres, which is 1,000,000 more than the area accepted during the previous year, and is the third largest output for the last six years.
To meet the growing demand for resurveys in cases where the title to the greater portion of the land is vested in private ownership, special legislation is recommended.
The progress made in the execution of public-land surveys in Alaska during the past year is reported as satisfactory.
In the Tanana Valley the group of public-land surveys initiated in the early summer of 1917 were extended southerly over agricultural areas in the Nenana Valley, and along the line of the Government Railroad, and connected with the surveys of the Nenana coal fields executed in 1915.
Surveys under this group were also further extended in the vicinity of the town of Nenana northerly and easterly, up Gold Stream, with the ultimate view of sectionizing the Gold Stream Valley adjacent to the Government line of railroad.
Surveys were also extended from the latter group easterly up the Tanana Valley along the north bank of the river.
Surveys in the Susitna River Valley were also extended by a double party during the 1917 field season from the limits of the surveys of last year up the valley east of the river to the foothills and northerly along the line of the Government railroad within.
10 miles of Talkeetna.
The surveys of town sites, Indian allotments, and others of a special character in Alaska are also reported.
Offices of surveyors general.
An improvement in the condition of the work in the offices of surveyors general is noted by the commissioner, due to the induction of improved methods.
A monthly work report is now made, and a cost-keeping system which had previously been promulgated is operative and uniform.
Alaska shore spaces.
The commissioner calls attention to legislation now pending relative to reserved shore spaces between entries on navigable waters in Alaska, and submits a full statement as to reasons why the present law should be repealed.
Alaska coal lands.
In the Nenana coal field 25 leasing blocks have been created and offered for leasing.
In the Bering River field a lease containing 2,420 acres has been secured.
The minimum investment to be made was fixed at $250,000, and work on the land has already been begun and early mining operations are expected.
In the Matanuska field operations have been conducted during the year by the lessees of blocks Nos. 2 and 3, and by the Alaskan Engineering Commission on the reserved lands in block No. 7, and in development of block No. 12, also reserved.
The lessee of blocks Nos. 10 and 11 is now engaged in opening a mine and installing mining machinery upon the land for immediate operations.
Certified copies.
The growth of this work is notable.
In 1897 the office furnished 4,100 pages of certified copies; in 1907, 18,000; in 1917, over 88,000; and in the year just closed, 125,000.