Continental conservation is the key to the future of this Nation and is the present problem of this department; nearly all of its functions center about it.
In the beginning our people huddled together in certain chosen areas and developed a simple but satisfactory rural life.
With the increase in numbers that followed a high birth rate and continual immigration, they gradually extended their range.
The successive waves of settlers that went down our rivers, over our plains and mountains and eventually along our railroads, carried with them little but their courage and experience.
In general, the conquest of our share of this continent has been of an amateurish character.
This was inevitable; the job of living was such an intense one that each man had to concentrate upon it in order to make a success.
If we had had full information as to the natural advantages of each new area, if he had known and understood the analysis of soils, if we had had our present quality of seeds and animal stock, a much more satisfactory result could have been accomplished.
Primarily, the aim of our people was to spread over the continent a blanket of farms, each maintaining a family.
If we had been able to plan in advance for the wisest location of our people upon this continent, we could have spared the great forests which were cut down in the Atlantic and some of the Great Lakes States, and have hurried our people through to the Great Plains.
The contest between the new land and the old has been a constant factor in American agricultural and economic life and is still going on in various phases in our own country as well as in others.
In the taking over of new land, its first values were harvested as promptly as possible, and then it was for the most part driven to the maximum of production for a considerable period.
Gradually we have been acquiring new conceptions of continental conservation.
Conservation is a term around which much confusion has reigned.
Conservation means wise use.
Wise use means that a natural asset shall be used for the proper purpose and at the right time.
Conservation does not mean the hoarding of natural resources for a hazy, indefinite future.
It does, though, mean intelligent and thoughtful planning for every resource of our continent.
The usual action of the Federal Government has been to distribute land resources into private hands as fairly and rapidly as possible.
Certain artificial conceptions such as that of the acre have been used in dividing up our continent just as we have divided up our cities into town lots of arbitrary size and shape.
This has been done largely regardless of the quality of the soil, amount of vegetation, the water supply, the climate, or those other factors upon which all of the values of the soil, in so far as the habitation of human beings is concerned depend.
The result of this has been that there has been a large marginal failure in almost every zone throughout the country.
In the best areas of the Middle West this process has not been so evident, but throughout the Rocky Mountain region and the Western States the tragic skeletons of abandoned homes tell the story of a sad process of failure that could have been avoided if we had understood the problem of spreading a great population over a continent for successful living.
In this process we have recklessly harvested such readily available resources as the forests.
We have thought only of their evident use and have failed to see their significance in protecting watersheds and their profound relationship to life in the valleys.
Only recently as a people have we sensed the value of our river systems and our water supplies in general.
The growing sense of continental conservation is working changes.
Some years ago it became evident that our loss in trees would seriously handicap us for lumber.
The great national forest system was wisely set aside to be retained as an asset of the people, rather than to have distribution into private hands.
Hidden beneath the surface of our land were great stores of coal, oil, natural gas, and minerals of many varieties stored there through the ages.
Fortunately, immense stores were so distant from the market, or so hard to master, that they were left intact, although.
Until the mineral leasing act was passed, discovery of these resources led to their transfer to private hands.
These mineral resources, while extensive, can never be replaced.
Anything that is irreplaceable should be conserved and protected for its fullest use.
Certainly for the control of these great resources some form of national strategy is desirable and many factors are now operating to bring about a better control, and one freer from waste, in their development.
A realization of the natural wonders of our country has led to a comparatively new conception as to certain parts of our continent.
Their beauty has outweighed any evident utility which they seem to possess.
The value of beauty in our environment did not seem to weigh heavily with the pioneer who was fighting nature in order to carve out a living for himself and family.
But now, with general assent, we have some 20 national beauty spots scattered throughout all parts of the United States, each one distinctive and possessing its own charm, each one to be retained in perpetuity for the enrichment of the life of the Nation.
Looking back from this newer viewpoint we see that our couquest of the continent has been accompanied by many failures, and we now often have desolation and shabbiness instead of the natural conditions built up through centuries of time.
As we look forward we begin to see the outlines of a future policy which will bring about a more intelligent use of our natural resources and which will restore some of the values we have lost.
Slowly but gradually we are using each part of the continent in the way that is most profitable.
This will be a long and slow process, but mistakes are costly and nature is unrelenting in carrying out her own program.
Our greatest difficulties in getting the best out of our continent in the future will come from our own actions, from the artificial decisions that we have made or will make regardless of natural conditions.
There are many misfits between our political units and our geography.
There is a great maze of legislation built upon so-called property and human rights which must gradually be adjusted to the necessary changes associated with an increase in population and a rising standard of living.
Our accommodations to a continent will inevitably take place.
If we can see what they should be, we can advance faster.
Science has placed a whole series of new tools in the hands of man in dealing with all of these questions.
Engineering has permitted us to control nature in many ways; organization has given us the chance to unite our financial and other resources in the applications of science and engineering to the problems of life.
By the use of the trained human mind, the trained human hand, and the machine, which is the product of both, we have brought in a whole series of new opportunities for the mind and body of man.
If we had proceeded too long without thought and without mobility, we would have found many of our people trying to live upon an ash heap.
We are still in danger from soil erosion and other natural processes unless we can conserve for our future certain basic and fundamental elements of our surroundings.
Primarily, our whole safety as living units depends upon the plant life about us.
Controlled plant life has given us our agriculture.
In many parts of the country control of plant life depends on controlled water.
The plant life of the past has given us our irreplaceable resources in coal, oil, and gas.
These plants working away in the presence of sunshine and water to make food for themselves and for us and our domestic herds are our most valuable material possession.
These plants depend entirely upon the rains, the soil, and the sun.
Conservation, control, and management of plant life will determine the future of the people of America upon this great continent of ours.
Thoughtful conservation and distribution of plants in accordance with our needs and the places where they can produce the most is the fundamental requirement of continental conservation.
We can exhaust our stored mineral resources and still survive, but we can not destroy our plant life and succeed.
In many parts of the West our population has reached the water line.
Only through more water in given localities is our normal increase in the population possible.
It is, then, the control of water which is fundamental to all of our States, and to all of our citizens, and particularly to our Western States and western citizens.
We are just beginning to realize that there is a connection between plant life and water supply; that the presence or absence of trees and plants on mountain and hillsides has something to do with floods and droughts; that overgrazing in one State may mean floods and droughts in another State.
Throughout the ages nature has developed a certain balance and harmony in these relations.
In our pioneering we have destroyed that by cutting forests, by varying the normal life of the plain and mountainside, by causing forest fires, and by committing a whole series of acts detrimental to that balance.
Try as hard as we may to operate political units, to determine the functions of States in the United States, or to distinguish between the activities of various branches of the National Government, we will only be fooling ourselves if we forget that nature knows nothing of our activities but goes on in its timeless way obeying its own laws.
If we can act in harmony with those laws, if we can work in organized groups with our resources, we can succeed since our scientists and our engineers have pointed out the way.
The adjustment of a people to its environment can take place through a thoughtless struggle in the survival of the fittest, or it can be a planned, quiet, and orderly process of human organization.
We have reached the point here in America where all of these forces working toward betterment must be coordinated.
We are now engaged in this country in making a survey of our childhood.
The White House Conference on Child Health and Protection, is in progress as this report is transmitted, bringing together the results of the studies of 1,100 experts in this field.
They are to present to us the most modern conceptions of education, of health, of recreation, and of child welfare.
From these findings we should be able to get some new points of view and develop some new plans for the future of our American children.
Our children are to have their home on this continent.
Their lives are to be spent in the surroundings we leave for them.
It is time for us boldly, thoroughly, and thoughtfully to guide the future management of our natural environment.
Our spaces are broad, our range is great.
We are but started on our way.
We must study our, and their, estate and conserve its manifold values.
We can be secure upon this great continent if we can conserve its values through intelligent action.
The prime aim for us as human beings in the conservation of the continent is to care, protect, and plan wisely for those who will inherit it.
The day of the amateur in the conservation and preservation of our continent and our child life is past.
Historically the Department of the Interior has played a large part in this country's pioneering.
As new territory was absorbed, the lands belonging to the National Government were distributed through the General Land Office of the department to States and to private citizens, through cession, sale, through special acts of Congress, including the.
When the special semiarid conditions of the West were met, the Reclamation Service of the department was brought into being in order that there might be concerted action to conquer the mountain and the desert.
Alongside of the problem of handling the public lands was the necessity of caring for the interests of the Indians, who had once roamed throughout the whole of our territory—thus came about the Office of Indian Affairs.
In the western march, certain unique and beautiful areas were discovered.
Their treasures belonged to the whole people, so that they were set apart as national parks.
The lure of gold brought men to face hardships and dangers and to seek for wealth in every nook and cranny of the West.
The Geological Survey helped not only to discover these mineral resources, but also all of the other forms of wealth hidden in our continent or to be developed through the control of stream flow.
The discovery of coal beds and petroleum have had much to do with the development of our vast wealth.
The American public school, represented in the department through the Office of Education, has been carried along by each group of settlers until it is found almost everywhere.
In the continental conservation which is the task of the new pioneering, this department must do its share.
This year saw the loss of Col. Earl D. Church, Commissioner of Pensions, by death.
Colonel Church had brought into the Bureau of Pensions an administrative experience in insurance matters which, coupled with his ability and energy, worked changes and improvements that years ofordinary progress had not effected.
He was especially valuable in the reorganization of the Veterans'Administration, and had he lived would have had an important part in his bureau's new affiliation.
Stephen T. Mather, former head of the National Park Service, its founder and its loyal friend, died.
Though no longer part of the administrative organization, his death was a loss to the Park Service.
The Park Service lost another able officer in W. B. Lewis, assistant director, whose rare spirit and devotion to duty while superintendent of Yosemite and later in Washington were outstanding.
Changes in the department staff included the addition of Miss Bess Goodykoontz as Assistant Commissioner of Education, Dr. Harold C. Bryant, as Assistant Director of the National Park Service, in charge of education and research, Dr. W. Carson Ryan, as officer in charge of Indian education, and Charles A. Dobbel as executive assistant to the Secretary of the Interior.
Otherwise the department's executive staff remains as reported a year ago.
In their conquest of the desert our pioneer people have erected sovereignties which must cooperate in the new pioneering.
That new pioneering must be done by regions, just as 30 years ago it was done by communities, and, in the decades before that, by individuals.
Interstate agreements will help to solve these problems, and the compacts affecting the Rio Grande, the Colorado, the Columbia, and other western streams, must be the Magna Charta of this new pioneering.
If one State can block the destiny of a region and a watershed by failure to think in terms of the larger regional units, a great part of the West's future control of its water will be relinquished.
The future of the semiarid regions of the West is no greater than its ability to control its water.
The background of community cooperation which made possible the development of the great irrigation projects in these States will eventually lead to interstate cooperation in the solution of these problems.
In considering the relations of the Federal Government and the Western States to the public domain, it is probably not generally understood that the States and the reclamation fund receive the major portion of all proceeds taken in by the Federal Government from public lands, whereas the Federal Government bears the cost of administration.
Thus, last year, out of $6,800,000 taken in by the General Land Office from all sources, $3,167,000 was distributed to the reclamation fund, $2,400,000 to the public-land States, $275,000 to Indian tribes, leaving only $954,000 in the Federal Treasury.
Yet the cost of administration of the public domain amounted to $2,222,000.
In other words, $5,567,000 of benefit was passed over to the States and reclamation fund at an out-of-pocket cost to the United States of $1,300,000 (that figure representing the difference between the Federal residue and the actual cost of administration).
Had the States and the reclamation fund borne the cost of the administration of the public domain they would have received little over half their actual receipts for the past year.
The future of the minerals of the public domain is being considered by the Public Land Commission along with the question of the disposition of its surface.
There are two divergent schools of opinion as to the proper use of these minerals.
One is the old theory of exploitation; the other is the policy of conservation, meaning by that term wise use rather than hoarding.
The latter has been the policy followed by this administration.
In the face of overproduction of oil with its resulting economic and physical waste the Government has withheld prospecting permits which might lead to an increase in this undesired production.
That policy has naturally encountered opposition from the exponents of the other school of thought, more interested in immediate revenues than in the ultimate utility of oil and gas.
Because State governments are to a major extent beneficiaries of these royalties there has been necessary a 3-cornered balancing of interests between the public of the United States, the oil-bearing Western States, and their citizens.
The surface of the public domain cries for immediate care and the States may be more competent to give it than the Federal Government; the minerals, particularly oil and gas, on the other hand, have a greater future utility than a present one.
The department last year asked and received from Congress two major pieces of legislation which will be important aids to this year's conservation efforts.
Authority was granted for Government participation in unit operation and development of single oil pools involving public lands, permitting development of these common pools by the minimum number of wells, with a minimum waste of gas and oil and eliminating “offsetting" with its accompanying overproduction, and authorizing extensions of leases for the life of the agreement.
The authority conferred by this legislation will expire January 31, 1931.
Negotiations are now under way for a unit agreement in Kettleman Hills, Calif., whose production of high-grade oil, if allowed to flow under the ordinary old-fashioned wasteful conditions from a score of ready and waiting wells, would flood the oil market with gasoline exceeding in quantity the entire California production.
The gas wasted from that field each day exceeds 450,000,000 cubic feet, although only 6 out of about 30 wells are being allowed to produce.
Each year the waste of energy from Kettleman Hills is over twice the total expected annual electrical output of Hoover Dam.
Californians who for years have urged the development of the Colorado River as a great new source of energy probably do not realize that failure to enforce strict conservation measures is costing them annually twice as much irreplaceable energy as Hoover Dam will be able to make good.
The second important piece of legislation authorized the extension of prospecting permits, in the Secretary's discretion and on conditions which he may impose.
This has made possible the insertion in most of the extensions of prospecting permits a requirement that no drilling or production shall be effected until permitted or required by the Secretary.
When the President's oil conservation policy was put into effect on March 12, 1929, there were approximately 17,500 outstanding prospecting permits.
On July 1, 1930, the number outstanding had been reduced to 5,094.
Yet, during that time permits had been granted and permits extended wherever equities demanded it, and in no case had any permit been canceled where there had been compliance with the requirements of the law.
Nevertheless, over 12,000 permits were found delinquent and canceled.
The conservation policy has resulted in blowing a great deal of speculative paper off the public domain.
But there has been no real injury to the oil industry thereby in any of the seven oil-producing public-land States.
Each year during the last three years more wells have been shut in because of lack of market than have been brought into production.
On July 1, 1930, there were shut in, in these seven States, 6,190 wells, including 599 on the public domain; whereas new wells brought into production during all of 1929 and the first six months of 1930 numbered only 1,898, including 282 on public land.
In other words, over three times as many wells were shut in on July 1 as had been brought into production during the preceding 18 months.
If wells were being shut in more rapidly than new wells were being produced it is not apparent that further prospecting would result in anything but an economic waste of any oil which might be produced.
And in every State except Idaho the number of shut-in wells on July 1, 1930, was greater than the number shut in on the day when the conservation policy became effective.
It would be unfair, however, to make the inference from these figures too sweeping in view of the very large factor played by the single State of California, which is responsible for 5,431 of the shut-in wells and 1,562 of the new ones.
But even if California is eliminated from the list the number of wells shut in exceeds the new wells brought into production during the period mentioned.
Oil-shale lands, though having no immediate value for oil, have received vigorous protection.
During the past year, commencing last spring, every mining engineer in the General Land Office, save three, was called off other work and under my personal orders assisted in identifying, examining, and physically posting more than 6,400 oil-shale claims with notice of default to the United States for failure of the claimant to perform assessment work.
This followed the Supreme Court decision of Wilbur v. Krushnic, which, although it reversed the department and sustained the claimants on the issue of assessment work, and so swept aside the bulk of our defensive procedure, left the possibility (though no certainty) that if the remaining claims were posted before resumption of work on the claim, a different result would follow.
This posting work will continue during the current year, and the tremendous task of adjudicating these claims will get under way.
A second test case in the courts may be expected.
No leases have been issued under this administration.
But oil-shale claims valid in 1920 can be taken to patent under the mining law, without any discretionary power in this department to decline to issue the patent.
Accordingly about 42,000 acres have been patented.
Recognizing that the industrial life of the Nation and our national defense rests largely upon petroleum in some form, the Federal Oil Conservation Board is continuing its efforts in the interest of practical conservation measures.
Government agencies and industrial leaders, cooperating with this board, are effectively dealing with production problems in the major oil-producing States.
In California, Oklahoma, and Texas efforts were made during the past year to confine crude production to actual needs, while a part of the refining branch of the industry, at the suggestion of this board, operated on a 6-day instead of a 7-day basis so that output might more equitably meet requirements.
On May 30, 1930, the board rendered a fourth comprehensive report to the President, surveying national petroleum conditions and advancing certain specific observations.
A volunteer committee on petroleum economics, consisting of State officials and industry leaders, made two special reports to this board dealing with supply and demand factors, possible allocation of crude requirements, and imports and exports of crude.
The basic efforts of the Federal Oil Conservation Board are to prevent waste in the producing and handling of our natural petroleum deposits.
As chairman of the board, the Secretary of the Interior is effecting practical conservation measures in connection with the development and maintenance of the public domain and Indian lands.
In looking forward to the fifty-second year of continuous public service of the Geological Survey, Director Smith states tersely: “The one-hundredth report of the Director of the United States Geological Survey may be expected to be simply a report of progress.
For, as he says, " the work of scientific investigation is a continuing work, and its field always expands, never contracts.
As agricultural, industrial, and mining development go into more and more intensive phases, the highly specialized service of the Geological Survey will adapt itself to increasing service.
Last year more than $4,000,000 was spent, and represented as sound an investment in the industrial development of this country as the Federal Government could make.
The fiscal year 1930 shows increases of 10 per cent in total expenditures, nearly 20 per cent in new maps, and nearly 30 per cent in book publications.
Personnel (80 per cent engineers and scientists) was larger than at any other time, even when the Bureau of Mines was a branch of the Geological Survey, and this year's appropriations exceeded by 50 per cent those of 1910, the last year before separation of the Bureau of Mines.
This 20-year period has seen a notable growth in both of these fine services, although postwar economies have not permitted their growth to keep pace with that of the industries which they serve.
Pure research of to-day is applied science of to-morrow," and these Government engineers, facing the Nation's increasing demands for raw materials and growing needs of basic engineering information, perform an essential service.
The Geological Survey has the special function of maintaining the flow of raw materials to industries.
The need for that function is greater to-day than it was 50 years ago, and 50 years in the future it will be more imperative than it is now.
The Geological Survey faces an indefinite period of increased growth.
A major contribution of the Geological Survey has been the conservation of the Nation's natural resources through its supervision of administration of the mineral leasing act.
The past year has seen a dramatic example in the harnessing of Kettleman Hills.
Accurate' stream measurement is another great function of the Geological Survey.
It is the basis for our control of water, and in control of water lies this country's future.
The topographic map of the United States is less than half completed.
There is urgent need that it be completed as rapidly as possible.
Such maps have a permanent utility.
The Geological Survey as a fact-finding agency faces a growing demand for facts regarding the country's natural resources, and it must grow with the deand.
The General Land Office has had an integral part in the building of the West.
The public-land States owe their very existence to the national public-land policy and must depend on the basic surveys for expansion and development.
Our country was settled by the land-hungry; boundaries and ownership of land must be determined with scientific accuracy and legal finality before development may commence.
The work of the General Land Office is not local but affects the citizens of every State in the Union.
Eastern investors have placed their capital in the mining and agricultural developments of the West.
Delays in adjudicating cases bring protests from every section of the country.
The responsibilities of the General Land Office have not diminished but have multiplied with the shrinkage of the remaining public domain.
Its very depletion has made it more valuable in the eyes of the public and increased the competition for the residue.
Adjudication of the resulting contests has meant an increasing burden of work.
Furthermore, contrary to the general impression, there has been a sharp increase in actual acreage of entries during the last two years, due largely to the stock raising homestead act of 1926.
1925 to less than $2,225,000 for 1930–31.
In other words, there have been more .
In 1910 a clerk could approve for patent 125 homestead cases each week.
To-day, under the changed conditions outlined above, the figure is 60.
Delay and public inconvenience is the inevitable result.
On a chart showing the status of the cases pending for field examination on the first day of each fiscal year from 1922 to 1931, with the new cases listed for field examination during the year, and the cases closed, it will be noted, significantly, that the curve representing “final action" closely parallels the line indicating the funds provided and, roughly, the line indicating the average number of field examiners.
The remaining unappropriated and unreserved public domain is, exclusive of Alaska, about 180,000,000 acres.
The less pretentious public lands are as essential to watershed strategy as the more valuable lands in private hands.
The sums expended for the protection of the public domain are entirely out of line with the importance of the work.
This protective work, the responsibility of the field service of the General Land Office, has furthermore been seriously crippled during the past year by withdrawal of all except three of the mining engineers for work on oil shale lands to facilitate the repossessing of defaulted claims, under the Secretary's instructions given last spring.
Similarly, field examination of the merits of asserted mining locations in the Hoover Dam area has imposed an added burden, requiring actual tests on the ground to indicate value or lack of value of the.
These extraordinary demands on the field service are typical of the burdens assumed by the other branches of the Land Office in connection with special legislation, preparation of reports needed in litigation, preparation of material for Congress, etc.
There have been no additions to the legal force of the Land Office for five years and many of their experienced law officers are nearing the retirement age.
If the Land Office is to discharge satisfactorily its great function, new blood and new money must be brought to its aid.
If the public domain is transferred to the States the work of the Land Office must be accelerated for several years in order to pass over to the States sufficiently completed records and surveys to enable them to carry on the old functions of the Land Office with new personnel.
Every line of activity in the Land Office has increased during the past year.
The original entries rose over 16 per cent, to 5,434,000 acres.
Unperfected entries rose to 22,550,000.
Fire-protection appropriations were inadequate.
Only $40,000 was available, whereas $47,000 was spent.
Even then it was impossible to maintain any lookouts during the hazardous months of May and June.
Coal fires have been burning for years in Colorado, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Utah, and Wyoming.
This loss to the Nation must be stopped and funds are needed to do it.
With all these handicaps the Land Office has succeeded admirably in discharging its difficult and highly technical work and its esprit d'corpsand-devotion to·publicservice is not surpassed anywhere in the Government.
Certain features of the Land Office work during the past year deserve emphasis.
The oil and gas conservation policy resulted in the cancellation of 8,358 prospecting permits; 4,474 permittees were called upon to show cause why their permits should not be canceled; 150 formerly canceled permits were reinstated; 199 new permits granted on a showing of equities; and 133 applications for prospecting permits were reinstated.
An unfortunate situation exişts as to the revested Oregon-California Railroad and Coos Bay Wagon Road land grants in Oregon.
Under the.law payments in lieu of taxes are made to the 18 counties involved by the United States on this revested land.
These payments have consistently exceeded the receipts from the sale of timber, and the prospect of their timber improving in price is dubious.
It is interesting to note the ratio of favorable action to unfavorable action recommended by the field service.
Sixteen thousand eight hundred and sixty cases were examined, in which 5,226 received adverse reports and 11,634 favorable.
The public-land surveys were extended in 22 States and Alaska.
On a linear basis, 15,911 miles of surveys cost $25.04 per mile.
These figures give some approximation of the magnitude of the task of the Land Office, and its necessity for adequate nourishment.
From time to time there has been agitation of the fundamental question of whether or not the Federal Government should continue in the reclamation of arid lands.
Objections have been founded chiefly on misconceptions of the supposed competition between these new lands and the older farming regions which are already burdened with overproduction.
Actually only about seven-tenths of 1 per cent of the Nation's cultivated area is included in reclamation projects.
The most important crops produced on reclamation projects are, in the main, of such a character and come into production at such a time that there is no substantial competition with eastern producing States.
Reclamation is an investment in national wealth from which the Nation derives large returns.
Last year the crops produced were worth over $160,000,000, or, roughly, the·entire·construction cost of all reclamation projects, exclusive of the cost of their operation and maintenance.
The cumulative value of crops grown on Federal reclamation projects exceeds $1,600,000,000.
Reclamation's 40,000 farms have a population of nearly 160,000 and, in addition, support 214 project cities and towns, with an additional population of over 470,000.
About $250,000,000, including operation and maintenance charges, has been expended by the Federal Government for reclamation projects which has increased the value of the land and other properties on farms and in towns within reclamation enterprises by at least a billion dollars, or four times all Government expenditure.
Reclamation is the backbone of the far West.
The fundamental question as to whether or not it shall continue should be answered in the affirmative so long as development is carried out along sound economic lines.
In early days the brilliant engineering achievements of the Reclamation Service surpassed the attention given economic considerations, which was the natural result of lower per-acre costs then obtainable.
There was a feeling that the settler would in some way dig in and succeed.
In some areas there has resulted delay, disappointment, and failure.
In others, the lower engineering costs of those days rendered economic considerations less important than at present.
To-day the easy things have all been done.
Irrigation costs ranged from $25 to $50 an acre in the beginning.
The new projects range from·$75 to $200.
Hydroelectric power is one source of revenue to assist in meeting these costs.
Contribution from benefited cities and areas protected from floods should be another source.
The handling of hydroelectric power, contribution from benefited areas, and the problem of control of the privately owned lands within the projects, together with the necessity of credit for the improvement of farms, present problems in local, State, and Federal cooperation which have resulted in a number of far-seeing recommendations from the Commissioner of Reclamation.
1. The present policy of turning over the operation of works to the water users as soo as they are able to take control should be continued.
2. In the future there must be an appraisal of the benefits which the investment of the Government and the labor of the settler bring to the community at large for the purpose of estimating proper contributions from the State and benefited cities in the financing of projects.
3. No new project should be undertaken unless there is a definite prospect of complete repayment of the Federal expenditures and unless the settlers are committed to full responsibility for their contracts; on some projects there is too great a tendency to adopt whittling tactics in an endeavor to convert the generous Federal noninterest-bearing investment into a gift.
4. There must be a revision of laws for reclaiming privately owned land.
Nearly all the future projects will be mosaics of land in public and private ownership.
After spending millions of dollars on reclaiming these holdings the Government has no control over the qualifications of the people who settle private land.
As reclamation construction costs on the newer projects are frequently in excess of $150 per acre, it is vital that the dry-land price of these lands be held down to a nonspeculative basis.
The assessed valuation on some projects is shown to be $11 per acre exclusive of the Federal water right; yet speculation in advance of the assumption of the Federal repayment contracts has skyrocketed sale prices of some dry lands to $150 per acre.
The result is an inevitable loss to the Government, for the net capital cost to the settler is, in such a case, about $140 in excess of the maximum cost upon which the bureau's finding of feaibiiity of the project was based.
5. As to hydroelectric development the policy expressed in recent appropriation acts should be adhered to, that is, application of power profits, first, to repay the cost of the power plant and appurtenant works; second, the cost of the reservoir and dam which regulates the delivery of water to the plant, and, after that, all net revenues should be credited to the revolving reclamation fund in the same manner that oil royalties' are now credited.
Existing contracts must, of course, be respected.
6. Construction expenditures each year should be restricted to the estimated increment to the reclamation fund for that year.
This increment comes from the sale of public lands, oil royalties on the public domain, from repayment of construction costs by the settlers, and from profits from hydroelectric power.
These revenues, together, average between eight and nine million dollars per year.
The profits from hydroelectric development which are created by a capital investment which comes out of the reclamation fund should go back into that fund as a foundation for new construction.
The theory of the reclamation fund is that it should be a self-supporting cooperative venture.
The revenues which go into it come largely from the States which benefit by it; but inevitably oil revenues from some States exceed the reclamation expenditures in those States, whereas in others the reverse is true.
Hydroelectric profits on future developments, like oil royalties, should go into the common pot, and new construction should not exceed the increment from these sources plus construction repayments.
7. Thought should be given to the possible desirability of legislation which will permit the reclamation fund to purchase all surplus land within a project area, to prevent speculation and to preserve to the Reclamation Bureau the choice of properly equipped settlers.
8. Attention should also be given to the problem of refinancing certain selected private projects with Government funds.
Many of them, paying commercial interest rates, are in poor condition, whereas Federal funds loaned at 4 per cent would recapitalize certain of them on a self-supporting basis.
Such a program must be carefully planned before the benefit of it is given to any particular project.
Major surveys now being carried out in the Reclamation Bureau include the Columbia River Basin project, an undertaking greater than the Boulder Canyon project on the Colorado River.
A silt area, larger than Delaware and Rhode Island, deposited by a prehistoric lake before the Columbia forced its way through the Cascades, is available for reclamation, depending on the feasibility of various suggested methods of getting water to it, all of them spectacular.
All construction to be carried on by the Bureau of Reclamation during the coming year (except Hoover Dam and some minor exceptions) will be in accord with the 10-year program initiated several years ago, unless new legislation intervenes, and all of its cost will be borne by the self-supporting reclamation fund, without burden to the Federal Treasury.
The greatest engineering job ahead of this department is the construction of Hoover Dam in the Colorado River.
The project was dedicated September 17.
Construction on the railroad began that day.
Work is now under way on the power line which will furnish power for construction of the dam.
Contracts for the dam itself will be avertised within a few months.
This structure will raise the water level 582 feet, generate 1,200,000 horsepower of electricity, cost, with its power plant, over $100,000,000 and will pay for itself by its own falling water.
The result will be flood protection to Arizona and California lands, reclamation of deserts, improvement of navigation, and the bringing of needed water for domestic supply to the coastal plain of Southern California.
Power-sale contracts: were successfully negotiated which will reimburse the United States for the cost of the dam and power plant if the rates set in these contracts continue to be maintained when the readjustment periods prescribed by the law are reached.
The entire financial burden is assumed by California purchasers of power, who, however, have agreed to relinquish 36 per cent of the prime power to the States of Nevada and Arizona when they desire it.
The 64 per cent absorbed by California will be divided 36 per cent to the metropolitan water district, which proposes to build an aqueduct from the Colorado to the Southern California coastal plain, 13 per cent to the city of Los Angeles, 6 per cent to other municipalities, and 9 per cent to the Southern California Edison Co. (Ltd.) and associated companies.
All secondary energy is allocated to the metropolitan water district, with a privilege to the city and company to use equally whatever secondary power is not in use by the district for the time being.
The city, in return for its 13 per cent, and the company, in return for its 9 per cent, have underwritten the shares of the States of Nevada and Arizona, pending use of the power by those States, for a total obligation of 64 per cent.
The States may demand their allocations, 18 per cent each, at any time for 50 years.
Revenues which will be derived from the rate of 1.63 mills per kilowatt-hour for firm energy and one-half mill per kilowatt-hour for secondary energy will net to the Colorado River Dam fund a surplus of $30,- 000,000 to $60,000,000 for other dams on the river, during the 50-year amortization period, and will net to the States of Arizona and Nevada between $300,000 and $600,000 per year per State, if secondary power is available in the amounts expected.
The aim in this power allocation, as agreed upon by all of the interests who assumed a firm obligation to buy the power, was to provide as wide a regional benefit as possible at a rate which will insure the sale of the energy.
Accordingly 3 States, 13 cities, the metropolitan water district, and 4 utility companies serving the great agricultural area outside the municipalities will receive this energy.
Next to the control of the Mississippi, this is the greatest attempt at solution of a whole region's water problem that the country has before it.
The necessity for flood control and the thirst for wattr have made it necessary and possible to erect this structure in the middle of a desert, transport its power 250 miles and sell it over an oil and gas field in order that the falling waters of the Colorado may earn the cost of their own capture.
The engineering is in the hands of an organization which has built over 100 of the world's great dams without a failure.
They will successfully divert the river through four great tunnels each 50 feet in diameter, together capable of carrying the Mississippi's flow at St. Louis; will build this dam, and will go on to other big jobs for this Nation, all in their stride.
It will be a monument to the engineering genius of many men, headed by Dr. Elwood Mead, Raymond F. Walter, John L. Savage, Walker R. Young, and their predecessors, Arthur P. Davis and Frank E. Weymouth.
The magnitude of the engineering work accomplished in reclaiming the arid lands of the West can only be conceived when a figurative comparison is used.
In creating its 39,970 irrigated farms, peopled with 157,088 inhabitants, this bureau has indirectly brought about the development of 214 cities and towns, the population of which when added to the project inhabitants equals more than the entire population of the District of Columbia.
To accomplish this there has been excavation of enough material to have created a ditch across the continent with a 50-foot width and a 10-foot depth.
Riprap placed by this bureau to date would create a pyramid nearly equal in size to the Cheops—the largest pyramid of Egypt.
Concrete placed to date would have paved the shortest direct route from New York to Los Angeles with a 6-inch paving on a 16-foot highway.
Telephone and power transmission lines used by this bureau on its various projects.
The Bureau of Reclamation has a remarkable backing of experience for the building of Hoover Dam.
Common sense administration of the affairs of the Indian was not possible under old conditions, since much that should be done by administration has been done by legislation.
There is a real opportunity at the present time for some constructive legislation by Congress which would open the way to a more efficient operation of the problem of the Indian.
Concrete suggestions have been laid before Congress by the Indian Service.
The old situation is unsound and will remain so until the Indian takes his place side by side with the rest of our citizenship, with the normal self-respect that goes with self-support.
The Indian boy and girl should be given an education up to the average of the white boy and girl with whom they must compete if they are to become self-supporting.
In the past for the most part the schools have not gone beyond the lower grammar grades.
Our whole program should be to give the Indian child increasing opportunities and independence as rapidly as he can be trained.
Until more administrative freedom, through new legislation and mobile funds, is provided, little in the way of advance can be anticipated.
In our 100 years' dealing with the Indian two problems have been confused.
One relates to his person; that is, his health, education, employment, and general welfare.
The other relates to his property—individual, tribal, allotments in trust, allotments in fee, indivisible tribal property and tribal property of other characters.
The Federal theory has been one of guardianship; unfortunately, guardianship of the person and guardianship of the property have been deemed inseparable.
Progress of the individual Indian toward self-support has accordingly been held back to the necessarily slow pace of a distant Government administration of his vast properties.
The Federal Government has drifted into a piecemeal solution of the Indian problem through adoption of the Nation's legislating machinery as the active agent.
Piecemeal legislation for individual reservations has created a patchwork of laws which renders Indian administration probably the most confusing job in the Federal Government.
The solution of the problem will take a generation; and it can be reached only if two landmarks are kept plainly in view: (1) The Government must be divorced more and more from supervision over the Indian's person, through the gradual break-up of the old reservation system; (2) modern business methods and tools, such as the corporation, joint stock association, or trust, must be applied to the handling of his property.
The problems of person and of property are related but distinct.
Some form of guardianship of the Indian's property will be necessary for a long time.
But as to his person and personal development the reservation system has proved thoroughly inadequate.
We have requested, and Congress has granted, funds to accelerate attention to health, education, welfare and employment, and the gradual separation of young Indians from the old reservations.
But, unfortunately, the other question, relating to his property, presents legal and economic complications that only carefully planned legislation can solve.
As regards the Indian's personal welfare, an encouraging start has been made this year.
A 30 per cent increase in appropriations, about $5,000,000, was secured, effective, however, only since July, 1930.
The new Indian Service administration had to use, its first fiscal year, the machinery and money available, and only now can embark on a program of its own planning.
Better food, better clothing, new specialists in vocational education, elementary education, and field supervision; experienced agriculture-extension-work men, reorganization of the Washington work so as to enable education, agriculture, and industrial work to be major administrative divisions under experienced heads; reduction of the retirement age in the field force from 70 to 65, resulting in opportunity for recruiting new blood; setting up a personnel officer to see that promotions and personnel questions are handled on the most effective basis; these changes have been the starting points.
Reorganization of the Indian Service is proceeding on sound lines with an eye to the result a generation from now, rather than immediate sensational overturns.
State public schools and the number is increasing from year to year.
The Government is paying tuition for them in 861 white communities, 23 more than last year.
Hundreds of other communities admit Indian children without tuition.
Of the other 34,000 who go to Indian schools, 4,000 live at home and go to Government day schools.
There are 12,000 in reservation boarding schools and nearly 12,000 in boarding schools away from their ·own reservations; 6,000 more attend mission and other private schools.
In addition to the 72,000 in schools there are about 9,000 others of school age, all of whom should be given an educational opportunity.
Extension of boarding schools is not being encouraged; day schools, where the children can live at home, and particularly schools where they will associate with the white children, are being furthered at every opportunity.
During the current year, however, the drought and economic conditions will impose a heavy demand upon boarding-school facilities.
An educational study among the Five Civilized Tribes has been completed and will facilitate plans for increased emphasis on dayschool attendance at white schools.
Solution of the problem of Indian education will receive added impetus during the coming year through the appointment of Dr. W. Carson Ryan, jr., of Swarthmore College, formerly of the Office of Education, as director of Indian education.
We have also been fortunate in borrowing for one year from Cornell University Dr. Erl A. Bates, author of the Bates plan, which has been applied with success in New York State.
It presents one of the soundest methods of approach to vocational education for the Indian which has been actually tried.
It emphasizes education in trades, agriculture, commercial arts, home making; and a key factor of it is cooperation by the States.
Indians are citizens of the States and voters.
It must be made increasingly clear that there is a State as well as Federal responsibility to these citizens.
The need has been pointed out for legislation on law and order on Indian reservations.
Jurisdictional questions between the Federal and State Governments are badly confused.
The Federal Code in 1910 gave Federal courts jurisdiction over eight major crimes committed on Indian reservations.
Other crimes are in an uncertain border class where many States decline jurisdiction and the Federal courts have none.
Four solutions have been considered: (1) Submission of reservations to State criminal laws to be applied in State courts; (2) a special Federal code to be applied in Federal courts; (3) State laws in Federal courts; (4) use of tribal courts on some reservations.
A valuable study is now being carried on by the Board of Indian Commissioners (an independent body not associated with the Indian Service, and whose report is summarized in Part III of this report) with a view to adaptation of these differing methods to suitable classes of reservations.
It is to be hoped that some uniformity in plan, though not in detail, can be secured despite the widely differing local problems.
In December, 1929, there were forwarded to Congress with my approval four letters which concretely stated the Indian property problems.
Those problems must be solved before we can put the Indian problem behind us.
1. The individual tribal estate must be administered by some method other than the distant Washington supervision of detail which is necessary under existing law.
Many tribes have such estates in oil, timber, power sites, grazing lands.
The tribal organization is a primitive prototype of our corporations.
The adoption of the white man's corporate system may, on careful study, prove to be a better method than the present long range guardianship.
One method proposed is the creation of tribal corporations under which the Indians' interests would be represented by shares of stock.
Regardless of his good or ill fortune in holding on to his interest, the physical tribal estate would remain intact, not subject to white encroachment.
Under this plan, it is argued, the Indian might be swindled out of his stock, as he is frequently swindled out of his land, but the tribal forest or oil would not be wasted and dissipated in consequence of it.
The corporate method should be tried gradually, developing with experience.
2. Indian claims against the United States continue to be pressed upon Congress and many of them find their way with the permission of Congress into the Court of Claims where they present a staggering burden on that court, on the Comptroller General of the United States, and on the Indian Service.
Present methods of adjudication may leave some of these claims undisposed of a hundred years from now.
Meanwhile, the hope of recovery has an unhealthy effect on the tribes concerned.
Some method of expediting disposition of these claims is desirable.
A special Indian court or commission offers one solution.
3. Some $35,000,000 of liens imposed upon allotted land held under the Government trust were created by statutes whose constitutionality has been questioned and this amount may eventually be a loss to the Federal Treasury.
The general allotment act which created the trust allotment system provides that "the United States will convey the same (allotted land) by patent to said Indian or his heirs * * in fee, discharged of said trust and free of all encumbrance whatsoever."
Nevertheless, subsequent legislation has specifically authorized the imposition of liens on Indian trust lands for reclamation costs and other expenditures amounting in all to over $35,000,000, despite the language of the original allotment act which has been carried over into each special allotment act and into the trust patents issued to the Indians.
It is time that thought was given to a reconsideration of the original allotment act, the special allotment acts, and to an eventual disposition of this constitutional question.
The higher courts have not passed upon it and the collection of the liens has proceeded in all cases where Indian allotted land burdened with a lien has been sold.
The Government has been reimbursed and the reimbursement taken out of the sales price of the land.
The Indian, not the purchasers of the allotment, thus pays the reimbursable lien.
4. A more urgent question is raised by the status of Indian allotted land on the death of the allottee.
As a practical matter sale is nearly always necessary; the Indian heir who may desire to remain on his allotment and cultivate it is rarely able to buy out his coheirs who may desire liquidation of the heirship estate by sale.
The consequences are generally unfortunate; the allotted Indians of the second generation usually become landless.
As an example, on the Blackfeet Reservation in Montana one-third of the allotted area of 410,000 acres is now in the class of heirship land, nearly all of which is theoretically on the market.
Some means must be provided whereby the allotted land could revert to the tribal estate on the death of the allottee, becoming thereupon subject to reallotment.
Harmonizing such a plan with existing legislation presents a major problem.
Such a plan would, however, be consistent with the.
Furthermore, the corporation might grant reimbursable loans to those heirs who desire to continue as cultivators, with which they could purchase the interest of heirs who preferred the money.
There is no greater single burden on the administration of Indian affairs than allotted lands and particularly heirship lands.
The allotment act in its entirety with the whole system of reimbursable liens needs legislative review and reconsideration.
5. Irrigation problems are complicated by the fact that under existing law this department must maintain side by side, and independently of each other, two reclamation services performing the same kind of work, under separate appropriations and with separate staffs.
One is the Bureau of Reclamation, which has 24 projects.
The other is the Indian irrigation service, which has about 180 small projects, 18 major ones.
In 1929 the expenditures by the two were almost equal due to the construction of the Coolidge Dam in Arizona, an Indian irrigation service project.
Construction of projects by the Indian Service has cost over $36,000,000; over $28,000,000 will be needed to complete these projects.
On them, 180,000 acres are white owned, 103,000 acres owned by Indians but leased out, and 120,000 acres owned and farmed by Indians.
On many of the Indian projects the great bulk of the land has passed into white ownership or white occupancy under lease.
For example, on the Yakima Indian project only 7 per cent of watered land is farmed by Indians.
Many of these projects were commenced on a small scale on the local initiative of the superintendent or the Indians and the legislation authorizing others specifically provided that the project should be created without cost to the Indians.
Nevertheless, the act of August 1, 1914, required that all funds theretofore or thereafter expended for such works should be reimbursed.
Such a reversal of former policy served to complicate the constitutional questions mentioned above.
Furthermore, the Indian reclamation projects undertaken since then have been programmed on a reimburseable basis whereby the Indians lands would eventually bear the cost of the project.
If the constitutional doubt suggested above should be resolved against the Government the whole Indian irrigation structure would represent a precarious Government investment.
If the ultimate loss to the Treasury should redound to the benefit of the Indians it might be viewed with more complacency.
Actually the great bulk of Indian Government lands in irrigation projects are headed gradually toward white ownership due to the death of the original allottees and sale of the unallotted lands.
Most trust restrictions are mandatorily removed under the law on the death of the original allottee.
The present policy of continuing an independent irrigation service for the Indians has been required by legislation, and has been based on the thought that Indian irrigation interests need special protection.
It may possibly prove sound on thorough consideration; but at least a complete legislative review of this problem is required.
Prima facie it presents an anomalous condition.
There is now under construction the development of the Flathead power site in Montana which will yield to an Indian tribe revenue ranging from $60,000 per year to $175,000 at the end of a sliding scale period, and will pay a total of $2,845,000 over a 20-year period as rental of the site.
This result is a credit to the business background and methods of the new Indian Office administration and terminates an undecisive situation of some years' standing.
Another question unsettled for several· years affecting an Indian tribe in Arizona was determined by the granting of rights of way to the proposed Paradise Verde irrigation district across Government lands, in return for an undertaking to supply the Indians with needed water.
The present administration is much interested in the subject of education.
The nature of the Federal Union, however, makes it constitutionally impossible for the Federal Government itself to engage in education except in such cases as training officers for its Army and for its Navy, educating the wards of the Government, such as the Indians and the natives of Alaska, and assisting through the District government in the educational program of the Capital City.
Under a broad interpretation of the constitutional clause relating to general welfare, Congress has from time to time granted subsidies to encourage the States and their local subdivisions in embarking upon new programs in education.
Outstanding examples of this are the appropriations which have been made for the advance of agricultural education and technical education.
On the college level these grants have led to the establishment and helped in the maintenance of the so-called colleges of agriculture and mechanic arts in the several States in the Unien.
Such appropriationshave been administered through the Commissioner of Education in the Department of the Interior and through the Department of Agriculture.
The important advisory committee on education, made up of leading educators of every field, has as its function a determination of the proper relation of the Federal Government to education in this country.
It is considering the proper educational activities of the Government itself, the question of subsidies by the Federal Government to colleges, and the field of subsidies for education in secondary and elementary schools.
To those who feel that the time has come to crystallize the Federal relationship to education the Memorandum of Progress by the National Advisory Committee on Education, covering the field of Federal relation to education, will be illuminating; the divergence of views as to the relationship of Federal and State Governments in this field shown by this able and representative committee, and the earnest effort being made to solve these questions, indicate that this problem is far from being ready for a final crystallization.
No more important study of governmental functions is going on at the present time.
Education may seem static, but it never is.
In the mass, both socially and intellectually, certain cleavage areas in the educational machinery are appearing.
One of them cuts through the middle of the traditional college course and is leading to the rapid spread of junior colleges, both private and public in many parts of the United States.
Impingement of masses on the colleges and the lack of clear distinction between advanced and elementary study is the chief cause for college failures.
The Office of Education can play a useful part in helping the readjustment of our educational system to these new lines of cleavage.
Reorganization of the Office of Education.
The coming year will find the Office of Education functioning on a changed basis.
As reported a year ago, the name given in the organic act has been reinstated, so that the Office of Education no longer functions under the name of “bureau" with its administrative connotations.
A higher classification has been secured for the commissioner, increasing the prestige and salary of his position, and the post of assistant commissioner has been created, with the classification formerly held by that of the commissioner.
The commissioner has been relieved as much as possible from administrative responsibilities.
Under existing law his functions are twofold: First, in connection with research activities in the United States and, second, administrative functions in control of the Alaskan school system.
In both fields the past year has seen important changes made on the commissioner's recommendation.
Changes in Alaskan work.
Formerly his Alaskan activities included four major divisions: (1) Administration of nearly 100 schools including 3 resident schools; (2) medical service among the natives, including supervision of 6 hospitals with their staffs of 30 nurses and a boat on the Yukon carrying a physician, a dentist, and 2 nurses; (3) operation of a supply steamer between Seattle and Alaskan ports, many of them not touched by commercial steamships; (4) supervision of the reindeer industry which, like every stock industry, has presented problems of upbreeding of stock, crossbreeding, scientific methods of feeding, fighting of pests, and marketing, including such purely commercial enterprises as stockyards, abbatoirs, cold-storage plants, export organization, etc.
It appeared to me to be futile to have a Washington office staff with highly trained experts in education struggling with these problems of agriculture, business, and medicine.
Two major changes were accordingly made in'the Alaskan work of the Office of Education.
The reindeer service was transferred to the Governor of Alaska as representative of the Secretary of the Interior.
The Seattle office, which formerly performed the dual functions of a business agent and a headquarters for educational supervision, was divided, and its educational functions transferred to Juneau, Alaska.
The business activities were continued in Seatile but transferred from the Commissioner of Education to the Secretary of the Interior, taking over the supply steamer Boxer formerly operated by the commissioner.
So far it has not been possible to work out a practicable method of transferring the medical responsibilities from the commissioner to other shoulders but that problem will be worked out.
This change of emphasis has made possible the concentration of the Alaskan work of the Washington office on more strictly educational lines including study of the capacity of the natives, adapting a course of study for them, and preparing teachers for the peculiar Alaskan conditions.
This reorganization of Alaskan work has also made it possible to revitalize the other and more important branch of the Office of Education work: Research and assistance in American educational problems through the Washington office.
A reorganization was effected January 1 which established six major divisions.
The first is the division of educational research under the direct supervision of the assistant commissioner.
This division is carrying on work along five lines: Collegiate and professional education; study of American school systems; special problems; statistics; and study of foreign school systems.
The other five major divisions established were: Editorial, library, service, administrative, and a division of major surveys, the last named being under the immediate direction of the commissioner.
These major surveys under the commissioner are proceeding along certain general lines of policy.
The policy is to place these surveys under the charge of groups of the finest available outside experts in the country, serving for this work on a part-time basis, assisted by a permanent Washington staff, and having available for consultation a representative group of laymen.
The survey of land-grant colleges has been completed and considerable progress has been made on that of secondary education.
A third major survey just undertaken will cover the field of teacher training in the United States and will occupy three years.
In addition to these official studies the Office of Education is taking part in three important volunteer services by outside groups.
The major volunteer efforts have been those of the committee on illiteracy, which has before it one of the most promising tasks in the field of education, and whose research and statistical work is under way, and the committee on education by radio.
The advisory committee on education, already discussed, is a completely independent organization, to which the Office of Education bears only a cooperative relationship.
The committee on education by radio haș developed some unique data which will help in establishing a foundation for this new and almost untried field.
Its report presents a clear analysis of the opportunities and problems, and should be referred to by those interested in the field.
The office has also cooperated in studies of engineering education with the Society for the Promotion of Engineering Education; the development of a series of State histories of education, sponsored by a committee of the American Association of College Professors of Education; a study of college financial and statistical reports in cooperation with a committee of representatives of several associations interested in such reports; and a study of methods of publication of bibliographies of doctor's and master's theses in education.
The past year saw the transfer by the States of North Carolina and Tennessee of title to the United States covering 159,000 acres of unique mountain country which will be the beginning of the Great Smoky Mountains National Park.
The Park Service has taken over the care of this area but it will not be organized as a national park until 427,000 acres have been acquired.
The whole cost·of $10,000,000 is being borne one-half by the two States and one-half by the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial.
This will be the first of the great national parks within easy motoring distance of the people of the East.
Eventually Shenandoah National Park in Virginia and Mammoth Cave in Kentucky and probably the Everglades in Florida will be added.
The only existing national park in the East is Acadia in Maine.
Congress has also established the George Washington Birthplace National Monument at Wakefield, Va., and authorized the creation of the Colonial National Monument which will include Jamestown Island, part of Williamsburg, and Yorktown battlefield.
In this small area are the landmarks of the beginning and the end of the colonial period.
Hawaii National Park was this year placed under exclusive Federal jurisdiction.
The Hoover Dam Reservoir area was reserved with a view to considering its possibilities as a national monument.
Eventually it will be a great inland lake, nearly 100 miles long, through wild country, including the lower end of the Grand Canyon, and may possibly provide a transportation route for tourists traveling by car from Zion and Bryce Canyon National Parks to the dam.
Particularly impressive in the development of the national parks, especially from the standpoint of public use, was the putting into service during the past season of spectacular new mountain roads, particularly the Zion-Mount Carmel road.
The full effectiveness of the landscape planning and the roadside clean-up work of the National Park Service in connection with roadway construction is beginning to be apparent.
Almost equally important was the elimination of dust from the highways.
This nuisance has now been largely eliminated from Sequoia, General Grant, Yosemite, Crater Lake, Mount Rainier, Glacier, Yellowstone, Zion, and Grand Canyon National Parks.
Oiling also was extended to the trails in several parks.
An interesting phase of road and other construction work in the Southwestern national parks and monuments was the employment of Indians as laborers and also on some specialized work.
Navajos, Havasupais, Hualpais, and Apaches were employed.
As roads have improved, the importance of further delineation and protection of wilderness areas and forest lands has been emphasized, and plans toward this end are now going forward.
The liaison established last year with the Bureau of Fisheries: of the Department of Commerce has already been productive of excellent results.
Plantings of trout fingerlings and eyed eggs, on a scientific basis, were greater this year than before, and plants made last year resulted in improved fishing this year.
Something more than recreation must be furnished national-park visitors if these areas are to function to their fullest degree.
Recreation is furnished in many places, while the greatest thing the parks.
The superlative display of natural phenomena warrants its use as teaching material.
With the beginning of the present fiscal year the educational work,.
In this the establishment of the new branch of education in the Washington office of the National Park,Service is an important step.
Already its officers are at work studying the working organizations in the various parks and planning a correlation of all endeavors in this field.
Especial care is. taken in the selection of the park naturalists, permanent field men in immediate charge of the educational activities in the individual parks.
There is still need to develop in the national park and monument system a program of actual scientific research work, which.
At the conference of operators of the park public utilities, called in Washington last December, the importance of preparing broadgage development plans was emphasized.
Plans were later submitted by the operators in most of the major parks and in some cases.
It is hoped that sooner or later all developments throughout the system will be as complete and have the wide variety of service as that now available at the north rim of the Grand Canyon.
Particularly important are the proposals to add to the Grand Teton Park a portion of the Jackson Hole country and the region between it and Yellowstone Park.
Another urgent project contemplates moving the eastern border of Mount Rainier Park to the summit of the Cascades.
The importance of acquiring private holdings in all the national parks is again emphasized.
Until this is done we can not be wholly effective in the protection and administration of these areas.
During the coming year the Bureau of Pensions will no longer be with us, having been transferred to the new Veterans' Administration, as recommended by the President and this department.
Its closing year in the Interior Department saw the increase of pensions to beneficiaries of the service in the war with Spain, the Philippine insurrection, China relief expedition, and the Civil War.
Nevertheless, adjudication of pension claims was expedited, largely through the energetic improvements introduced by Colonel Church, including, for instance, the adoption of modern flat filing methods after several decades of use of the old bundle system.
The retirement legislation administered by the Pension Bureau was liberalized by changing the age limits and increasing the annuities, benefiting some 18,000 annuitants.
This bureau, in leaving, takes with it over 70 per cent of the annual Interior Department appropriation.
While it was a part of this department its total expenditures exceeded $8,000,000,000.
It .
The obligation of the people to their veterans is. none the less real because of the size of the burden, but it will be helpful to have the Pension Bureau grouped for the first time with the other veteran relief organizations (the Veterans' Bureau and the Soldiers'Home) so that the total annual cost of the care of our veterans, amounting to the largest single item in the Government Budget, may be dealt with on a scientific and uniform basis.
The process of gradual transfer to the Territory, itself, of as much of the administrative responsibility now administered from Washington as may be practicable, will continue during this year.
Already the administrative division of the Office of Education has been transferred from Seattle to Juneau and the responsibility for the reindeer industry transferred to the Governor of Alaska from the Office of Education in Washington.
The President has appointed an interdepartmental commission composed of resident representatives of the Departments of the Interior, Commerce, and Agriculture.
This commission is to study and report on the transferring of departmental activities to Alaska and in advising on changes in operations which will benefit the Territory.
The various problems of Alaska are being studied with a view to assisting the economic development of its immense resources and readjustment of its administration so the Territory will be selfsupporting and prepared within itself to move forward in its development as the other Territories of the United States have in the past.
Alaska's abundant pulpwood—enough to supply a billion board feet each year on a sustained yield—still lies idle; the forests are dying of old age; 450,000 horsepower of cheap water power near tidewater is going to waste.
Accessibility is the greatest need; an international highway from Seattle to Fairbanks is being pressed vigorously and is a real necessity if Alaska's resources are to become available.
Increased industrial training of the Eskimos and Indians will be pressed so these natives will be gradually altered from wards of the Government to producers of export commodities.
One thousand two hundred and eighty reindeer have increased to over 600,000 in 40 years.
A great meat export and by-products industry awaits development by capital, and this will be actively promoted.
It is considered advisable to encourage the local production of finished products and quartz mining so as to assist in stabilizing the winter labor market.
There are to-day about 70 prepared aviation fields in actual service and about 30 regular commercial planes are using points on the Alaska Railroad as a supply base from which they handle commerce with'regions hundreds of miles in very direction.
Aviation will be encouraged.
Tourist travel to Mount McKinley Park and the interior will be especially recommended.
The Alaska Railroad will continue to show a deficit until capital flows into the country and develops mines and other resources leading to traffic.
No matter how good the management, traffic must precede profit.
The railroad will continue to be operated as the greatest development factor in the Territory.
The Territory of Hawaii has the many problems of any new growing country, but, under the law, few of them come to the door of this department.
During the past year we have attempted tohelp work out the Territory's land problems with the other Federal departments, and will continue to keep up a helpful liaison without interfering in this Territory's local affairs.
This excellent school for the deaf presents a problem of jurisdiction; it represents one of the few activities of the Federal Government in the national field of direct education.
Its justification has rested in the fact that the deaf are not in sufficient numbers in any one State to justify special State colleges for them.
It has offered a wide course of studies for a student body of 76 men and 55 women; 64 primary and grammar-grade students were also enrolled.
Negro welfare will receive added attention through three activities of this department during the coming year.
Howard University will have under construction a $200,000 classroom building and two new girls' dormitories, which will cost $539,000.
Freedmen's Hospital will receive a new building for its obstetrical department, costing $153,000.
In the Office of Education a specialist has been added to carry on research in negro education.
The United States was caring for 4,503 mental patients on June 30 at St. Elizabeths.
A new building costing $875,000 is being completed and a $1,050,000 building program is beginning.
This hospital costs about $4,000,000 a year.
There follows a summary of the report of each officer reporting to the Secretary of the Interior.
These reports are printed separately and may be obtained on application to the Department of the Interior.
The tables printed in these separate reports are not reprinted here.
St. Elizabeths Hospttal.
Freedmen's Hospital.
Howard University.
Columbia Institution for the Deaf.
Extra-Departmental .
American Antiquilies.
General Education Board.
Fuel Adminstration; Coai Commission.
Perry's Viclory Mtmorial Commission.
A total of 396 new suits were instituted in the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia against the Secretary of the Interior during the year, which, with the 30 suits pending on July 1, 1929, made a total of 426 suits which were handled by this office during the year.
Of the number, 392 were pending on June 30, 1930.
Under the act of Congress of February 13, 1929 (45 Stat. 1166), 346 suits were filed seeking to obtain a court review of the department's action relative to claims for losses under section 5 of the war minerals act of March 2, 1919 (40 Stat. 1272).
Of these, five were tried.
The court, after reviewing the disposition of said claims, held that the questions of law raised by the petitioners had been properly adjudicated by the Secretary of the Interior.
Appeals to the Court of Appeals have been filed and are pending in four of said decided cases.
These are in the nature of test cases, as they involve the principal issues, and it is believed their final decision will govern the disposition of the most of these war minerals cases.
Also, during the year, there were filed in the same court 38 suits, the object of each being to obtain a writ of mandamus to require the Secretary of the Interior to take action in effect recognizing a right in petitioner to be given an oil and gas prospecting permit under the act of February 25, 1920.
There will be no leases or disposal of Government oil lands, no matter what category they may lie in, of Government holdings or Government controls, except those which may be mandatory by Congress.
In other words there will be complete conservation of Government oil in this administration.
No oil and gas prospecting permits will be issued on and after March twelfth, nineteen twenty-nine.
Reject all applications for oil and gas permits now pending in your office and receive no more.
All orders for drawings hereby revoked.
This was followed within a few days by formal Orders 336, 337, and 338, containing detailed directions which have been complied with, and, for the time being, have discontinued the further issuing of such permits.
Whether such action was within the broad discretionary power of the Secretary of the Interior, or effected a temporary withdrawal of public lands subject to prospecting, are the questions involved in the suits.
Eight of these have been tried and decided adversely to the contentions of the Secretary.
They were appealed and are now pending in the Court of Appeals of the District of Columbia.
During the year 12 other cases were filed.
There are pending in the Court of Appeals of the District of Columbia 14 appeals in which the department is involved.
During the year that court disposed of 4 cases to which the Secretary was a party, deciding 2 in his favor, 1 against him, and the other was dismissed upon an amicable settlement of the issues out of court.
In its sixty-first annual report to the Secretary of the Interior, the Board of Indian Commissioners states that during the fiscal year much of the groundwork was laid by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs for putting into effect the Secretary's general progressive program for Indian administration.
In formulating plans and methods the commissioner and his advisers made it quite clear that they were not engaged in the business of upsetting the Indian Service structure, but instead were holding to the purpose of using every activity and function which could be made to fit in with the general policy program of acceleration and expansion.
Progress was to be made step by step .
Much of the new work must wait until the augmented funds of the 1931 acts .
The board points to the increased appropriations for the use of the Indian Service during the 1931 fiscal year as evidence of the cooperation of Congress with the Indian Office.
It shows that during the last decade Congress has increased its money grants for the Govern-'ment's Indian business nearly 100 per cent; that in the past 10 years the appropriations for education alone have grown from $4,475,000 to more than $10,000,000, and that the grants for the Indian medical :service have expanded from $350,000 to $3,188,000, an increase of more than 800 per cent.
These are significant comparisons.
They show that Congress and the Indian Bureau, in a large sense, are partners in the endeavor to hasten the general :advance of the Indians.
The cooperation is evident, even though the Indian Bureau too often, for settled ease of mind in the Indian Office, has been taken :severely to task and roundly scored on the floor of Congress.
But, by and large, for 20 years at least, and particularly during the past decade, a spirit of willing cooperation has characterized the relations of Congress with the Indian Bureau.
It is disclosed in the continuing growth of Indian Service appropriations and is emphasized by the $5,000,000 increase of the 1931 money grant over that of 1930.
The law-and-order situation on Indian reservations is reviewed in the board's report.
The Congress and the Indian Bureau should take action promptly and positively to bring about the maintenance of law and order in every jurisdiction of the Indian Service.
Further delay in adopting a firm policy and enacting proper legislation to make every Indian under Federal supervision amenable to the law of the land is no longer excusable.
The irresolution which has characterized the attitude of the responsible legislative and executive officials of the National Government toward this fundamental Indian problem should be supplanted by a determination to tackle this question with vigor and resolution.
The board reports that during the year it secured the opinions,- suggestions, and recommendations of 59 agency superintendents on the reservation law-and-order problem.
It says that all but two of them expressed the opinion that the Indians under their supervision have advanced sufficiently to be made subject to State laws; that 30 superintendents believe the State laws should be administered by State and county courts and officials; that 27 are in favor of the administration of such laws by Federal courts and officials, while 2 think their Indians are still so primitive that they should be kept under Federal law and administration.
As respects reservation courts of Indian offenses, 37 superintendents report such courts are in operation in their jurisdictions; 32 commend them and five express doubt as to their effectiveness.
Most of the superintendents present the suggestion that because Indian trust property does not pay taxes some arrangement should be made for the Federal Government to reimburse State and county courts and their law-enforcement organizations for expenses incurred in handling Indian cases.
We have heretofore recommended that the Indian Office should be reorganized within itself; that the chiefs of the divisions should be given much more executive authority so that they can handle all of the purely administrative affairs of their respective divisions without passing them up for final deter mination to the commissioner's desk.
That the agricultural and industrial possibilities of each reservation should be determined through a careful and comprehensive survey made by a commission or committee, or whatever it might be called, to decide what program should be followed with relation to the economic, medical, educational and other activities; that a definite program should be outlined covering a period of from 5 to 15 years or so; and that the adopted plans should be followed continuously notwithstanding changes in superintendents.
We recommend that in filling vacancies in the reservation superintendent class no person should be appointed until he has had enough experience in the field service working with as well as for Indians to demonstrate that he can hold down the job as the executive and administrative head of a reservation unit.
The outstanding cooperation between the United States Public Health Service and the Indian medical service prompts the suggestion that the Public Health Service, in accordance with the authority conferred on that organization by the Parker Act (Public, No. 106) of the Seventy-first Congress might be able to detail 10 or more of its officers to the Indian Service.
We, therefore, strongly suggest that the Commissioner of Indian Affairs take up this matter with the Surgeon General of the United States Public Health Service with the hope that a joint effort will result in giving the Indián medical service 10 or more of the highly trained and specially fitted physicians in the United States Public Health Service.
Chairman Leavitt, of the House Committee on Indian Affairs, has introduced a bill providing for a United States court of Indian claims.
It received the general approval of the Department of the Interior, but not of the Attorney General.
The Board of Indian Commissioners indorsed the Leavitt bill and recommended its passage.
We repeat our indorsement and recommendation.
We hope that the bill will be given a full hearing by the appropriate committees of Congress.
On many reservations the incomes derived from oil, grazing, timber sales, etc., are used to pay the expenses of agency administration.
Where the resources are large, such as those of the Osage and Klamath Tribes, it is quite proper, in our opinion, that the tribal funds so derived shall be employed to pay the administrative expenses incurred in managing the affairs of such Indians.
Where Indians are poor, however, such revenues might better, we believe, be used for the improvement or development of Indian property rather than for the payment of agency expenses.
Necessity for additional funds.
The Commissioner of the General Land Office reports that there has been a constant increase since 1926 in the area embraced in original selections, filings, and entries, and that the time has come when there must be an increase in the number of employees if the demands of the public are to be properly met in the disposition of the work before the office.
The area embraced in original entries -during the last fiscal year was 5,434,550 acres, as against 4,612,722 :acres for the year 1929.
During the same period the cancellations of entries theretofore made, both through relinquishments and through expiration of the statutory periods, were less than in the preceding year.
There were embraced in unperfected entries, selections, and locations at the close of the year 22,533,574 acres, as against 21,347,505 acres at the close of the previous year.
It is stated that while the work of the office may as a rule be gaged by the area embraced in existing entries, selections, and filings at the beginning and those received during the year, the cooperative work with other bureaus and departments depends upon their initiative, and that these emergency demands on the public service not only interrupt the routine handling of applications, entries, selections, and other filings but render it impossible to accurately estimate the work to be assigned to the various employees during a fixed period.
Illustrative of these unusual demands on both the field and the office forces, reference is made to the field examinations and subsequent adjudicative work to clear the records of speculative mining locations in the area to be flooded by the Hoover Dam; also the field examination and office adjudication of oil shale mineral locations in Colorado, Utah, and Wyoming, and the compilation of data involving immense areas for the Department of Justice and the General Accounting Office in connection with a large number of suits by Indian tribes now pending in the Court of Claims.
The three classes of work specifically mentioned partly performed during last year will last several years.
The fire hazard in the timbered sections of the Northwest and the Pacific Coast is very great.
Heretofore this department has scarcely met its just share of the expenses for fire protection when the amounts paid by private interests and the several States are taken into consideration.
The Government should protect its timbered property and not depend on the States to perform that service.
The best.
There are a number of fires in coal beds on the public domain, particularly in Colorado, Montana, North and South Dakota, Utah, and Wyoming, which have been smouldering for years.
Some of them may ultimately.
Some can be put out at small cost, while others are of such a nature that the fire ravage may be stopped only at great expense.
Every effort should be exerted toward the conservation of our coal deposits.
A special appropriation should be provided for the prevention and suppression of fires in coal deposits on the public lands, to be immediately available and to continue available until expended.
The total cash receipts from sales, leases, and other disposition of the public lands (including receipts from copies of records, sales of government property, etc.) were $6,492,720.20, and from sales of Indian lands $308,689.75, an aggregate of $6,801,409.95, all of which was deposited in the Treasury.
Subject to final settlement of all accounts by the General Accounting Office, the money will be distributed approximately as follows: Reclamation fund, $3,167,701.64; to the public-land States and to certain counties within such States, $2,405,078.63; to the Indian tribes, $274,386.72; and to the general fund of the Treasury, $954,342.96.
Total expenditures for the conduct of the business of the General Land Office and its field activities, including expenses of the district land offices ($281,235.79), amounted to $2,222,785.
Disbursements from deposits by individuals for surveying public lands ($39,615.23).
The total area of public and Indian lands embraced in original entries allowed during the year was 5,434,550 acres, not including 74,442 acres embraced in public auction sales, timber and stone entries, mineral entries, and other items embraced in final entries of classes not theretofore counted as original disposition of land.
Of the total area embraced in allowed original entries, 4,125,120 acres were allowed under the stock-raising homestead act of 1926.
The area patented was 1,892,475 acres, including 1,433,905 acres patented under the homestead laws.
The field examiners investigated and reported upon 16,860 cases, of which 5,226 reports were adverse to the claimants and 11,634 were favorable.
There was a satisfactory reduction in the number of routine cases.
Although 17,129 cases were awaiting field examination June 30, that amount of pending work was due principally to the initiation shortly prior thereto of a large number of emergency investigations in the Hoover Dam Reservoir area and in the oil shale areas of Colorado and Utah.
The total amount of cash collected as the result of the work of the field examiners was $81,306.63.
There were restored to the public domain 129,438 acres, representing fraudulent entries canceled on administrative proceedings based on field examiners' reports.
Civil suits brought through the Department of Justice and criminal prosecutions instituted upon recommendation of the field service resulted in the recovery of $1,111.87 additional, the restoration of 4,315 acres to the public domain, and 29 indictments.
Of the criminal cases tried 22 resulted in conviction.
The appropriation for protecting public lands, timber, etc., for 1930, provided an allotment of $40,000 for the prevention and suppression of forest and other fires on public lands.
A total of $47,151.41 was expended or obligated for that purpose, or $7,151.41 more than the allotment.
This excess was paid from funds provided by a deficiency appropriation.
At the beginning of this fiscal year, or from July 1 to September 30, 1929, there were employed 58 forest patrols and lookouts.
During the fire hazard season of 1930, or during the months of May and June, no patrols and lookouts were employed except 3 in Alaska, because of the exhaustion of the appropriation.
The public land survey was extended in 22 States and the Territory of Alaska.
Such of these surveys and resurveys as are measureable on a quantity basis aggregated 15,911 linear miles, at an average cost of $25.04 per mile.
In addition, miscellaneous surveys, including work for and in cooperation with other Federal agencies, were executed in every part of the public domain.
Over 1,600,000 acres of agricultural lands were surveyed and resurveyed in the various Western States, principally in Arizona, California, Colorado, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah, and Wyoming, this work being done upon the application of settlers and the States to accommodate entries under the dry-farming and stock-raising homestead acts and to provide for State selections.
Operations on a more extensive scale planned under this classification were necessarily curtailed by the detail of seven chiefs of party to the field service to run lines and assist in the identification of the lands under examination in the oil shale fields of Colorado and Utah.
In the nonagricultural and mineral classification there were accomplished the extension of exterior lines over large areas in southeastern Utah in order to provide a basis for the description of oil placer claims, the resurvey of over 20,000 acres of oil shale land in western Colorado, and the survey of approximately 23,000 acres and resurvey of 7,000 acres of railroad lands in California.
Cooperative surveys were executed for the Forest Service to the extent of 900,000 acres of forest lands, the National Park Service, the Bureau of Reclamation, the Geological Survey, and the Biological Survey.
Under the appropriation for surveying and allotting Indian reservations and other Indian funds over 250,000 acres were surveyed or resurveyed on Indian reservations.
Miscellaneous surveys were also executed for the War Department, Federal Power Commission, and International Boundary Commission.
In addition, over 1,142,000 acres were included in resurveys made necessary in the older localities by obliteration of monuments, incongruities, and erroneous and fraudulent surveys, relics of the early days when Government surveys were executed under contract.
There were accepted and placed on file plats representing 1,599,828 acres of original surveys and, in addition, 1,448,699 acres of land resurveyed, comprising an aggregate area of 3,048,527 acres.
The map of the United States, 1929 edition, has been published.
This edition differs from previous publications in that the different acquisitions of territory are shown in solid colors.
The State maps of Nevada and Louisiana are in the hands of the contractor, being printed.
Work is progressing upon the recompilation of the maps of the States of Idaho and Wyoming; also upon the revision of the map of Wisconsin.
A new map of the Hawaiian Islands was compiled and the map of the United States west of the Mississippi showing the activities of the Department of the Interior was revised, and both published during the fiscal year.
The map of Alaska to accompany the report of the governor of the Territory was revised and published.
Numerous detailed maps have been prepared within the States of Iowa, Kansas, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North and South Dakota, Wyoming, and Montana, based upon Executive orders and treaties beginning with the year 1805, for the use of the Department of Justice in connection with the suits brought by the Sioux and other Indians to recover the value of large areas of lands for which the Indians claim they have never been compensated.
This is a continuation of the work undertaken during the previous.
There were sold 19,293 photolithographic copies of township plats, for which $9,754 was received, and 8,982 copies were furnished otherdepartments for official use.
There were approved for patenting 6,727 homestead entries.
There were also considered 5,509 original entries and final proofs thereon,.
1,742 applications to make second homestead entry, 833 applications to amend, 773 applications for leave of absence and for extension of time in which to establish residence, and 21,078 appeals from the action of district land offices and of the General Land Office, making a total of 29,935 items, as against 28,123 the previous year.
Timber and stone cases acted upon numbered 284, of which 152 were approved for patenting, and 1,075 applications for public sale of isolated tracts were received for action.
Considerable other work which can not be reflected by figures was performed in connection with entries, applications, and other filings involving lands within those States having no district land office.
Final stock-raising homestead entries to the number of 2,530, involving 1,057,262 acres, were patented with a reservation of all minerals to the United States.
Since the passage of the stock raising act 57,609 patents thereunder have been issued, covering an aggregate of 21,289,660 acres.
The area withdrawn during the year for that purpose amounted to.
170,552 acres, and that released from such withdrawals, 9,872 acres.
The total area included in stock driveway withdrawals at the close of the year was 9,443,655 acres.
During the year 256 entries under the mining laws were patented and 917 mineral entries were received for action.
The work on oil.
This involves but a portion of the claims on which :action will be required in the near future.
The passage of legislation by Congress providing for the Boulder Canyon project made necessary the examination and adjudication .
On June 1, 135 field reports were pending and 526 were received .
There were 84 cases on hand involving leases and relief applications under sections 14, 18, 18a, 19, and 22 of the mineral leasing act of February 25, 1920.
During the year 740 cases were received for consideration and 74 leases were granted.
Under section 14 of the act, which authorizes leasing to permittees who show a discovery of oil and gas as the result of prospecting under a permit, 73 leases were issued covering 35,000 acres.
Under section 17, authorizing public sale of leases, one lease was issued.
Other sales were authorized during the year but leases have not yet been consummated.
Bids were called for on royalty oil produced in the Kettleman Hills .
One hundred and thirty-three applications for prospecting permits were reinstated, 150 permits which had been canceled were reinstated, and 199 new permits were granted.
Final action was taken on 206 applications for permit, 379 assignments of permits were acted upon, and 6,785 applications for extension of time were disposed of.
During the year 4,474 permittees were called upon to show cause why their permits should not be canceled and 8,358 prospecting permits were canceled; 4,390 cases were examined on which further action was necessary, leaving 874 pending at the close of the year.
Sixty-eight coal prospecting permits were issued, 29 coal leases, and 15 coal licenses; 41 potash permits, 3 potash leases, and 30 sodium permits.
Receipts from bonuses, royalties, and rentals aggregated $4,739,- 095.67.
Smaller amounts were received in Montana, Colorado, Utah, North Dakota, Alabama, Louisiana, Idaho, Washington, Nevada, and South Dakota, in the order mentioned.
Restorations and openings subject to preference right of ex-service men.
There were opened to entry through release from segregation or withdrawal 254,567 acres, and through survey or resurvey 547,626 acres.
During the past few years Congress has enacted laws providing for the leasing of vacant public land for various purposes.
Some are issued on a rental basis, while in others the lease is for the purpose of aiding some public development.
Leases for public airports were issued to Rawlins, Wyo.
Milford, Utah; the Chaiber of Commerce of Ajo, Ariz.
Nine fur-farming leases in Alaska were issued, assignments of two such leases were approved, and two leases were canceled; 177 applications for such leases were considered and 60 applications are awaiting reports of field examination.
Consideration was given to 145 applications for grazing leases in Alaska, 1 lease was issued, and 80 applications are now awaiting reports from the field.
A lease was issued to the Boy Scout Camp in Douglas County, Oreg.
Twelve applications for leases of public lands in connection with mineral, medicinal, or other springs were considered and two applications remain intact awaiting field division reports.
Fourteen withdrawals were made for recreational classification, aggregating 258,020 acres, based on 1 municipal, 4 county, and 9 State petitions.
One tract was purchased under the recreational law and 3,893 acres were classified as nonrecreational and released from withdrawal.
There are now 149 national forests embracing 183,975,930 acres, of which a little over 86 per cent is public land.
Enlargements, reductions, and other changes effected a gross addition of 404,029 acres and an exclusion of 993,052 acres.
One hundred and ninety-five railroad right-of-way applications were received, 48 approved, 8 canceled, 37 otherwise disposed of, and requirements made in 101 cases.
Six hundred and seventeen irrigation and miscellaneous right-ofway applications were received; 155 were approved, 24 canceled, and interlocutory action taken in 441 cases.
The number of approved rights of way of all kinds awaiting office action July 1, 1929, was 31, which together with 676 received, totaled 707.
Of these proof of construction was accepted on 89, there were canceled by relinquishment or default 79, requirements were made in 459 cases, and 50 were otherwise disposed of.
Eight suits were recommended and nine decrees of forfeiture obtained as the result of previous recommendations.
The controversy over a dam site in the San Gabriel Canyon between the city of Pasadena and the Los Angeles County flood-control district was settled and the city's application for a right of way for a reservoir site was approved.
Ninety-two power-project applications were transmitted to the General Land Office by the Federal Power Commission, involving public lands and lands within national forests in 12 States and the Territory of Alaska.
Original reclamation homestead entries on reclamation projects pending at the beginning of the year were 55 and there were received 588; there were examined and accepted 52; canceled, 47; claimants called upon for additional evidence in 288 cases; and otherwise disposed of, 200.
Over 300 assignments were considered ; also 28 desertland entries and 285 final reclamation homestead entries were approved for patenting.
There were promulgated 40 orders of restoration and 16 orders of withdrawal under the reclamation act.
Since the passage of the acts of August 11, 1916, and May 15, 1922, applications by 73 districts for approval have been received.
During the year 2 applications involving a total of 48,720 acres were rejected.
One application is awaiting further evidence on behalf of the district.
Since the enactment of the legistlation applications by 58 districts, embracing a gross area of 2,432,258 acres, have been approved, and applications by 16 districts, involving 323,408 acres, have been finally rejected.
Interlocutory action on .
Six reports were received as the result of investigations of private irrigation enterprises upon which claimants and applicants under the desert land laws were depending for their water supply, making a total of 1,407 such projects reported upon since the adoption of the regulations of September 30, 1910.
The disposals are summarized as follows: Desert land entries approved, 548; canceled, 385; requirements made, 1,361; otherwise disposed of, 792; pending at close of the year, 287.
Withdrawals, segregations, and patent applications under this act amounting to 254,912 acres were considered, and either interlocutory or final action taken upon 183,577 acres thereof.
Two hundred and thirty-two Pittman Act applications and permits were before the office for action; 85 were approved, 45 canceled, and requirements made in 82 cases.
During the year there were patented under the swamp land act 7,695 acres to the several States entitled thereto.
Selections involving 7,695 acres await consideration.
During the year 10,235,409 acres were placed in à state of reservation either by Executive order or departmental order, and 554,021 acres theretofore reserved were restored to entry or other disposition.
Among the outstanding executive withdrawals was that of approximately 400,000 acres in Owens Valley and Mono Lake Basin, Calif., in aid of proposed legislation authorizing the sale of the lands to the city of Los Angeles, or their permanent reservation to protect and augment the city's water-supply system.
Two thousand nine hundred and ninety-one records in contested cases were received and decisions rendered in 2,330.
Fee patents to the number of 1,501, and 460 trust patents were issued.
The compilation of data concerning ceded Indian reservations involved in suits before the Court of Claims was completed in the Great Sioux, Fort Berthold, Otoe Missouria, Rosebud, Standing Rock, Blackfoot, Pine Ridge, and Yankton-Sioux Indian Reservations.
While not completed, progress has been made in the preparation of similar data affecting nine other reservations.
Instructions were issued on April 17, 1930, defining the procedure to be followed for the issuance of patents for lands within the tracts confirmed and patented to the Indian pueblos in New Mexico.
The excepted tracts found by the decisions of the Pueblo Lands Board to be held by non-Indians under valid and indefeasible title as against the titles of certain pueblos have been surveyed and after publication of notices of the filing of the plats of such surveys patents will be issued.
All unperfected entries and purchases of land in the former Cheyenne River and Standing Rock Reservations were acted upon subsequent to December 1, 1929, either allowing a year's extension, accepting relinquishment, or canceling the entry.
Three thousand five hundred and twenty cases of ceded Indian lands were considered.
Title was conveyed to the various States covering 274,230 acres involved in indemnity selections, and 113,146 acres of quantity selections.
The work under quantity grant selections increased during the year, which increase will continue because of recent grants made by congress, such as 250,000 acres to New Mexico, 50,000 acres to Arizona, an exchange grant of 30,000 acres to Nevada, and others, under which grants the States have recently begun to make their selections.
Conveyances amounting to 38,143 acres were made to the States with reservation of certain mineral deposits to the United States, including coal, phosphate, nitrogen, potash, oil and gas or oil shale.
Under the act of January 25, 1927, granting mineral school sections to the several States, it is incumbent upon this office to determine whether the various school sections pass to the States under the original granting acts as nonmineral land or under the provisions of said act of 1927 as mineral land.
During the year it was held that title remained in the United States to 12,765 acres; that 100,795 acres had passed to the States under the original grants and 29,981 acres under the act of January 25, 1927, and that as to 37,521 acres title was in the States under either the original grant or the aet of January 25, 1927.
Selections were received to the extent of 273,043 acres, and during the same period there were certified or patented in satisfaction of such grants 73,311 acres and 66,552 acres of selections were rejected, the total acreage adjudicated being 463,906.
The act of June 25, 1929, declared a forfeiture of certain claimed rights of the Northern Pacific Railway Co. and directed the institution of proceedings looking to adjustment of the grant.
Responding to the request of the Attorney General a considerable number of special maps and diagrams, copies of various papers, and approximately 100 intricate tabulations covering some of the points involved were prepared and transmitted to the Department of Justice.
Other diagrams and tabulations are still in course of preparation.
The work of adjusting 10 railroad grants was completed.
Adjustment of the grant to the Union Pacific Railroad Co. (main line) is progressing rapidly.
Revested Oregon & California Railroad and Coos Bay Wagon Road grant lands.
Under the act of June 9, 1916, there were conducted 99 sales of timber on the Oregon & California Railroad grant lands, involving 9,565 acres containing 285,019,380 feet b.
Total sales to date, $5,652,590.09.
The Coos Bay timber sales embraced 135,560,000 feet of timber on 2,242 acres of land, for which timber the sum of $263,657.50 was received.
Total sales to date, $1,571,904.84.
Revested lands within the Lakeview and Roseburg land districts to the extent of 3,775 acres were restored to homestead entry, which with restorations theretofore reported make a total of 1,084,075 acres.
Under the act of July 13, 1926, there was paid to the counties involved, in lieu of taxes on the revested lands, the sum of $588,243.50.
There was also certified for payment to four of the counties in conformity with the opinion of the Attorney General, the total sum of $178,601.73 which had been disallowed in the claims of 1916 to 1928, inclusive.
There were considered 1,050 town-lot cases and 284 patents were issued.
Because of the long delay in the issuance of patent to purchasers of lots in Harding Townsite, Fla., caused by litigation, an extension of time until December 31, 1930, was granted to all purchasers of lots who are in arrears.
Seventy-one applications for the sale of trade and manufacturing sites were considered and six patents issued, the remainder being intact awaiting the survey of the traçts or submission of final proof by the claimants.
Three applications for sale and export of timber were filed and await reports from the field, and one sale was approved involving 40,000,000 feet of timber from approximately 500,000 acres.
Eleven applications for the purchase of 5-acre tracts were considered.
Fur-farming and stock-grazing leases in Alaska are covered under the general head of “Leases," while Alaska town lots are grouped with others in the States under“Town sites."
Memoranda or proposed reports were prepared on a total of 210 bills, of which 82 became laws, and instructions or regulations affecting 73 of such acts were promulgated.
Three hundred and thirty-eight forest lieu selections were considered and 53 patents issued.
The larger number of the remaining cases are for unsurveyed lands and await survey.
Exchanges of privately owned lands within the boundaries of national forests for Government lands or timber within other forests in the same State were considered to the number of 807, resulting in the issuance of 53 patents.
Completion of the exchange of 1,010 acres of public lands in the Yosemite National Park for 1,350 acres of privately owned lands adjoining the park for the purpose of protecting the deer awaits survey of part of the lands involved.
An exchange of 27.12 .
Nine hundred and fifty-eight cases involving soldiers'additional homestead rights, commonly called soldiers'additional scrip, were considered and 57 patents issued, and consideration was also given to 133 other applications to locate various classes of scrip.
While only 10 applications to locate military bounty land warrants were received, inquiries as to the issuance and location of such warrants were received to a considerable number from persons seeking membership in various patriotic organizations.
Fifty-seven color of title cases under the act of December 22, 1928, were considered, 8 under the act of April 15, 1920, as to Utah, and 10 under the act of February 16, 1929, as to Michigan.
One hundred and eleven small holding claims in New Mexico were considered and patents issued in seven.
Under the several acts providing for the disposal of lands originally erroneously designated as covered by water but subsequently found to be dry, 297 cases were considered and 18 patents issued.
Some of the remaining cases await field reports and others the final disposition of conflicting claims.
There were stated 228 accounts allowing repayment of $16,568.60, and 122 claims were denied.
Timber, coal, gravel, and turpentine trespasses to the number of 1,614 were considered; also 51 cases of the unlawful inclosure of public land.
Exclusive of Alaska and the public lands included in Indian reservations, national forests and national parks, and withdrawn for water power, stock driveways, and other public purposes, the area of the public domain subject to disposal under the applicable public-land laws on June 30, 1930, was 178,979,446 acres, of which 128,301,266 acres are surveyed and 50,678,180 acres are unsurveyed.
The report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs covers the first year of incumbency of himself and his associates in office.
The commissioner invites attention to certain fundamental facts concerning the Indian, his history, inherited characteristics, his racial point of view, and relationship to our own existing civilization, to be considered in determining our own proper course of action in dealing with his affairs.
His conception of property and ownership is not the same as ours; he has little understanding of individual property rights in land, and no background affording him such understanding.
His view of ownership has been limited to personal possessions but only such as met his traditional needs.
The trait of acquisitiveness is undeveloped, and so far as this would constitute an incentive to personal effort, the motive for industry fails.
His interests have been in doing the things which his forefathers have always done and it is difficult to substitute for him a real interest instead in the activities of the white citizen.
While inevitably the Indian must develop such interests as may enable him to become a component part of our organized civilization and be self-sustaining, we should not destroy what is best of his own traditions, arts, crafts, and associations, but encourage their development and survival.
In assisting in his development we must build on his own inherited good traits.
It is suggested that these conditions indicate the need for the proper kind of social service for the Indian, a work which has been overlooked in the past in the struggle to protect the property rights of a minority race.
Total appropriations for the year were $18,794,829, which was $4,597,763 in excess of the total for the prior year.
This amount included $2,121,614 made available by the first and second deficiency acts, fiscal year 1930, these moneys being provided to meet additional urgent needs for both 1930 and 1931.
These needs included an adequate food allowance for pupils, additional necessary clothing, additional personnel required for relief of the students in the schools, equipment, furniture, and dairy stock.
Concerning Indian education, there has been developed an organization for professional direction of educational activities embracing essential elements of a sufficient personnel therefor.
Appointees were secured who by special training, preparation, and experience in educational administration were qualified to advise and assist in the formulation and conduct of an educational program for Indians.
These appointments include an assistant director of education, a supervisor of secondary education, a supervisor of trade and industrial training, and two additional supervisors of home economics.
In the particularly important field of agricultural extension the aid of the Department of Agriculture was sought and transfer of a qualified specialist obtained for direction of allied branches of this work.
Since the close of the year the office has secured as director of education an educator of standing and experience in this field of work.
The extent to which good results are dependent on the more careful selection and placing of employees in the field service work with the Indians and in the schools was appreciated, and to accomplish this a field representative having special qualifications for work of this character was appointed to have advisory direction and supervision of the personnel.
Steps commenced in 1928 and 1929 to raise the standards of teaching and other educational service have advanced and considerable improvement in the teaching personnel has resulted.
Stress is laid on the education of the young children in the schools at their homes where these are available.
Attendance of these children in the local public schools has been steadily increasing, and while final totals have not yet been compiled for the year the number is believed to be in excess of the total for the prior year.
This policy of attendance in school at home involves elimination of the young children from the Federal boarding schools, the rapidity with which this can be accomplished being dependent on a number of factors such as home conditions, remoteness from public school facilities; ascertained needs for institutional care, health needs, and social deficiencies.
The amount of new construction in the Indian Service, both of hospital and school buildings, has necessitated a reorganization and enlargement of the construction division.
A well qualified architect has been obtained from the Supervising Architect's Office of the Treasury Department to direct the work, and more complete plans, specifications, and estimates are now possible than heretofore.
The staff has been increased by five persons, well trained in this class of work.
In the field of Indian industrial activities the policy has been continued of affording practical assistance and encouragement in the agricultural pursuits of those who must or who desire to depend upon their lands for occupation and self-support.
The director of extension work has been assisted by eight agricultural extension agents, each of whom has a specified territory which includes several reservations.
A supervisor of livestock has been appointed to give attention and supervision to matters which relate to the stock industries.
Seven home demonstration agents have been working with the Indian women in order to assist them in all that pertains to the making and conduct of a modern, well-kept home.
Continued progress has been made in the work of affording medical care and relief for the Indians.
The health organization finds a gradually increasing response on the part of the Indians to the facilities which the service is offering to them, and this is due in part to educational effort which has been directed to this end.
While the medical service, its hospitals and facilities, have been and are being improved and extended, its work has been furthered by the interest shown and cooperation extended by other Federal, State, county, and local organizations in regard to the special Indian health problems.
The United States Public Health Service has continued to detail personnel and to make available the service of medical officers, field directors, sanitary engineers, and of the National Institute of Health.
A considerable increase in total hospital capacity was secured during the year, distributed among many jurisdictions where the need has been evident.
Emphasis is placed, however, on the need of physical improvements, increased diagnostic and treatment facilities as well as an augmented personnel, so that the standards of the Indian institutions may more nearly approach those of' similar institutions providing like service for other citizens.
The regular nonreimbursable appropriation for health purposes in the sum of $2,658,600 represented an increase of $1,218,600 over that of the prior year, and in addition a deficiency appropriation of $400,000 for urgent health demands was provided by the Congress.
Realizing the primary importance of suitable and permanent occupation or employment for Indians after leaving school initial steps were taken to develop a guidance and placement organization which may ultimately function effectively in the furtherance ·of this basic need.
Coordination between the school and the placement organization is essential and will contribute to the proper direction of vocational effort.
Several placement officers are now on the roll and have accomplished much good work within the respective territory assigned to each.
Sales of individual Indian lands, both for cash and deferred payments, aggregated 35,773 acres, comprising original allotments, for a total consideration of $505,799, and of inherited lands 72,742 acres for a consideration of $1,101,996.
These represent a decrease in sales and revenue derived therefrom as compared with the prior year.
However, sales are not encouraged except where old, indigent, or afflicted Indians need money for support and assistance or where sales of part of an allotment will result in improvement of home conditions.
In cases where heirs are not too numerous (four or less) and inherited tracts are susceptible of a fair and equitable division the policy is to favor partition, in order that younger and more able-bodied Indians, many of whom have not received allotments, may retain land for their own benefit and utilization.
The lands of the several Indian reservations in the western part of the United States are to an extent desertlike in character, and their utilization can be effected only by artificial irrigation.
This has necessitated the planning and construction of irrigation projects and dams for impounding of water and the maintenance and operation of these projects when completed.
An example of this work is found in the San Carlos project, Arizona, and construction of the Coolidge Dam, mentioned in the report of the Secretary for the prior year.
Water for other uses is also developed by the service.
Within the Navajo reservations in Arizona and New Mexico 100 new spring wells and reservoirs were developed during the year to provide water for improving the grazing ranges of the Navajos.
With approval of the Secretary, it has been directed that grazing activities on Indian lands are to be hereafter administered by the forestry branch of the Indian Service, and immediate steps were taken to so reorganize the work.
Under supervision of representatives of the Forest Service.other units will cooperate to the end that there may be conservation of future grazing values, range depletion relieved, native grasses gradually restored, and erosion of soil of Indian lands checked.
The Interior appropriation act of May 14, 1930, contains the first specific authority for payment of rewards for information leading to arrest and conviction of persons setting forest fires in contravention of existing law.
The report of the Commissioner of Pensions for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1930, shows that the disbursements for pensions for the year were $219,203,540.82, as against $229,889,986.48 the previous year, a reduction of $10,686,455.66.
The unexpended balance of the moneys appropriated and available for payment of pensions was $1,374,341.50.
Of the amount disbursed, $46,068,116.07 were paid to Civil War veterans; $79,698,163.03 to Civil War widows; $71,179,383.82 to Spanish War veterans; and $12,381,648.69 to Spanish War widows.
There was a decrease of $17,827,810.58 in the amount paid on account of Civil War service, and an increase of $6,715,328.23 in the amount paid on account of Spanish War service.
The cost of maintenance and expense of the pension system for the year was $1,272,203 as against $1,276,512 for the previous year.
The total number of pensioners, June 30, 1930, was 464,257 as against 477,915 on June 30, 1929.
Of the pensioners, 48,991 were Civil War veterans; 167,574 Civil War widows; 186,365 Spanish War veterans; 30,919 Spanish War widows.
On account of service in Indian wars 5,454 soldiers and 4,191 widows were in receipt of pension.
By reason of service-connected disabilities 15,661 soldiers were drawing pension, and 3,830 widows·whose husbands had died of injuries or diseases of service origin.
There were also on the roll 630 widows of Mexican War soldiers and 10 widows whose husbands served in the War of 1812.
By classes the pensioners on the roll June 30, 1930, were distributed as follows: Soldiers, 256,515; Army nurses, 473; widows, 199,704; minor children, 2,262; helpless children, 877; and dependent parents 4,426.
The number of pensioners who died during the year was 35,792, of whom 11,082 were Civil War veterans and 18,353 Civil War widows.
The total gains to the roll for the year numbered 23,541, and the losses 37,199, making a net loss of 13,658 for the year.
On June 30, 1929, there were 41,282 claims in the pending files.
During the year 190,742 claims were received and 121,791 claims were disposed of, leaving 110,233 claims pending on June 30, 1930.
The marked increase in the number of claims received and pending was largely due to new and liberal pension legislation enacted by the Congress toward the close of the fiscal year.
Of the claims disposed of during the year 21,210 were based on Civil War service; 70,317 on Spanish War service; 2,818 on Indian wars service; and 11,029 on disability or death due to military or naval service.
Final action was taken upon 3,220 cases in which pension was granted by special acts of Congress; 7,541 claims for accrued pension due at date of death of pensioner; 5,148 for expenses of last sickness and burial of deceased pensioners; and 447, of deserted wives claiming one-half the pension being paid to their husbands.
Toward the close of the fiscal year the Congress passed two pieces of general pension legislation.
On June 2, 1930, it granted pensions and increase of pensions to certain soldiers, sailors, and nurses of the War with Spain, the Philippine insurrection, and the China relief expedition.
The rates of pension to soldiers, sailors, and marines of the Civil War, and widows and former widows of such soldiers, sailors, and marines were increased by an act approved by the President June 9, 1930.
The Pension Bureau is charged with the administration of the laws providing for retirement with annuity of civil-service employees.
On June 30, 1930, there were 17,768 annuitants on the roll of whom 13,774 were retired for age and 3,994 for disability.
During the year 1,973 of the claims for annuity based on age were disposed of, and 1,050 of the claims based on disability.
Civil-service employees to the number of 25,700, who had severed their connection with the Government service, made application for refund of deductions from their salaries for the retirement fund, and the claims of 25,110 were settled.
There were 1,434 annuitants dropped during the year by reason of death.
The cost of administration of the retirement law was $80,924.77, of which $69,401.74 were expended for personal services.
On June 30, 1929, the balance in the civil-service retirement and disability fund was $119,525,394.86.
During the past year $29,027,- 662.33 were added to the fund, representing 31½2 per cent of the annual salaries of civil-service employees.
The fund was further increased by the addition of $5,899,257.42, interest and profits from investments, and $20,500,000 appropriated from the general fund of the Treasury.
There was disbursed from the fund in payment of annuities the sum of $13,107,731.55 and on account of refunds $5,049,- 107.36.
The, balance in the fund on June 30, 1930, was $156,795,475.70.
On May 29, 1930, an act amending the act of July 3, 1926, providing for the retirement of civil-service employees, was approved by the President.
This act, which became effective July 1, 1930, reduces the age for superannuation retirement of certain groups of employees and provides for optional retirement two years earlier in all cases where the employee has rendered at least 30 years'service.
A new method for computation of annuities is provided, which results in an increase of most of the annuities heretofore granted.
Altogether the new retirement law is much more liberal in its provisions for aged and disabled civil-service employees than the act of July 3, 1926, which it practically supersedes.
The Office of Education has no administrative functions except those connected with the expenditure of the funds appropriated by the Federal Government for the maintenance of colleges of agriculture and the mechanic arts in the several States and Territories, and those connected with the education, support, and medical relief of natives of Alaska.
It is primarily an establishment for educational research and promotion.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 1930, the survey of landgrant colleges, begun in July, 1927, was completed.
This study, one of the most comprehensive ever undertaken in the field of higher education, was authorized by Congress 3 years ago, and an appropriation of $117,000 was made to defray its cost.
The report of the foregoing investigation is now in process of publication.
The survey of State-supported higher institutions in Oregon is making satisfactory progress, and the findings will be presented to the State Board of Higher Education of Oregon during the Fall of 1930.
The survey of secondary education in the United States is progressing satisfactorily.
It is planned to appoint this fall a committee of between 50 and 60 laymen representing all aspects of lay opinion and all States in the Union.
Condensed reports of the progress of the survey will be sent to these persons and their criticisms received and considered.
The foregoing investigation as organized furnishes a model which, if satisfactory, will be followed in all other special studies of the Office of Education.
By October 1, 1930, the survey will be operating with a staff as follows: 10 part-time professional experts stationed in the field, under whom will work some paid experts and some nonpaid student investigators; 8 full-time professional workers stationed in Washington; and 8 full-time clerical assistants stationed in Washington.
A nation-wide study of the professional education of teachers, authorized by Congress, is one of the forthcoming projects of the office.
A fund of $200,000 for the conduct of the survey was provided by Congress, and of this amount $50,000 is available for expenditure during the present year.
Dr. E. S. Evenden of Teachers College, Columbia University, was appointed as part-time associate director and expert in teacher education of the survey.
Acting under appointment of the Secretary of the Interior, the Commissioner of Education served as chairman of the advisory committee on education by radio.
On January 1, 1930, the investigations of this committee were formally closed, and the Commissioner of Education wrote its summary report.
The annual conference of State superintendents and commissioners was held December 9 and 10, 1929.
Conferences on rural education were continued as heretofore.
The commissioner also called, on December 6 and 7, 1929, a conference at Washington in the interest of better education in home making.
As a result of the foregoing a regional conference was held at the University of Cincinnati on March 21, which was productive of splendid results.
A specialist in school libraries was added to the library division to devote full time to investigations of school library conditions, and another cataloguer was employed on account of the heavy increase in permanent material received in the library.
The bibliography of research studies in education was issued as Bulletin, 1929, No. 36, and the bibliography for 1928–29, which will be issued as Bulletin, 1930, No. 23, was sent to the printer.
The whole number of documents printed during the fiscal year was 72, of which 36 were bulletins, 12 pamphlets, 1 leaflet, 1 report of the Commissioner of Education, 10 numbers of School Life, and 12 miscellaneous publications.
Of the bulletins issued, 7 were chapters for the Biennial Survey of Education.
The allotment of funds for printing was $2,000 more than in 1929.
The amount allotted was insufficient in that there were statistical and research manuscripts on hand, ready for the printer, for which the cost of printing was conservatively estimated at $6,000 over and above the amount available for printing.
Through the Alaska division, the Office of Education maintains schools, furnishes medical relief, and provides assistance generally for the aboriginal races in the widely varying regions of Alaska.
During the year the responsibility of the office in connection with the reindeer industry in that Territory was transferred to the governor on the recommendation of the Commissioner of Education, so that the Office of Education retains administrative authority only with respect to the education, support, and medical relief of the natives.