To the Senate and House of Representatives: It is my duty under the Constitution to transmit to the Congress information on the state of the Union and to recommend for its consideration necessary and expedient measures.
The chief influence affecting the state of the Union during the past year has been the continued world-wide economic disturbance.
Our national concern has been to meet the emergencies it has created for us and to lay the foundations for recovery.
If we lift our vision beyond these immediate emergencies we find fundamental national gains even amid depression.
In meeting the problems of this difficult period, we have witnessed a remarkable development of the sense of cooperation in the community.
For the first time in the history of our major economic depressions there has been a notable absence of public disorders and industrial conflict.
Above all there is an enlargement of social and spiritual responsibility among the people.
The strains and stresses upon business have resulted in closer application, in saner policies, and in better methods.
Public improvements have been carried out on a larger scale than even in normal times.
The country is richer in physical property, in newly discovered resources, and in productive capacity than ever before.
There has been constant gain in knowledge and education; there has been continuous advance in science and invention; there has been distinct gain in public health.
Business depressions have been recurrent in the life of our country and are but transitory.
The Nation has emerged from each of them with increased strength and virility because of the enlightenment they have brought, the readjustments and the larger understanding of the realities and obligations of life and work which come from them.
NATIONAL DEFENSE Both our Army and Navy have been maintained in a high state of efficiency.
The ability and devotion of both officers and men sustain the highest traditions of the service.
Reductions and postponements in expenditure of these departments to meet the present emergency are being made without reducing existing personnel or impairing the morale of either establishment.
The agreement between the leading naval powers for limitation of naval armaments and establishment of their relative strength and thus elimination of competitive building also implies for ourselves the gradual expansion of the deficient categories in our Navy to the parities provided in those treaties.
However, none of the other nations, parties to these agreements, is to-day maintaining the full rate of construction which the treaty size of fleets would imply.
Although these agreements secured the maximum reduction of fleets which it was at that time possible to attain, I am hopeful that the naval powers, party to these agreements, will realize that establishment of relative strength in itself offers opportunity for further reduction without injury to any of them.
This would be the more possible if pending negotiations are successful between France and Italy.
If the world is to regain its standards of life, it must further decrease both naval and other arms.
The subject will come before the General Disarmament Conference which meets in Geneva on February 2 FOREIGN AFFAIRS We are at peace with the world.
We have cooperated with other nations to preserve peace.
The rights of our citizens abroad have been protected.
The economic depression has continued and deepened in every part of the world during the past year.
In many countries political instability, excessive armaments, debts, governmental expenditures, and taxes have resulted in revolutions, in unbalanced budgets and monetary collapse and financial panics, in dumping of goods upon world markets, and in diminished consumption of commodities.
Within two years there have been revolutions or acute social disorders in 19 countries, embracing more than half the population of the world.
Ten countries have been unable to meet their external obligations.
In 14 countries, embracing a quarter of the world's population, former monetary standards have been temporarily abandoned.
In a number of countries there have been acute financial panics or compulsory restraints upon banking.
These disturbances have many roots in the dislocations from the World War.
Every one of them has reacted upon us.
They have sharply affected the markets and prices of our agricultural and industrial products.
They have increased unemployment and greatly embarrassed our financial and credit system.
As our difficulties during the past year have plainly originated in large degree from these sources, any effort to bring about our own recuperation has dictated the necessity of cooperation by us with other nations in reasonable effort to restore world confidence and economic stability.
Cooperation of our Federal reserve system and our banks with the central banks in foreign countries has contributed to localize and ameliorate a number of serious financial crises or moderate the pressures upon us and thus avert disasters which would have affected us.
The economic crisis in Germany and Central Europe last June rose to the dimensions of a general panic from which it was apparent that without assistance these nations must collapse.
Apprehensions of such collapse had demoralized our agricultural and security markets and so threatened other nations as to impose further dangers upon us.
But of highest importance was the necessity of cooperation on our part to relieve the people of Germany from imminent disasters and to maintain their important relations to progress and stability in the world.
Upon the initiative of this Government a year's postponement of reparations and other intergovernmental debts was brought about.
Upon our further initiative an agreement was made by Germany's private creditors providing for an extension of such credits until the German people can develop more permanent and definite forms of relief.
We have continued our policy of withdrawing our marines from Haiti and Nicaragua.
The difficulties between China and Japan have given us great concern, not alone for the maintenance of the spirit of the Kellogg-Briand Pact, but for the maintenance of the treaties to which we are a party assuring the territorial integrity of China.
It is our purpose to assist in finding solutions sustaining the full spirit of those treaties.
I shall deal at greater length with our foreign relations in a later message.
THE DOMESTIC SITUATION Many undertakings have been organized and forwarded during the past year to meet the new and changing emergencies which have constantly confronted us.
Broadly the community has cooperated to meet the needs of honest distress, and to take such emergency measures as would sustain confidence in our financial system and would cushion the violence of liquidation in industry and commerce, thus giving time for orderly readjustment of costs, inventories, and credits without panic and widespread bankruptcy.
These measures have served those purposes and will promote recovery.
In these measures we have striven to mobilize and stimulate private initiative and local and community responsibility.
There has been the least possible Government entry into the economic field, and that only in temporary and emergency form.
Our citizens and our local governments have given a magnificent display of unity and action, initiative and patriotism in solving a multitude of difficulties and in cooperating with the Federal Government.
For a proper understanding of my recommendations to the Congress it is desirable very briefly to review such activities during the past year.
The emergencies of unemployment have been met by action in many directions.
The appropriations for the continued speeding up of the great Federal construction program have provided direct and indirect aid to employment upon a large scale.
By organized unity of action, the States and municipalities have also maintained large programs of public improvement.
Many industries have been prevailed upon to anticipate and intensify construction.
Industrial concerns and other employers have been organized to spread available work amongst all their employees, instead of discharging a portion of them.
A large majority have maintained wages at as high levels as the safe conduct of their business would permit.
This course has saved us from industrial conflict and disorder which have characterized all previous depressions.
Immigration has been curtailed by administrative action.
Upon the basis of normal immigration the decrease amounts to about 300,000 individuals who otherwise would have been added to our unemployment.
The expansion of Federal employment agencies under appropriations by the Congress has proved most effective.
Through the President's organization for unemployment relief, public and private agencies were successfully mobilized last winter to provide employment and other measures against distress.
Similar organization gives assurance against suffering during the coming winter.
Committees of leading citizens are now active at practically every point of unemployment.
In the large majority they have been assured the funds necessary which, together with local government aids, will meet the situation.
A few exceptional localities will be further organized.
The evidence of the Public Health Service shows an actual decrease of sickness and infant and general mortality below normal years.
No greater proof could be adduced that our people have been protected from hunger and cold and that the sense of social responsibility in the Nation has responded to the need of the unfortunate.
To meet the emergencies in agriculture the loans authorized by Congress for rehabilitation in the drought areas have enabled farmers to produce abundant crops in those districts.
The Red Cross undertook and magnificently administered relief for over 2,500,000 drought sufferers last winter.
It has undertaken this year to administer relief to 100,000 sufferers in the new drought area of certain Northwest States.
The action of the Federal Farm Board in granting credits to farm cooperatives saved many of them from bankruptcy and increased their purpose and strength.
By enabling farm cooperatives to cushion the fall in prices of farm products in 1930 and 1931 the Board secured higher prices to the farmer than would have been obtained otherwise, although the benefits of this action were partially defeated by continued world overproduction.
Incident to this action the failure of a large number of farmers and of country banks was averted which could quite possibly have spread into a major disaster.
The banks in the South have cooperated with the Farm Board in creation of a pool for the better marketing of accumulated cotton.
Growers have been materially assisted by this action.
Constant effort has been made to reduce overproduction in relief of agriculture and to promote the foreign buying of agricultural products by sustaining economic stability abroad.
To meet our domestic emergencies in credit and banking arising from the reaction to acute crisis abroad the National Credit Association was set up by the banks with resources of $500,000,000 to support sound banks against the frightened withdrawals and hoarding.
It is giving aid to reopen solvent banks which have been closed.
Federal officials have brought about many beneficial unions of banks and have employed other means which have prevented many bank closings.
As a result of these measures the hoarding withdrawals which had risen to over $250,000,000 per week after the British crisis have substantially ceased.
FURTHER MEASURES The major economic forces and weaknesses at home and abroad have now been exposed and can be appraised, and the time is ripe for forward action to expedite our recovery.
Although some of the causes of our depression are due to speculation, inflation of securities and real estate, unsound foreign investments, and mismanagement of financial institutions, yet our self-contained national economy, with its matchless strength and resources, would have enabled us to recover long since but for the continued dislocations, shocks, and setbacks from abroad.
Whatever the causes may be, the vast liquidation and readjustments which have taken place have left us with a large degree of credit paralysis, which together with the situation in our railways and the conditions abroad, are now the outstanding obstacles to recuperation.
If we can put our financial resources to work and can ameliorate the financial situation in the railways, I am confident we can make a large measure of recovery independent of the rest of the world.
A strong America is the highest contribution to world stability.
One phase of the credit situation is indicated in the banks.
During the past year banks, representing 3 per cent of our total deposits have been closed.
A large part of these failures have been caused by withdrawals for hoarding, as distinguished from the failures early in the depression where weakness due to mismanagement was the larger cause of failure.
Despite their closing, many of them will pay in full.
Although such withdrawals have practically ceased, yet $1,100,000,000 of currency was previously withdrawn which has still to return to circulation.
This represents a large reduction of the ability of our banks to extend credit which would otherwise fertilize industry and agriculture.
Furthermore, many of our bankers, in order to prepare themselves to meet possible withdrawals, have felt compelled to call in loans, to refuse new credits, and to realize upon securities, which in turn has demoralized the markets.
The paralysis has been further augmented by the steady increase in recent years of the proportion of bank assets invested in long-term securities, such as mortgages and bonds.
These securities tend to lose their liquidity in depression or temporarily to fall in value so that the ability of the banks to meet the shock of sudden withdrawal is greatly lessened and the restriction of all kinds of credit is thereby increased.
The continuing credit paralysis has operated to accentuate the deflation and liquidation of commodities, real estate, and securities below any reasonable basis of values.
All of this tends to stifle business, especially the smaller units, and finally expresses itself in further depression of prices and values, in restriction on new enterprise, and in increased unemployment.
The situation largely arises from an unjustified lack of confidence.
We have enormous volumes of idle money in the banks and in hoarding.
We do not require more money or working capital--we need to put what we have to work.
The fundamental difficulties which have brought about financial strains in foreign countries do not exist in the United States.
No external drain on our resources can threaten our position, because the balance of international payments is in our favor; we owe less to foreign countries than they owe to us; our industries are efficiently organized; our currency and bank deposits are protected by the greatest gold reserve in history.
Our first step toward recovery is to reestablish confidence and thus restore the flow of credit which is the very basis of our economic life.
We must put some steel beams in the foundations of our credit structure.
It is our duty to apply the full strength of our Government not only to the immediate phases, but to provide security against shocks and the repetition of the weaknesses which have been proven.
The recommendations which I here lay before the Congress are designed to meet these needs by strengthening financial, industrial, and agricultural life through the medium of our existing institutions, and thus to avoid the entry of the Government into competition with private business.
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT FINANCE The first requirement of confidence and of economic recovery is financial stability of the United States Government.
I shall deal with fiscal questions at greater length in the Budget message.
But I must at this time call attention to the magnitude of the deficits which have developed and the resulting necessity for determined and courageous policies.
These deficits arise in the main from the heavy decrease in tax receipts due to the depression and to the increase in expenditure on construction in aid to unemployment, aids to agriculture, and upon services to veterans.
During the fiscal year ending June 30 last we incurred a deficit of about $903,000,000, which included the statutory reduction of the debt and represented an increase of the national debt by $616,000,000.
Of this, however, $153,000,000 is offset by increased cash balances.
In comparison with the fiscal year 1928 there is indicated a fall in Federal receipts for the present fiscal year amounting to $1,683,000,000, of which $1,034,000,000 is in individual and corporate income taxes alone.
During this fiscal year there will be an increased expenditure, as compared to 1928, on veterans of $255,000,000, and an increased expenditure on construction work which may reach $520,000,000.
Despite large economies in other directions, we have an indicated deficit, including the statutory retirement of the debt, of $2,123,000,000, and an indicated net debt increase of about $1,711,000,000.
The Budget for the fiscal year beginning July 1 next, after allowing for some increase of taxes under the present laws and after allowing for drastic reduction in expenditures, still indicates a deficit of $1,417,000,000.
After offsetting the statutory debt retirements this would indicate an increase in the national debt for the fiscal year 1933 of about $921,000,000.
Several conclusions are inevitable.
We must have insistent and determined reduction in Government expenses.
We must face a temporary increase in taxes.
Such increase should not cover the whole of these deficits or it will retard recovery.
We must partially finance the deficit by borrowing.
It is my view that the amount of taxation should be fixed so as to balance the Budget for 1933 except for the statutory debt retirement.
Such Government receipts would assure the balance of the following year's budget including debt retirement.
