Many of to-day's problems of government belong many hundred miles closer to the people than is the city of Washington.
In 11 of our States a great part of all the land is owned by a landlord from two to three thousand miles away who has done nothing to protect his neighbors from the floods, erosion, and other consequences of allowing overgrazing on his own lands.
In every State there is a locally conceived and locally administered school system which has come more and more under the influence of the Federal dollar.
In the conservation of oil and gas there is just beginning to be a realization that 10 oil-producing States are trustees for the Nation and must themselves act.
In 20 of our States are scattered 300,000 citizens who are set apart from their white neighbors in their relationship to the State,.
We hope that we are in the midst of a movement back to local responsibility in some of these fields.
The Committee on the Conservation and Administration of the Public Domain, appointed by the President, has rendered a significant report recommending that in the course of the next 10 years the surface of the public domain be transferred to those States which are willing to accept the responsibility for it, and that in those States which do not so elect the Government for the first time set up an adequate system of range control.
The Western States are full grown, know more about their local problems than anyone else, and should assume the administration of the lands within their borders.
Wherever ownership rests in one sovereignty and the police power in another, there will be neglect of the property.
There has been such neglect in every Western State.
The rainfall has not changed a great deal in the last 100 years, nor has the slope of the mountains.
But in county after county the desert rains now rush down through gulleys, flooding farms and carrying off the surface soil to ruin reservoirs, whereas when the white man first came the sagebrush and the desert grasses retained the rains, held the soil, and protected the watersheds.
There is not a single Federal statute on the books which adequately regulates grazing on the public domain; it has generally been open range, which the Government will not protect and the States can not.
The time has come when we must allow these western citizens to protect their property if we will not protect our own.
In the field of oil and gas conservation the most significant development to date has been the 1-page compact signed on September 13 between the Governors of Oklahoma, Kansas, and Texas agreeing to restrict production to a scientifically determined figure.
These oil-producing States, with the informal adherence of California, New Mexico, Colorado, and Wyoming, have for the first time collectively used their police power for the conservation of a natural resource which is too widely scattered for any one State to control by itself.
I am glad to say that the Federal Government has done its share; the conservation order of March, 1929, stopped overdrilling and overproduction in the one sphere where we could control it, the public domain.
As long ago as 1926 the Federal Oil Conservation Board urged an interstate agreement, and in 1929 I laid such a program before the Colorado Springs Oil Conference.
Although the support for this program during the last five years has come largely from the Federal Government, this does not detract from the fact that the credit for the accomplishment belongs to the State executives and their public-utility commissions who accomplished the job.
The effect has been an immediate increase in the value of oil and a decrease in its wasteful use.
We can look forward with some hope to a permanent working arrangement, sanctioned by Congress, which will include the following elements: An adequate conservation agency in each State, enforcing within its boundaries conservation laws which are uniform in principle with those of the other major producing States; an interstate advisory board constantly studying supply and demand and fixing periodic quotas for production by the various States; an interstate compact under which the States agree to appoint this committee and enforce these quotas, and perhaps agree on certain uniform practices of conservation; and a joint Federal and State participation in negotiation with foreign governments for foreign production quotas to correspond with our own, so that conservation in this country will not be followed by excessive importations or undue loss of our export trade.
Some form of Federal protection of the consumer in this system is necessary.
In the field of education the National Advisory Committee on Education, appointed by the President, has just rendered a report which points out that the inherent strength of the American education system is that it is administered by 150,000 local school boards responsible to local opinion in lieu of a national ministry at Washington.
If we needed any reminder of the benefits of the traditional American system, we can look to the Federal experiment in the control of Indian education and thank Providence that our educational troubles are solved at home and not in Washington.
For a hundred years we have been busy setting up islands in our civilization upon which we have maintained a native Indian population isolated in education, in industrial training, and in economic contacts from the rest of us.
As a result we now have 300,000 men, women, and children who are citizens of the United States, who live surrounded by white neighbors, but who look to Washington and not to themselves or their communities for most of the normal relationships between thę citizen and the state.
We have set a definite goal for the Indian Service—that it shall work itself out of a job in 25 years.
We hope to accomplish in the next quarter century the breaking down of the cement which has been setting for four times that period.
We hope to turn over to the States trained, alert, and active Indian citizens.
Our degree of success will depend largely upon the willingness with which the States accept their part in the economic relationship.
One of the important affiliated activities of the Department of the Interior has been the White House Conference on Child Health and Protection.
This conference was called by the President in the summer of 1929.
The general conference was held November 19 to 22, 1930, and the Medical Section conference February 19 to 21, 1931.
The Secretary of the Interior was appointed chairman of the conference and is still serving in that capacity in the follow-up activities.
The two conferences were the result of the pooled efforts of 1,200 experts from all parts of the country—men and women leaders in every field touching the life and welfare of the child.
They brought together in the conferences reports showing the status of child life throughout the country, the activities of all agencies working for the care and betterment of children—medical, public health, educational, and social welfare—and made recommendations for improvement based on the findings.
These reports, revised in the light of the discussion of the conferences, are now in process of publication.
They represent the most comprehensive survey of our national child life which has ever been made.
President Hoover's White House Conference on Child Health and Protection, recognizing the rights of the child as the first rights of citizenship, pledges itself to these aims for the children of America.
1.
For every child spiritual and moral training to help him to stand firm under the pressure of life.
2.
For every child understanding and the guarding of his personality as his most precious right.
3.
For every child a home and that love and security which a home provides; and for that child who must receive foster care, the nearest substitute for his own home.
4.
5.
For every child health protection from birth through adolescence, including periodical health examinations and, where needed, care of specialists and hospital treatment; regular dental examinations and care of the teeth; protective and preventive measures against communicable diseases; the insuring of pure food, pure milk, and pure water.
6.
For every child from birth through adolescence, promotion of health, including health instruction and a health program, wholesome physical and mental recreation, with teachers and leaders adequately trained.
7.
For every child a dwelling place safe, sanitary, and wholesome, with reasonable provisions for privacy, free from conditions which tend to thwart his development; and a home environment harmonious and enriching.
8.
For every child a school which is safe from hazards, sanitary, properly equipped, lighted, and ventilated.
For younger children nursery schools and kindergartens to supplement home care.
9.
For every child a community which recognizes and plans for his needs, protects him against physical dangers, moral hazards, and disease; provides him with safe and wholesome places for play and recreation; and makes provision for his cultural and social needs.
10.
11.
For every child such teaching and training as will prepare him for successful parenthood, homemaking, and the rights of citizenship; and, for parents, supplementary training to fit them to deal wisely with the problems of parenthood.
12.
For every child education for safety and protection against accidents to which modern conditions subject him—those to which he is directly exposed and those which, through loss or maiming of his parents, affect him indirectly.
13.
For every child who is blind, deaf, crippled, or otherwise physically handicapped, and for the child who is mentally handicapped, such measures as will early discover and diagnose his handicap, provide care and treatment, and so train him that he may become an asset to society rather than a liability.
Expenses of these services should be borne publicly where they can not be privately met.
14.
For every child who is in conflict with society the right to be dealt with intelligently as society's charge, not society's outcast; with the home, the school, the church, the court, and the institution when needed, shaped to return him whenever possible to the normal stream of life.
15.
For every child the right to grow up in a family with an adequate standard of living and the security of a stable income as the surest safeguard against social handicaps.
16.
For every child protection against labor that stunts growth, either physical or mental, that limits education, that deprives children of the right of comradeship, of play, and of joy.
17.
For every rural child as satisfactory schooling and health services as for the city child, and an extension to rural families of social, recreational, and cultural facilities.
18.
To supplement the home and the school in the training of youth, and to return to them those interests of which modern life tends to cheat children, every stimulation and encouragement should be given to the extension and development of the voluntary youth organizations.
19.
To make everywhere available these minimum protections of the health and welfare of children, there should be a district, county, or community organization for health, education, and welfare, with full-time officials, coordinating with a state-wide program which will be responsive to a nation-wide service of general information, statistics, and scientific research.
For every child these rights, regardless of race, or color, or situation, wherever he may live under the protection of the American flag.
For every child these rights, regardless of race, or color, or situation, wherever he may live under the protection of the American flag."
Due to the nation-wide stimulus of the White House Conference an active follow-up in all parts of the country has resulted.
Up to November 20, 1931, State White House conferences had been held in the following States: Indiana, Georgia, Utah, New Jersey, New· Hampshire, Florida, Mississippi, Maine, Oklahoma, Louisiana, Michigan, and Massachusetts.
The city of Chicago held a regional conference October 30–31, sponsored by 90 organizations.
Local conferences have followed State' conferences in many places.
Other State conferences scheduled are: Virginia, November 23–24; Idaho, November 24–25; South Carolina, first week in December; Montana, December 10–11; Ohio, January 26–28; Oregon, February, 1932.
The Children's Charter has been adopted as the basis of the year's program by the National Congress of Parents and Teachers.
Home Economics Association, Child Welfare League of America, Boy Scouts, Women's Christian Temperance Union, Women of Mooseheart Legion.
The publications of the conference embodying the findings of the committees will reach a total of possibly 40 volumes, making, when finished, a comprehensive library of child life.
Seven volumes have already appeared, one, White House Conference, 1930, giving a summary of the main conference with the speeches and abstracts of committee reports; three are in the field of education; two in the field of medical care; one in the field of public health.
Other volumes will appear rapidly from the press of the Century Co.
Several of these will deal with the educational problems of our Territorial schools and with conditions educational and otherwise among the Indians.
The conference maintains an administrative and editorial office in the Interior Building which will continue until the publications have been completed and the follow-up throughout the country initiated.
The findings of the conference will then become an integral part of the State and community programs for the children of the Nation.
The historical basis of handling the Indian's affairs by combining in the Federal Government the functions which in the case of his white neighbors are found in the county, the State, and the Federal Governments, never has been very satisfactory.
For a hundred years the wheels of Federal administration have worn a deeper and deeper rut of dependence.
We can probably make a distinction between the Indian's health and education and his property.
Until the States develop proper protective laws for the Indians' property, Federal responsibility is inevitable, but there is no good reason for maintaining separate schools and health programs for Indian boys and girls when the State already provides them.
If the Indian youth is to ever succeed as a member of American society, he must have the same opportunity as do other children.
We can not expect to put the Indian to work on a self-supporting basis unless he is properly prepared.
The reservation develops a sense of retreat and of defeat in the mind of the Indian.
His education should give him confidence that he can do as well as his neighbor.
There is no possible escape from the fact that we can not make citizens of the United States by any process of trusteeship and wardship.
Citizens must make themselves by their own self-development and by accepting responsibility for both person and property.
The idea that the Government by any process can manufacture citizens is a fallacy.
It can only provide opportunity.
The sooner the Indian grasps the fact that his present success means his amalgamation with the general population the better the results are bound to be.
There will always be a percentage of dissatisfaction when one person's affairs are handled by another.
Certainly no one can say that a policy that has been recognized as at least a partial failure, and has extended over four generations of Indians, should be maintained indefinitely simply because a system has been set up which needs to be supported.
The Indian must learn to want to be free.
Under Commissioner Rhoads and Assistant Commissioner Scattergood a courageous beginning has been made.
For the first time in a century the administration of the activities relating to the Indian's person and to his property are now separated.
The recent reorganization of the Office of Indian Affairs has grouped the divisions of health, education, and agricultural extension and industry under an assistant to the commissioner in charge of “human relations"; and the divisions of forestry, irrigation, and lands are under an assistant to the commissioner in charge of property.
Of the 76,905 Indian children in school during the year ending June 30, 1931, some 43,652 were in public schools.
The Federal Government has tuition arrangements with 2,568 school districts involving 36,753 Indian children, an increase of 341 districts and 10,055 children over last year.
Three boarding schools have been closed and seven others now carry no grades below the fourth.
Of these seven, four now take no children below junior high school.
In 1929–30 over one-half of the pupils in nonreservation schools were in high-school grades.
This year the proportion is over threequarters.
Whenever possible the Indian school curriculum is being adapted to conform with that of the State rather than to a uniform curriculum dictated from Washington.
The requirements have been raised in all branches of the Indian Service.
Primary-school teachers are now required to have three years of normal-school or college training.
Matrons four years ago needed only an eighth-grade education; now at least one year's college is required.
The superintendent of an Indian school must now have four years of college work, two years of postgraduate work, and four years'experience.
Indian Service education requirements probably compare favorably with those of any State.
The Commissioner of Indian Affairs has given peremptory orders that no flogging will be tolerated.
Cases of brutality are being summarily dealt with.
Ten additional Public Health Service doctors have been loaned to the Indian Service.
Increased facilities are being added to many Indian Service hospitals.
Under a $75,000 appropriation a survey of tuberculosis, trachoma, and venereal-disease conditions among the Indians is now under way.
The appropriation for Indian education this year is over $12,000,- 000; more than the appropriation for the whole Indian Service 10 years ago.
This year it represents 42 per cent of the entire Indian appropriation.
In the field of agriculture extension and industry the past year has seen significant development.
As one consequence of the drought-relief measures undertaken by the States, Red Cross, and Federal organizations subsistence farming in addition to commercial farming has been inaugurated in many localities.
Gardens are being raised on thousands of Indian allotments where none has been grown before.
We can at once make up our minds that only a small percentage of Indians will be successful farmers.
They have keen senses, wellpoised nervous systems, and finely coordinated muscles.
Mechanical ability is common, and many have real artistic capacity.
This is good human material for our present world.
There is hope, too, that by preserving and developing the Indian art many tribes possess a real contribution to our culture can be made.
In the past year employment offices have been maintained in 10 localities for the placement of Indians in industrial work.
This is only a beginning, but this beginning should have dated from the 1880's instead of the 1930's.
There is considerable propaganda to the effect that the Indian is diseased and dying out.
Actually he is slowly increasing in numbers.
Like the rest of us, he multiplies with' a stable food supply.
He is susceptible to tuberculosis, but resists many diseases better than his white neighbors.
The 1931 population showed an increase of 3,544 persons, or 1.5 per cent, over 1930 outside of the Five Civilized Tribes.
There a correction of old figures results in an apparent but not an actual decrease of the Indian total for 1931.
We have asked Congress (H. R. 15498, 71st Cong.) to authorize a codification of Indian laws.
This sorely needed bill, designed to bring order out of the jumble of patchwork legislation through which the Indian Service must grope, was passed by the House but failed in the Senate.
The filibuster in the Senate during the closing days of Congress also prevented the passage of H. R. 15603, a bill extending the restrictions on homestead allotments and accumulated funds of the Five Civilized Tribes.
Despite the removal of restrictions the department has made every effort to protect the property of these Indians, and it is hoped an extension bill may pass in the next Congress.
The problem of settling old claims of various tribes against the Government continues to be a staggering burden upon the Court of Claims, the Comptroller General, and the Indian Service.
A special Indian Court of Claims is urgently needed and will again be recommended to Congress.
The subject of law and order on Indian reservations is having the Indian Service's particular attention.
The Institute for Government Research is also completing a study designed to straighten out the confusion that exists between Federal and State jurisdiction.
The problem becomes more acute as time passes.
We have two major purposes constantly in mind.
One is to turn over to the States as many active citizens as possible in lieu of wards supported by a distant Washington government, and the other is to give these people as adequate training in health, education, and economic independence as we can pending the assumption of those responsibilities by the local citizenship.
We have no desire to capture any more Indians.
No premium is going to be put on adding new wards of the Government, keeping old ones, or extending reservations for them.
Every Indian and his home constitute individual problems, and the home must be the starting point for their solution, as it is for white folks.
The vacant lands subject to all applicable public land laws now total 177,101,551 acres.
Of this area 127,265,885 acres are surveyed and it is estimated that 49,835,666 acres are unsurveyed.
There are, however, other areas which are subject to acquisition under certain of the land laws but subject to reservations of various sorts.
Thus, about 355,000,000 acres are subject to acquisition either outright, or for mining purposes only, or with minerals reserved, or subject to other qualifications.
The President, pursuant to the act of April 10, 1930, appointed a “Committee on the Conservation and Administration of the Public Domain," with former Secretary of the Interior James R. Garfield as chairman.
Its function was to make recommendations for the future care of our remaining public domain.
On January 16, 1931, it rendered to the President its significant report.
Each of the 11 public-land States was represented by its governor's nominee, and a group of representative eastern men and one woman were also appointed by the President.
1.
The future disposition of the remaining vacant, unreserved, unappropriated public lands and the adoption of a definite program of conservation of grazing resources either through ownership or control by the States or by Federal administration.
2.
The use and conservation of water resources, including reclamation and flood control.
3.
The conservation of subsurface mineral resources with respect particularly to the position which the States should occupy in any program.
4.
The conservation of timber resources with special consideration of national-forest areas, their usefulness within present limits, and the matter of additions to or eliminations from those limits.
5.
Changes in administration which might produce greater efficiency in the conservation and use of the natural resources of the Nation.
1.
That all portions of the unreserved and unappropriated public domain should be placed under responsible administration or regulation for the conservation and beneficial use of its resources.
2.
That additional areas important for national defense, reclamation purposes, reservoir sites, national forests, national parks, national monuments, and migratory-bird refuges should be reserved by the Federal Government for these purposes.
3.
That the remaining areas, which are valuable chiefly for the production of forage and can be effectively conserved and administered by the States containing them, should be granted to the States which will accept them.
4.
That in States not accepting such a grant of the public domain responsible administration or regulation should be provided.
5. We recognize that the Nation is committed to a policy of conservation of certain mineral resources. We believe the States are conscious of the importance of such conservation, but that there is a diversity of opinion regarding any program which has for its purpose the wise use of those resources. Such a program must of necessity be based upon such uniformity of Federal and State legislation and administration as will safeguard the accepted principles of conservation and the reclamation fund. When such a program is developed and accepted by any State or States concerned, those resources should be transferred to the State. This is not intended to modify or be in conflict with the accepted policy of the Federal Government relating to the reservation stated in conclusion No. 2 above."
The general recommendations were followed by 20 specific ones.
It is proposed, in brief, that Congress tender to each State the remaining unreserved, unappropriated public domain within its boundaries (reserving minerals in known mineral areas), and that the various States may have 10 years within which to accept the grant.
At the end of that time the public domain in States not taking it over should be incorporated in a“national range " by congressional and Executive action. Meanwhile, a “national range"might be established before expiration of the 10-year period in any State on the State's request.
Certain procedure for effecting the transfer is recommended.
Certain described lands are excepted from the grant pending future study.
These areas are those which the Forest Service thinks should be added in the near future to national forests.
A board representing the National and State Governments would ultimately decide whether these areas should be added to the national forests and whether certain lands now within national forest boundaries should be restored to the public domain.
This proposed board would also select for Federal retention such sites as the Government may need for reservoirs, reclamation purposes, national parks, defense purposes, migratory-bird refuges, etc.
Certain exchanges of lands would be authorized to eliminate the present checkerboard of Federal, State, and railroad sections.
Very important is the proviso that all lands passing to the States should be"impressed with a trust for administration and rehabilitation of the public domain and for public institutions and with such restrictions as Congress might deem appropriate."
The committee recommends that the present conservative policy of reclamation, limiting construction each year to the annual income to the reclamation fund, should be continued, and that receipts from the development of hydroelectric power on the projects should be used first to repay the cost of the power plant and appurtenant works; second, the cost of the reservoir and dam regulating the delivery of water to the plant, and after that, all net revenues should be credited to the reclamation revolving fund.
Congress is asked to provide funds for the survey of the remaining unsurveyed public land.
The committee recommends long-time grazing permits in case the land is held in a national range, but ultimately, if the lands pass to the States, private ownership, with all the responsibilities of property, is set as the objective.
20. In order to provide for a more effective administration of the public domain and the various reservations and areas now under the control of the Federal Government and to promote the conservation of natural resources, it is recommended that the Congress be asked to authorize the President to consolidate and coordinate the executive and administrative bureaus, agencies, and offices created for or concerned with the administration of the laws relating to the use and disposition of the public domain, the administration of the national reservations, and the conservation of natural resources."
This committee's report makes very clear a problem that is very old.
Control of grazing is vitally necessary to preserve the carrying capacity of the range and to prevent soil erosion, floods, and the silting of reservoirs.
Congress has never authorized either the Land Office or the States to protect these lands.
Now, before it is too late, the choice must be made between the agencies that are to do the job.
The Western States are grown to maturity and are alive to the problem.
But if Congress is unwilling to let them solve it, it should let the National Government do it.
Both are helpless now.
So the committee recommends, first, transfer to the States; second, if the States do not want the task, creation of nationally administered national ranges.
In its essentials this committee's report is inescapably sound.
Exceptions will be taken to many details by proponents of particular ideas.
Thus some believe that minerals should not be reserved by the Federal Government.
This view overlooks the fact that 90 per cent of the Federal revenue from these minerals now goes to the States; 37½2 per cent direct and 521½2 per cent to the reclamation fund, and the States individually take in from their lands already granted them by the United States about two and a half million annually.
If minerals were transferred, the immediate effect, quite aside from the national interest in their wisest use, would be the crippling of reclamation.
Its fund is now expended where needed, regardless of which State produced the royalty oil and gas.
As long ago as 1905 a Roosevelt commission made a study of the public domain, and particularly the grazing problem, and recommended immediate control.
But such authority has never been lodged by Congress in any agency, and the problem now is more acute by just 26 years.
The Commissioner of the Land Office reports that“the depression has in no manner lessened the demand for our remaining public lands.
The area included in original selections, entries, and filings from July 1, 1930, to June 30, 1931, was 5,218,627 acres, almost equal to that of 1930 and greatly in excess of 1929.
Of the five million and odd acres entered, 4,201,766 acres were allowed under the stockraising homestead act.
Comment on the operation of this act is made elsewhere.
This past year saw 1,938,864 acres patented, of which 1,058,102 acres were patented with all minerals reserved under various acts.
The receipts and disbursements of the Land Office again present an interesting picture.
It received from sales, oil and gas royalties, coal leases, and other sources a total of $4,621,338.53.
Of this sum $2,396,605.13 went to the reclamation fund, $1,610,852.37 went to the States, and only $613,881.03 remained in the Federal Treasury-All of these figures exclude sales and leases from Indian lands.
Total expenditures for the conduct of business of the General Land Office amounted to $2,158,159.81.
Thus, the total benefit of the States and the reclamation fund is slightly over $4,000,000 by virtue of the fact that the Land Office is one revenue-producing activity of the Government.
The Land Office is continuing its gradual completion of the rectangular surveys of the United States.
It is a long process under moderate appropriations.
It has been pointed out elsewhere that about 50,000,000 acres of the unreserved public domain remained to be surveyed, and eventually the rectangular surveys should be extended over the entire United States.
These rectangular surveys should not be confused with the topographic survey of the United States which the Geological Survey now has in progress; both are far from complete.
This rectangular system is the most scientific method of land designation that has yet been devised.
The Land Office, if the surface of the public land is transferred to the States, will face a period of heightened activity and responsibility in completing the surveys of these areas and in handling the clear listing requisite for transfer of title.
At present we have under way a survey of the operation of the stock-raising homestead law in the Western States.
Complaints against abuse of it have been increasing, particularly on some of the remaining public range in Colorado.
Under this law 640 acres may be acquired as a stock-raising homestead, with minerals reserved to the Government.
Those opposed to the law assert that many such homesteads are acquired by dummies for the benefit of stockmen, :and that in many other cases 640 acres is entirely inadequate and necessitates grazing on the public domain in addition.
From June 30, 1919, to June 30, 1931, 22,341,253.90 acres have been patented under the stock-raising homestead acts.
Activity under these acts has greatly decreased.
In 1922, 8,399 patents were issued and in fiscal year 1931 only 2,462.
Last year's patents covered 1,051,593.21 acres.
We have referred the problem to each member of the Public Domain Commission and to the governors of the Western States for their views.
Reclamation of public lands to date has added only about threefourths of 1 per cent to our national crop area, but has added $1,761,- 929,500 to the purchasing power of the West.
It is financed from a revolving fund.
This fund bears a relationship to the Federal Treasury like that of a subsidiary to a parent corporation.
Its expenditures can not exceed its own resources, regardless of the Treasury's surplus or deficit.
Fifty-two and one-half per cent of royalties under the oil leasing act, and some proceeds of public-land sales, go into it.
Of recent years royalties have made up about 26 per cent of the total annual income of about $10,000,000, and land sales and power revenues about 7 per cent.
Sixty-seven per cent has come from the repayments by the water users of the cost of their project works and other collections.
Expenditures in the form of construction and maintenance costs have been limited to income.
Most operation and maintenance has been taken over by the water users under the department's policy of encouraging local responsibility.
The percentage of collections has been uniformly high; 97.3 per cent of annual construction repayments and 98.1 per cent of operation and maintenance bills were met to June 30, 1931.
To-day we face a serious problem.
Last year a number of causes accelerated outgo and retarded income.
An open winter speeded up construction on some projects, and low prices for farm products coupled with legislative modification of contractual obligations depressed income.
Congress responded to the emergency by extending to the reclamation fund a moratorium of two years on repayments by the bureau of $1,000,000 a year on the $20,000,000 loan which augmented the reclamation fund; $10,000,000 of this loan had already been repaid.
Congress further advanced a new loan of $5,000,000 from the Federal Treasury, repayment of which at the rate of $1,000,000 a year is to begin in 1933.
Thus the reclamation fund, beginning July 1, 1932, will have to repay to the Treasury $1,000,000 a year for 10 years, and beginning July 1, 1933, will hawe to pay an additional $1,000,000 a year for 5 years.
This situation makes it imperative that power revenues, whenever possible, must accrue to the reclamation fund, and not be diverted to the credit of the individual district, as has been required under some special legislation.
It means also that all projects make every effort to keep their payments intact, for these are the backbone of reclamation's credit and the source of 67 per cent of its funds.
Nevertheless, poor conditions on some projects already forecast more requests for moratoria.
Such requests present troublesome problems.
If granted, the landowner who needs no help and the landowner who is in trouble both benefit alike.
Their State and county taxes and private debts are not ordinarily relaxed.
The net result is that the blanket Federal relief is actually for the benefit of the local tax and banking structure.
A reversal of this situation is often needed, because of the unscientific bases upon which lands frequently are assessed and grouped for tax purposes.
Accordingly, we have under way a study of the financial situation on every project in order to be prepared to lay before Congress the relationship of these factors when and if moratoria are urged.
Needed relief should be given by the sources which should fairly contribute, but the comparative situation of all projects should be seen before action is taken on one, and before the Federal Government assumes the whole burden of relief.
Speed and size are the two outstanding factors in connection with the construction of Hoover Dam, the first unit of the Boulder Canyon project which was formally inaugurated by President Hoover with his approval on July 3, 1930, of the first appropriation of $10,660,000 and on February 14, 1931, of an additional appropriation of $15,000,000.
Plans and specifications for the 730-foot dam, the power plant, and appurtenant works were prepared at unprecedented speed, requiring the closest coordination of the Washington and Denver offices of the bureau to avoid any delay in their compilation, printing, and distribution to prospective bidders.
As a result of this coordination the work was completed in a minimum of time, and on March 11, 1931, the Secretary of the Interior signed the award of contract to the Six Companies (Inc.), of San Francisco, the low bidder, at the bid price of $48,890,995.
The contract price does not include the furnishing of materials which enter into the completed work, such as cement, reinforcing steel, pipe and fittings, conduits, valves, gates and hoists, and structural steel.
The total estimated cost of the work covered by the contract, including all materials, is about $92,000,000.
The power machinery and its installation will cost an additional $17,000,000.
Other work completed includes the construction of a 22.7-mile branch railroad from the main line of the Union Pacific system near Las Vegas, Nev., to Boulder City, the construction headquarters; a railroad 10 miles long connecting the end of the Las Vegas-Boulder City line with the dam site; 20 miles of railroad, one branch running to the boat landing and thence to the outlets of the diversion tunnels, and another branch running to the sand and gravel deposit in Arizona; the erection of a transmission line 235 miles long, from Victorville, Calif., to Hoover Dam site to furnish power for construction purposes; the construction of a 24-foot oil-macadam highway, 7 miles long, from Boulder City to the dam site; a 9-mile pipe line of a water system to provide for 5,000 people, the installation of pumps to lift the water 2,000 feet from the river to Boulder City, and a presedimentation basin and purification plant.
Bids were opened on the last day of the fiscal year, and contracts were let for work at Boulder City to include street, alley, parkingarea and sidewalk grading; street paving; street and parking-area surfacing, curbs, and gutters; sidewalks; sanitary sewers; and waterdistribution system.
These contracts have been practically completed.
Office buildings, mess houses, clubhouse, commissary, dormitories, and about 150 four and two room cottages have been erected by the Six Companies, and about 30 permanent brick and stucco houses have been constructed by the bureau for its employees.
Administrative, municipal, and dormitory buildings have also been erected.
The Six Companies (Inc.) is actively engaged on the excavation of the four tunnels, each 50 feet in diameter and with a total length of 3.1 miles, through which the Colorado River will be diverted during the period of construction of Hoover Dam.
At the end of November work was about 12 per cent completed, comprising 14,000 feet of 12-foot diameter pioneer bore and 2,000 feet of 36 by 56 foot section.
From August 7 to August 13 labor difficulties were encountered, prompted by replacement of hand muckers by machine muckers, and refusal of the replaced men to accept the prevailing wage for other available work, $4 per day.
For about a week, up to 1,400 men were on strike and work was shut down by the Six Companies.
On August 13 the construction engineer ordered the Six Companies to resume work under their contract, and the hiring of men was begun at the entrance to the Federal reservation by the United States Labor Commissioner, preference being given to worthy former employees.
By August 17 about 1,100 men were back on the job, and by the end of the month the force had been brought up to approximately 1,700.
All labor is now hired through a Federal employment bureau established at Las Vegas, with the full approval of the Six Companies.
During the closing months of the year between 2,600 and 2,700 men were being employed on the job.
A recent report showed that 41 per cent of the employees of the Six Companies were ex-service men.
Boulder City business permits.
In order to control and supervise the various business activities at Boulder City, arrangements were made to issue permits to individuals and other privates agencies to engage in specified lines of business.
This work was organized by Mr. Louis C. Cramton, with a view to making Boulder City a substantial town instead of a construction camp.
At the end of the fiscal year 295 formal applications had been filed for business permits in Boulder City, representing 36 States and 62 kinds of business.
Permits were being issued on the basis of approved qualifications, and many lessees were actively engaged in preparations for building.
Several had started actual construction.
Mr. Sims Ely was appointed city manager of Boulder City, and a permanent committee, comprising John C. Page, office engineer, Bureau of Reclamation; J. R. Alexander, district counsel, Bureau of Reclamation; and V. G. Evans, manager of the Boulder City Co., a Six Companies' subsidiary, has been designated to act in an advisory capacity to the construction engineer and the city manager.
This project is the companion to Hoover Dam, both authorized by the Boulder Canyon project act.
It contemplates substitution of an American-controlled source of water supply for the Imperial Valley in lieu of the present Mexican-controlled canal.
Public lands will benefit by the new route.
A diversion dam across the Colorado, and a canal across the sand hills to connect with the Imperial system, with a main branch to the Coachella Valley, are the principal works.
The cost is estimated at about $34,000,000.
The district is now under an injunction to remove the diversion works from which its canal leads into Mexico and back.
The international character of the present canal, serving lands in both Nations, has brought many difficulties despite the wish of both interests to cooperate.
Much of the cost of the new canal would be necessitated in any event by the change of diversion works now required by decree.
All engineering plans have been completed, and on November 4, 1931, the Secretary of the Interior approved as to form a contract between the United States and the district for repayment of the cost in 40 years.
It may be possible to request a small initial appropriation this year.
On May 8, 1931, the United States Supreme Court handed down a decision dismissing the bill of the State of Arizona asking an injunction against the construction of Hoover Dam.
The holding was in line with the Government's contention that Arizona was not injured either by the building of the dam or by the 6-State Colorado River compact to which she is not a party and by which she is not bound.
The question of division of the Colorado's waters is thus not affected by the decision.
No attempt, so far as is known, has been made by Arizona and California to come to an agreement on a water division since the decree.
We have, nevertheless, proceeded on the basis that sooner or later Arizona would be in a position to utilize water from the Colorado.
Accordingly the funds made available by the Boulder Canyon project act for investigation of projects on the river have been so allocated as to include investigation of Arizona possibilities.
It is possible that a feasible Arizona project may be found to utilize the planned Imperial Dam, as Arizona's present Yuma project will do.
Under the project act the quantity of water to which California may acquire title is limited for Arizona's benefit.
Under the power allocation made last year Arizona is reserved 18 per cent, or about 118,000 horsepower, to take whenever her needs require.
It is to be hoped that the States may bring their water allocations into accord sooner or later, but meanwhile these great works that are ready for present development need not be delayed.
The interstate water problem on the Colorado has had a counterpart within California.
There, as a necessary preliminary to the all-American canal contract, it was necessary to have a determination of the priorities of the various California claimants.
In November, 1930, the Secretary of the Interior referred the matter to the State for a recommendation.
In August the State engineer, Mr. Ed.
Hyatt, submitted a recommendation based on an agreement among all interests, which has been ratified by all but one claimant.
It sets up an order of priorities as among seven users, subject to availability of their allocations under the Boulder Canyon project act and the Colorado River compact.
It will be included in all California water contracts.
The project act contemplates subordinate compacts among the four upper basin States and the three lower ones.
The upper-basin allocation is now subject to study by a conference of State representatives and Reclamation Bureau officers who have been asked to assist.
It is a pleasure to report that the Metropolitan Water District, of Southern California, contractor for 36 per cent of Hoover Dam power, has voted a $220,000,000 bond issue to build its aqueduct to the Colorado River and has pledged its continued support of the Boulder Canyon project.
There is now under way an effort by the States and communities of the Columbia River Basin—Washington, Idaho, Oregon—to evolve a counterpart of the Boulder Canyon project.
An irrigation development of over 2,000,000 acres, watered by a dam or dams more expensive than Hoover Dam and financed by sale of power, is visualized.
Federal funds, repaid out of power revenues, are wanted.
The War Department engineers, pursuant to congressional direction, have completed their studies and the Bureau of Reclamation has been asked to add its review.
It would be premature to state its conclusions in detail, but it appears in general that a project feasible from an economic and engineering standpoint can be worked out, financed by an adequate power market, provided all power users cooperate.
The size of the investment is the major problem.
Sooner or later the Columbia will go into harness of the same sort that we are splicing together in Black Canyon for the Colorado.
The conservation policy initiated March 12, 1929, and restated at the Colorado Springs conference of June, 1929, has had significant results.
Pointing out on these two occasions the wastes of gas and oil attendant on overproduction, the Government pledged first a cessation of speculative prospecting on the public domain, second a program of orderly production from Government fields such as Kettleman Hills, and third, urged the States, who alone have a measure of control over production on private lands, to coordinate their production through an interstate compact so that curtailment in one State could not be offset by increased production in another.
To-day the oil industry has back of it for the first time a stabilized source of supply and in front of it an indicated demand for 1932 which shows little effect of the depression.
Specifically, the Government's efforts have reduced the outstanding prospecting permits from 17,431 to 3,750.
The Government lands in Kettleman Hills were unitized and production there was stabilized at 60,000 barrels daily from a field capable of producing 300,000 daily.
The Kettleman operators have voluntarily set a fine example of conservation and teamwork.
Two years after the Colorado Springs conference a compact, in informal form, was signed on September 13, 1931, by the Governors of Oklahoma, Kansas, and Texas, setting quotas for each State's production so that the country's daily total during 1932 and the balance of 1931 will not exceed 2,379,000 barrels.
It has been fairly well followed and it was immediately effective in raising oil prices above prevailing distress levels.
It was preceded and made possible by the efforts of the Oil States’ Advisory Committee, which presented a plan based on an interstate compact to the Federal Oil Conservation Board in April, and by the efforts of the Kansas Public Service Commission, the Oklahoma Corporation Commission, and the Texas Railroad Commission.
These enforcing agencies met on September 11 and agreed upon a production allocation under the chairmanship of Mr. Thurman P. Hill, and the agreement was signed on behalf of their organizations and their governors on September 13, with the cooperation of Chairman Cicero Murray, of the Oil States' Advisory Committee.
Its provisions have been temporarily enforced by martial law in Texas and Oklahoma on the initiative of the governors of those States.
Though time may be necessary to work it out, what we must eventually see is a State-Federal structure based on an interstate compact, as was pointed out at Colorado Springs and in the Federal Oil Conservation Board's 1929 report, for the problem requires exercise of governmental powers not possessed completely by either sovereignty.
Each State must enact its own conservation laws within its own borders.
But their effect should be coordinated through an interstate advisory board created by an interstate compact.
This board should study demand and supply, as the Federal Oil Conservation Board's economic committee now does, and recommend State quotas to meet it; it should draft and recommend model conservation laws; it should be a clearing house for joint action.
But the domestic quota is a relative term depending on world production.
Negotiations for foreign cooperation in equating production should be carried on under Federal auspices with the cooperation of the interstate board.
Such negotiations are academic in the absence of a compact because under the Constitution the Federal Government can not enforce a production quota within any State.
The Kansas-Oklahoma-Texas agreement is a courageous and sensible beginning.
In order to make unit operation on public lands legally possible, the department presented to Congress amendments to sections 17 and 27 of the mineral leasing act, which were enacted in the act of July 3, 1930.
This was a temporary act, expiring January 31, 1931.
The Kettleman unit-plan agreement was inaugurated under it before its expiration, as was another unit-plan agreement in Little Buffalo Basin, Wyo.
Thereafter, the department recommended that this policy be enacted in permanent legislation, and the act of March 4, 1931, accomplishes that purpose.
This action by Congress set a notable example for State conservation efforts.
It is interesting to note that Congress has twice had the mineral leasing act before it for amendments since the inauguration of the oil conservation policy in March, 1929, and the conservation efforts of the department have encountered no adverse legislation.
The administration's conservation policy was attacked by several mandamus actions in the District of Columbia Supreme Court, designed to compel an acceptance of applications for prospecting permits and the issuance of permits.
Four test cases involving various phases of the conservation policy were carried to the United States Supreme Court after the department had been upheld by the Court of Appeals.
On May 18, 1931, the Supreme Court rendered a decision to the effect that the steps taken by the Secretary of the Interior were within his discretion, under the mineral leasing act, and declining to interfere therewith.
Oil production on the public domain last year was 23,821,111 barrels; 41,962,184,000 cubic feet of gas were produced and 111,499.598 gallons of natural gasoline.
These figures represent a decrease in crude-oil production of 3,598,398 barrels, or 13.12 per cent, an increase of gas utilization of 2,838,068,000 cubic feet, or 7.25 per cent, and an increase of natural gasoline utilization of 10,029,297 gallons, or 9.88 per cent.
Completion of new wells dropped from 209 to 146, or 30 per cent.
Completions for the first six months of 1931 dropped to 30, from the 1930 figure of 73, a decrease of 59 per cent.
Wells shut in on the public domain increased from 599 on July 1, 1930, to 699 on July 1, 1931, or approximately 17 per cent.
Permits outstanding on July 1, 1931, totaled 3,750, as against 17,431 on March 1, 1929.
Our policy of house-cleaning the speculative paper which had encumbered the public domain has produced results; eventually it will be down to a working basis of bona fide permits upon which a structure of conservative exploration can be built.
At present the following practices characterize the operation of this policy as to oil and gas: (1) Extension of permits for periods of two years on condition that no drilling be done during the first year, unless sooner authorized or required by the Secretary.
2) The issuance of leases on discovery with provision for drilling and producing only such wells as are required to offset drainage.
3) Authorization of drilling programs on leases on the basis of one well per 40-acre tract.
4) Acceptance of compensatory royalty in lieu of drilling wells to offset drainage from adjoining lands.
5) Collection of 5 cents per thousand cubic feet for all natural gas wasted by blowing into the air.
All equities under bona fide permits are being liberally dealt with.
Extensions are granted where equities justify it and new permits are issued when adequate showing is made of equities established before the conservation order of March, 1929, went into effect.
Thus, during the past year 103 oil and gas leases covering 63,102 acres and 91 permits covering 142,196 acres were issued.
We can look forward now to an eventual resumption of activity on the public lands under sound and conservative practices which will substitute unit operation and ratable production for the orgy of speculation which had covered 15,000,000 acres with over 17,000 permits, less than 4,000 of which ever complied with the leasing law's development requirement, and all of which were ready tinder for a blaze of speculative activity in case of another major discovery.
During the past year substantial reductions were effected in importations of oil and refined products.
For the April-September period, total imports were 26.6 per cent under the 1930 figures, largely as the result of the Federal Oil Conservation Board's request of individual importers that they make their plans so as to relieve distressed domestic conditions as far as possible.
On June 29, 1931, I reported to the Senate Committee on Commerce, then considering an oil-tariff bill and an oil-embargo measure, my opinion that"It seems to me that the evident need is proration of imports under the guidance of some fact-finding body such as the Federal Trade Commission."
I also stated : "The program of domestic curtailment of production necessarily curtailed the oil-producer's income, and naturally in seeking relief the producers have looked to a similar curtailment of imports from foreign fields. If proration is the logical method of control of supply, it would seem to be logical to apply it to imports. Briefly stated, since 1923, when exports and imports of all oils were practically equal in quantity, the exports of crude oil, and especially of refinery products, have largely exceeded imports in quantity, and very greatly exceeded them in value. Indeed, exports of petroleum products have made up the third largest item in the foreign trade of the United States. What the effect of restrictions would be upon the employment of labor in connection with oil refining and the effect upon employment in other industries is again beyond the knowledge of this department."
The problem, as Secretary Lamont pointed out at the Chicago meeting of the American Petroleum Institute, is ultimately one of equating foreign and domestic production.
Foreign oil kept out of our domestic market will go into our foreign markets, for if it can be laid down on our doorstep cheaper than our own oil it can be laid down on that of our customers' likewise.
The question is simply one of balance.
For the time being the condition of the domestic industry, pending stabilization of east Texas, has been such that attention has been focused on imports.
Now that we have temporarily put our house in order through the Kansas-Oklahoma-Texas compact, it is fair to look for a permanent basis upon which the threat of excessive imports will be removed as a disturbing factor in the domestic equation without unnecessarily displacing our exports and throwing them back on the domestic structure.
Difficult times should not make us lose sight of the long-range view of our national resources, nor of the fact that with 20 per cent of the world's reserves, we are furnishing over 60 per cent of the world's production.
Since the last annual report the circumstances surrounding the Kelley oil-shale charges have been brought to light by the Senate Committee on Public Lands.
It will be recalled that on September 28, 1930, Ralph S. Kelley, a land office employee, former chief of field division at Denver, published a letter of resignation, accusing the department of collusion with Colorado oil-shale locators in disposing of lands worth many billions of dollars.
Subsequently a series of 14 syndicated articles appeared in the New York World amplifying these charges.
Kelley had been called to Washington on July 7 to take charge of oil-shale matters in the Washington office, following his protracted but indefinite criticism of handling of cases here, and had failed to report for duty until August 5.
Correspondence between Kelley and the World, brought to light by the Senate committee, showed that Kelley, from July 29 to the date of his resignation, September 28, had been arranging for sale of his material to the World.
He signed a contract on September 11 under which he was to receive $12,000 if he remained in Government service and completed his articles before resigning, or $6,000 if he was caught and discharged.
By use of repeated sick-leave applications and collaboration of World employees he succeeded in concealing his employment by the World while remaining in Government employment, and resigned as per schedule on September 28, a Sunday, in a letter broadcast before it had been received and which, of course, gave no opportunity for reply that day.
When I received it on September 29, I refused the resignation, and on September 30, 1930, transmitted the case to the Attorney General for investigation.
Kelley refused to answer any questions of the Department of Justice.
After an exhaustive examination of the cases listed by Kelley in his articles, the Attorney General, on October 24, reported that “there is more evidence to support the conclusion that you and your department have been exceedingly strict and exacting in resisting claims for patents than that you have been too liberal.
Later the Senate Committee on Public Lands developed the facts stated above about his employment.
He was paid his $12,000, or about 50 cents per word.
The venture was not a financial success, however.
The World's correspondence with its agents and the 200 or more papers to whom it tried to sell the story makes entertaining reading but has no place here.
However, in view of the publicity given the Kelley matter, the statement by the World published on December 25, 1930, in reply to the following letter, was gratifying.
Between October 6 and 10, 1930, inclusive, the World published a series of articles over the signature of Ralph S. Kelley, a former chief of the field division of the United States land office at Denver, Colo.
These articles not only criticized my administration as Secretary of the Interior but impugned my official and personal conduct.
I do not question the absolute right of the World or any other newspaper to comment fairly upon the acts or policies of the Department of the Interior or of myself as its responsible head, nor the right to obtain, if possible, an investigation of the decisions, policies, or the personnel of the department.
For my part I welcome such an investigation.
I do deny your right, however, to publish such statements as were made by Mr. Kelley which reflect upon my personal integrity and which were untrue in fact.
When the World opened its columns to Mr. Kelley and published his articles, not as communications received unsolicited, but as paid special-feature articles, it afforded him not only a forum for the statement of his views but gave his charges an apparent indorsement and guaranty of truth.
These charges of Mr. Kelley, with their irresistible inference, reflect seriously upon my good name, and I can not let such an unwarranted attack go unchallenged.
I am presenting this aspect of the matter so that you may have opportunity, as an act of simple justice, to see that amends are made for this serious reflection upon me.
The World has already stated, and it is very glad to state again, that in publishing Mr. Kelley's articles it did not indorse or guarantee the validity of his criticisms. It merely affirmed its convicton after careful investigation of Mr. Kelley's record that his charges were made in good faith and with technical competence. The only purpose which the World has sought to attain by the publication of Mr. Kelley's articles was to insure a full inquiry by the Senate into the questions which Mr. Kelley raised, and it has complete confidence that if the Senate authorizes the Public Lands Committee to conduct this investigation the truth will be fairly ascertained. The World is happy to note that Doctor Wilbur himself welcomes such an investigation, for his cooperation in this matter will contribute greatly toward public confidence in it. As to the question of Secretary Wilbur's personal integrity which he raises in this letter, the World can only say it has never believed or implied that in all these complicated transactions he did any dishonorable thing."Editor THE WORLD.
In order to prevent a repetition of such sales of confidential information out of Government files to private parties without consent of Congress or the officer responsible for their custody, the chairman of the House Committee on Public Lands, after hearings on oil-shale legislation, and on the department's recommendation, introduced H. R. 17338.
Sec.
The oil-shale problem arises from the provision of section 37 of the mineral leasing act which permits claims located prior to the date of the act (February 25, 1920) to proceed to patent in compliance with the mining laws as they existed on that date.
The principal requirements are good faith of the locator, performance of assessment work, and discovery.
Some months prior to Kelley's resignation a Supreme Court decision in the case of Wilbur v. Krushnic had held that a locator in default in assessment work could resume work at any time in the absence of a challenge by the United States.
Thereafter, convinced that many claims were being held without compliance with the law's requirement of assessment work, the department in January, 1930, had undertaken the task of physically posting notices of forfeiture on each claim as a preliminary step to adjudication.
This work had been under way many months to the time of the Kelley matter.
To date about 7,500 such claims have been posted; about 5,500 remain.
Where the law as to discovery, assessment work, and good faith of locators has been complied with, patents issue on completion of $500 of development work and application for patent.
About 195,000 acres have been patented in all.
The estimated oil-shale area in Colorado is about 1,496,027 acres, in Utah, 2,754,959, and in Wyoming, 4,006,805; 156,024 acres are included in two naval reserves.
Currently we have under way the immense task of adjudicating the status of all outstanding claims which the Kelley fiasco temporarily interrupted.
We have requested the Senate Committee on Public Lands to continue to a thorough conclusion its examination of the oil-shale matter, particularly if it can lead to legislation clarifying the questions left uncertain by the leasing act.
The House Committee on the Public Lands has reported out a bill (H. R. 15002) designed to fix a dead line by which all claims must proceed to patent or be abandoned and relaxing the department's conservation policy by excusing certain defaults in assessment work.
A full summary of the oil-shale problem and the department's requests for legislative clarification will be found in the report on this bill.
Report 2537, House; 71st Cong. 3d sess.)
Established in 1879, the Geological Survey was given by Congress a broad mandate for“the classification of the public lands and examination of the geological structure, mineral resources and products of the national domain.
Other related functions have been added from time to time.
Building upon this legislative foundation, the Geological Survey for more than half a century has endeavored to maintain high standards of professional work and conduct, to make steady contributions to the advance of knowledge within its assigned fields, and to apply this knowledge in the mineral industry, in cartography, and in hydrography.
For the Geological Survey the year was one of gratifying progress.
In 1931 the direct Federal appropriations and the funds otherwise available from Federal and State sources for work by and under supervision of the Geological Survey reached nearly $5,000,000, the largest amount in its history.
As a consequence, moderate expansion has been possible in the staff and in a number of its activities.
Especially noteworthy has been the growth in geologic investigations and in studies of water resources.
Geologic work was strengthened by an increase in the appropriation “for geologic surveys" and by the granting of a new fund “for fundamental research in geologic science" which permitted the beginning or resumption of studies in some of the many problems that have long awaited attention.
Well-qualified scientists were added to the staff, and a satisfactory beginning is under way on an expanded program of research.
Broadened investigations of the surface and underground waters of the country were made possible by markedly increased funds appropriated as a recognition by Congress of the national interest in this vital natural resource.
A feature of the geologic work was the completion of the special 5-year potash exploration program authorized by Congress in 1926 and 1927, which was an outgrowth of general investigations by the Geological Survey during several preceding decades.
Four sites for core tests were recommended to the Bureau of Mines during the year, bringing the total number of sites thus recommended to 24, all but one in New Mexico and Texas.
The geologic conditions of the areas investigated have certain resemblances to those of the German potash area.
The explorations have disclosed substantial bodies of certain potash minerals that are apparently thick enough, rich enough, and shallow enough to justify mining operations.
One company has now sunk a shaft and begun commercial production in the New Mexico field.
In 1930 the United States produced only 15 per cent of its demand.
At the direction of Congress an exploratory program is under way in Alaska looking toward development of new industries and traffic for the Alaska Railroad.
Further progress was made in the topographic survey of the United States, more than 18,000 square miles being covered.
But as only 44.6 per cent of the area of the United States has yet been mapped, and only 0.4 per cent was added last year, any speeding of the project would be of great advantage.
The stage of the unfinished work varies from 8 per cent complete in Florida to 98.6 per cent in New Hampshire.
Nine States are completely mapped.
Conservation of the Nation's mineral resources was fostered through enforcement of the leasing laws and through encouragement and advice to operators for the adoption of the best mining practices.
In this work the Geological Survey benefits the entire country not only by insuring the collection of proper rents and royalties from the public lands but also by safeguarding the development of the mineral deposits themselves and thus aiding in the reduction of waste.
Through its activities in land classification we now have reserved 6,536,473 acres in 21 States and Alaska for future power reservoirs capable of producing 15,000,000 horsepower when economic conditions warrant.
It gages stream flow through 2,663 gaging stations and furnishes the basic data on which the future development of these sites will depend.
It has in progress now 37 of its valuable "water resources" reports; 20 were completed last year.
It makes ground-water investigations; 63 are in progress.
The Survey not only aids in classifying power possibilities for reservation on the public lands but makes monthly and annual reports of electrical production and fuel consumption.
Its reports for the calendar year 1930 show that the total power generated dropped 1.5 per cent, to 95,936,000,000 kilowatt-hours, of which 34.4 per cent came from hydroelectric power and 65.6 per cent from steam.
Hydroelectric power dropped 4.6 per cent, largely because of drought conditions.
The total drop of 1.5 per cent is the first since 1921.
Consumption of coal per kilowatt-hour generated dropped to 1.62 pounds, or 51 per cent of the 1919 rate, representing a continuation of the gain in efficiency that has been unbroken since 1919.
After nearly 23 years' service as Director of the Geological Survey, Dr. George Otis Smith resigned on December 22, 1930, to accept an appointment as chairman of the reorganized Federal Power Commission.
Doctor Smith's administration, covering nearly half the life of the Survey, spanned the period of its greatest expansion and the closest adaptation of its activities to the growing needs of the country.
Fundamentally a scientific organization, engaged in research in geology and engineering, it has nevertheless constantly maintained the practical viewpoint and has sought always to make the activities of its technical staff applicable to the problems of daily life.
Its geologic reports and maps have guided the search for our mineral deposits and aided in their development; its topographic maps find manifold uses in engineering fields; the results of its studies of our water supplies, both surface and underground, are basic in all plans for the development and use of water resources; its technical advice to the department in the administration of the agricultural and mineral land laws supplies the physical facts upon which proper administration rests.
The development of the ideal of practical application of sound scientific work was a major objective sought and attained by Director Smith throughout his administration.
His selection by the President to head the Federal Power Commission is a recognition of the practical idealism manifested in his guidance of Survey affairs.
Our generation faces a major responsibility and a greater opportunity.
One hundred years from now, as people look back on our use of this continent, we shall not be praised for our reckless use of its oil, nor the weakening of our watershed values through overgrazing, nor the loss of our forests; we shall be heartily damned for all these things.
But we may take comfort in the knowledge that we shall certainly be thanked for the national parks.
Two dozen of the treasure spots which our growing population has surrounded have been set apart from private acquisition and held for public enjoyment in perpetuity.
The task is not finished and the opportunity is not gone.
These years should constitute the era of completion of the park system.
Grand Teton National Park is a skeleton with much essential land still privately owned, and the greatest herd of elk in this country remains subject to slaughter because of it.
Mammoth Cave, Isle Royale in Michigan, the Everglades in Florida, certain Blue Ridge areas, and the Great Smokies— these are projects visualized but not yet complete.
We always face two problems: One, to keep out the host of unworthy projects that are urged for national-park status for local reasons; second, to bring in those that are national heritages in fact and should be in law.
It is surprising to an outsider to learn of the selfish determination in many places to hinder or to block park extensions completely.
Even in areas where the generosity of private donors, such as Mr. John D. Rockefeller, jr., stands ready to make a gift of these treasure spots, local forces are often marshaled by selfish interests to prevent the transfer.
We trust, nevertheless, that the acquisition of vital areas, particularly in the Grand Teton and Great Smoky areas, can be accomplished this year.
The National Park Service continues to extend its activities into the eastern portion of the United States.
The Colonial National Monument in Virginia was established on December 30, 1930.
In addition to Yorktown, the new monument includes the old colonial town of Williamsburg and Jamestown Island, the latter the site of the first English settlement in the United States.
Provision is made for a parkway connecting the three historic areas.
The sesquicentennial celebration held at Yorktown October 16 to 19, 1931, in commemoration of the surrender of Lord Cornwallis, and arranged by the United States Yorktown Sesquicentennial Commission, was an unqualified success.
The United States commission, the various cooperating agencies, and the National Park Service deserve congratulation.
Another important eastern development' is the rehabilitation of the George Washington Birthplace National Monument at Wakefield, Va.
Construction of the house and kitchen has been completed and much accomplished in landscaping the area and improving the old Washington family burial grounds.
It is planned to dedicate this area to public use on next February 11, when the bicentennial celebrations start.
On November 2, 1931, representatives of the Governors of North Carolina and Tennessee presented the department with deeds to another area of 170,000 acres of land in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park.
The total area deeded to the Federal Government is now approximately 300,000 acres.
The park lacks but 130,000 acres of the minimum area specified by Congress for full development.
Another project east of the Mississippi is the proposed Isle Royale National Park, in Michigan.
Authority for its establishment was given by Congress at the close of the last session.
This project is now in the status of the Shenandoah and Mammoth Cave proposed parks; when the necessary lands therefor have been deeded to the United States, the parks will be established.
Progress has been made on the latter two projects during the year, and the State association engaged in acquiring the Mammoth Cave area reports that sufficient funds are in hand to buy the necessary lands for park establishment.
Construction and improvement activities were begun early in the season and carried as late into the fall as possible, and every effort made to furnish employment for local people.
In those parks in the vicinity of Indian reservations many Indian laborers were employed.
In addition to the employment furnished through the regular park appropriations, a total of $2,078,800 was allotted to the National Park Service from the emergency public-works funds, and this was used in road construction in areas in Virginia, Arizona, and Utah, where the emergency was particularly acute.
The Bureau of Public Roads continued throughout the year to render service in road building in the national parks and monuments under the agreement between the Department of Agriculture and the Department of the Interior.
Through the interest of the bureau engineers in preserving the beauty of.the natural landscape, the highways now being built in the parks not only are feats of engineering but are also superb from a scenic standpoint.
The Eastern National Park-to-Park Highway, designated last April, is an interesting development.
At present it connects the Great Smoky Mountains National Park, the Colonial and George Washington Birthplace National Monuments, and the proposed Shenandoah and Mammoth Cave National Parks.
Later it is hoped it may be extended to serve Acadia National Park in Maine, the proposed Isle Royale Park, and the Florida Everglades, should this project receive approval.
To meet the increased popular demand, the educational programs in practically all of the national parks will be augmented during the coming year.
Lectures, naturalist guided trips, both on foot and in auto caravans, and museum facilities, all were expanded last year.
Special emphasis has been laid by the new branch of education and research upon the historical aspects of park and monument work, and a new program dealing with the colonial history of the United States has been initiated.
The Educational Advisory Board, composed of eminent scientists and educators serving without pay, has continued to assist the Director of the National Park Service on difficult problems along their particular lines.
One of their interesting current recommendations is that legal provision be made for a trust-fund committee to handle endowment funds.
The establishment of natural boundaries makes acquisition of adjoining lands a frequent problem; and within the parks themselves, private lands still constitute the most serious problem of administration and protection facing the National Park Service, despite the fact that excellent progress was made in eliminating some of them during the past year.
For the purchase of such lands an appropriation of $1,000,000 was made by Congress, all of it except $200,000 to be expended on a 50-50 basis in cooperation with private funds.
A total of 8,917.82 acres of alienated lands was brought into Government ownership during the fiscal year 1931.
It is estimated that there still remain 95,138.60 acres of alienated lands in the national park and monument system.
Had the Government commenced its policy by preservation of these areas for public use a quarter century earlier, millions of dollars would have been saved.
We now face the identical problem: That of foreseeing the right of our grandchildren to certain remaining bits of primitive America and of preserving certain recreation areas for them.
On December 3, 1929, the President appointed a committee consisting of 52 eminent men and women experienced in educational problems as the National Advisory Committee on Education, and asked them to give us the proper chart by which to select our educational course in so far as the Federal Government is concerned with it.
The Secretary of the Interior and the Commissioner of Education were designated as liaison officers.
On November 16, 1931, this committee rendered its report.
It is the first comprehensive survey of the relationship of the Federal and State Governments to each other in the problem of education.
Obligation.
Under our theory and practice of popular sovereignty, has the Federal Government an obligation to promote education in the United States?
Control.
Shall we delegate to the Federal Government any basic and final political control over all or any part of the education of the American people, in the sense in which the States now exercise such powers?
Finance.
Can and should we use the Federal tax system to aid the States financially in supporting American education without inevitably delegating to the Federal Government control of the social purposes and specific processes of education?
Information.
Can an efficient national service of research and information operated by the Federal Government provide the intellectual assistance needed for stimulating and improving education in the States in such manner as to meet adequately the national responsibility for American education?
It made a statement of policies on these issues under eight headings.
1.
Responsibility.
There are national responsibilities for education which only the Federal Government can adequately meet.
2.
Management.
Although the educational obligations of each of the three levels of American government, Federal, State, and local, are equally full and binding, these obligations may and ought, in fact, to be discharged by each of these governments in a somewhat different manner.
3.
Decentralization.
It is particularly unwise to centralize in the Federal Government the power of determining the social purposes to be served by educational institutions or of establishing the techniques of educational procedure.
It is most nearly free from social caste or class bias.
In all its present trends it aims to discover and to cultivate in each member of the whole population the personal talents most useful to society and to the individual.
The political domination of education by a remote central government, managed by administrative officers far removed from local conditions and sympathies, has always led to the evils of bureaucratic unresponsiveness to local and to changing needs, to bureaucratic standardization, red tape, and delay, and to official insensitiveness to the criticism of fardistant parents and citizens.
Education is of too intimate concern to the American parents to be brought under a far-removed civil administration which tends toward relative inflexibility.
Once it is allowed to operate on the plastic and uncritical minds of youth at school, democracy faces a catastrophe.
A decentralized system of management and control of schools is the one absolutely reliable antidote to the easy capture of schools by the propagandists of an economic, social, or political cult.
4.
Tax systems.
The American people are justified in using their Federal tax system to give some financial aid to education in the States, provided they do this in a manner that does not delegate to the Federal Government any control of the social purposes and specific processes of education.
5.
Grants.
If federally collected tax money is used to give financial aid to the States, it should be given to aid education as a whole and not as special grants for the stimulation of particular types of training.
6.
Matching.
The matching of Federal money grants with State or local funds whether their use is for general or special educational purposes is a policy not to be favored in the field of education.
7.
Research.
The Federal Government should render large intellectual assistance to the States in matters of education through scientific research, and the collection and dissemination of reliable information, particularly when the types of intellectual, scientific, and professional service needed can not be provided by the States and the local communities.
8. Transition.—Modification of the Federal means of aiding education should include provisions to assure adequate periods of transition."
For the furtherance of these policies the committee makes certain recommendations in Part II of its report.
To realize the policies presented in this report, there must be in the Government, close to its head coordinator, the Chief Executive, a spokesman for the American spirit and method in education who may on all occasions express that enlightened public opinion upon educational matters which is our surest guide in formulating public policy.
The lack of such an official spokesman for education competent and influentially situated in the Government has been one of the conditions, and a major condition, which has permitted us to drift into our present dilemma, where a Nation, by tradition and experience opposed to the federalized administration of education, has in fact developed a pluralized Federal control of education in the States through various Federal agencies, which are not even coordinated in their efforts.
This drift toward centralized Federal controls is attested by the efforts of enabling acts, land and money grants with a restricted educational purpose, and approvals and vetoes over State plans, all sanctioned by law and departmental rulings."
On this basis it recommends the creation of a Federal department of education, of which the present Office of Education would be the nucleus.
The functions of the Federal Board for Vocational Education, stripped of the authority to withhold funds or require State matching of funds, would be transferred, as would the Public Health Service.
Educational activities within each department, such as the Navy and War Departments and the Indian Service, would remain where they are, but an interdepartmental council on education would coordinate their work.
Powers.—The Federal department of education as here recommended will have no legal or financial power and no regulatory or executive authority, direct or indirect, explicit or implied, by which it may control the social purposes and specific processes of education. This limitation of powers necessitates a complete reversal of the tendency exhibited in much recent Federal legislation to build up a centralized control of the purposes and processes of education in the Federal Government."
The policies outlined by the committee, emphasizing as they do the necessity for preserving the American theory of decentralization, are an excellent chart.
The recommendation that they be furthered by creation of a Federal department of education deserves further study.
My experience with Federal bureaus and departments does not encourage a belief that, once created, decentralization becomes their goal.
Because the Interior Department includes the Office of Education and has a large educational responsibility in the Indian Service, it has had an opportunity to see the Federal Government in operation in the educational field at both extremes.
Our experience with centralized supervision of education for the Indians should warn the American people away from centralized control of their own education from Washington.
Prejudice, bad advice, or lack of brains may temporarily flood any educational enterprise; but a ship with 48 compartments is hard to sink.
In the autumn of 1930, with the approval of the President and the cooperation of State superintendents of education, the Secretary of the Interior appointed a national advisory committee on illiteracy.
Our 1920 census showed that there were 5,000,000 Americans over the age of 10 who could not read or write.
This showing was accentuated by the discoveries about our citizenry during the World War.
There has been a 12.6 per cent reduction in the last decade.
At this rate it would take 50 years to bring reading and writing, the first tools of democracy, to the hands of a large element of our population.
When the American people revived a political institution of antiquity, the Republic, they relied upon education to make an institution succeed here which had crumbled in the hands of the ancients.
Today we have in 43 States, and in over 1,000 centers of American life, regional committees at work on the problem.
It is the first time in the history of the country that a national organization has been set up to combat illiteracy.
It was made possible through the generosity of the Rosenwald Fund, John D. Rockefeller, jr., and others.
We hope to lay a basis which will lead to the eradication of illiteracy within a decade.
The presence of the Office of Education in this department, with its nation-wide research contacts, has offered a foundation from which to launch this attack.
The Office of Education now has few administrative functions.
It is an establishment for research and the dissemination of data on education.
Those activities will become even more characteristic of it during the current year.
We now have under way three nation-wide surveys: Those in secondary education, the professional training of teachers, and school finances.
They are conducted by the division of major surveys, created during the past year.
More than 50 minor research studies were completed and submitted for publication during the past year.
An important new effort will be that of the newly created section of negro education.
Contacts are kept up with foreign school systems.
Statistics are compiled on a host of subjects in this country.
Education by radio during the past year had the attention of a specialist, whose employment was made possible by the Payne Fund of New York City.
A senior specialist in education by radio has lately been added to the regular staff of the office.
Hawaii, a melting pot whose population is 6 per cent Hawaiian, 8 per cent part Hawaiian, 7 per cent Portugese, 38 per cent Japanese, 17 per cent Filipino, and 12 per cent Caucasian, continues to develop a commercial integration with the United States which is remarkable.
Income-tax payments to the United States Government last year ranked ahead of those from Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Mississippi, Montana, Nebraska, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oregon, South Carolina, South Dakota, Utah, and Vermont.
Of the $108,- 439,103 worth of goods which she exported in fiscal year 1931, about $99,000,000 came to the mainland of the United States.
Incidentally, her balance of trade continued to be favorable; imports were only $91,213,049, the great bulk of which came from the mainland.
The two great exports are pineapples, which brought in $39,000,000, and sugar, which realized $59,000,000.
Twenty-one steamers are in regular service between the mainland and Hawaii.
Her population is about 368,336, an increase of 44 per cent over the 1920 figures.
About 20,000 tourists, mostly from the mainland of the United States, visited the islands last year.
The Interior, the War, and the Navy Departments are the three Federal departments with which Hawaii comes most closely in contact.
In civil matters the islands are almost entirely self-governed.
The governor is appointed by the President but is a resident of Hawaii.
The legislature and the county governments are locally elected.
There are under way in Hawaii a number of constructive governmental efforts.
A quarter of the area of the islands is now under forest production.
Reforestation is proceeding at the rate of about 28,000 trees per month, with an extraordinary percentage of survival of nearly 88 per cent.
Educational curricula are being improved.
Emphasis is being put on subjects which will stimulate interests in local living problems.
School attendance increased 5 per cent, to 76,634.
Health is receiving more emphasis.
Sanatorium care is provided where possible on the discovery of symptoms of tuberculosis in school children.
Periodical tests, aided by pamphlets, visits of school nurses, moving-picture films, and radio are being put to use in the schools.
The infant mortality rate has been reduced to 75.99 per thousand, the lowest in the history of the Territory.
It is interesting to note that the highest rate is found among the native Hawaiian population, 199.49, and lowest in the Japanese element, 41.65.
The death rate from tuberculosis is dropping slowly.
Public-health nursing last year accounted for 17,038 visits to infants and preschool children.
Economic conditions continue on a steady plane (last year shows a new high record of production for the pineapple and sugar industries), with improving health and educational facilities and an established commercial tie to the mainland.
Hawaii should continue to be a credit to her flag.
The development of this great frontier, like that of each of the American frontiers which have preceded it, will depend upon two factors: The attraction of wealth, and the pressure of population behind.
The latter factor is not yet of great assistance.
We have not yet consolidated and outgrown our conquest of the southern half of the continent.
But because Alaska is one of the great reservoirs of natural resources to which we shall eventually turn, this department is endeavoring to stimulate the development of resources which will attract to that country the new settlers whom our present population has not yet propelled.
Although Alaska has produced since 1880 some $629,313,000 in mineral wealth, there has been a gradual decline since 1916.
However, gold mining is this year on the increase and it is expected that about $8,476,000 will be extracted during calendar year 1931, as against $7,761,000 in 1929.
Copper production decreased this year by 8,000,000 pounds—the total was 32,651,000 pounds.
The value of the copper output decreased from $7,130,000 to $4,244,600.
The fisheries showed a net decline of return to the fishermen of $4,200,000; the net return this year was $12,285,000.
Twenty-seven thousand five hundred and sixty-eight persons were employed in fiscal year 1931 against the 1930 total of 29,283.
Inasmuch as these two industries, mining and fishing, are responsible for over 90 per cent of Alaskan exports and 95 per cent of all labor, the effects upon the Government-owned Alaska Railroad have been serious.
The railroad has been running behind about $1,000,000 each year.
In an endeavor to place it on a paying basis a Senate committee, after an investigation, recommended that freight rates be increased from 35 to 70 per cent and that passenger rates be increased 66% per cent, and that train service be drastically cut.
These recommendations were followed.
Although reduced, the deficit amounted this year to $589,750.
The long-time effect on the growth of revenue remains to be seen.
The Senate committee's report has been published as Report 1230, Seventy-first Congress, third session.
Heretofore, the fixing of rates has been a function exercised by administrative officers with an effort to promote local traffic.
The policy required by the Senate committee, however, will be given a full and fair trial.
As mining always has been the great lodestone for Alaskan development, the Government has embarked on an exploratory program carried out by the Geological Survey in an endeavor to develop new possibilities.
The last session of Congress appropriated $250,000 for exploration designed to develop industries along the Alaska Railroad, and the program is now well under way.
It is too early to predict what may be found.
Among the interesting Alaskan statistics are those of the Government efforts to conserve animal resources.
The seal herd on the Pribiloff Islands was entrusted to the care of the United States by a convention with Great Britain in 1910.
At that time the seal population was 132,000; in 1930 it was 1,045,101, although thousands of pelts had been taken meanwhile.
The 1930 crop was 42,500.
The reindeer imported by the United States have increased in 40 years from 1,500 to approximately 1,000,000.
This growth has brought a counterpart to the problems of the old western range.
White owners and Eskimos have come into conflict over ownership of the herds and over grazing privileges.
This year a reindeer council of six, representing natives, Government, and private interests, met and agreed upon certain range rules and supervision under a new reindeer service which is to be responsible to the Territorial government.
Thirteen thousand natives are dependent on reindeer for a livelihood.
About 2,500 own their own deer.
This attempt to achieve a local settlement of the reindeer problem is one of our efforts to have as many Alaskan problems as possible settled in Alaska by Alaskans.
Lack of Territorial finances prevents a complete present realization of this policy.
Thus while the Territory educates the white children, Indian children are educated at the cost of the United States.
This year the Office of Indian Affairs took over the administration of native schools from the Office of Education.
Inasmuch as 48 cents of each dollar collected by the Territory goes for educational purposes, it is apparent that we can not now ask the Territory to assume the native educational burden, although that is where it ultimately should rest.
July 1, 1931, was the date upon which the transfer of native education from the Office of Education to the Office of Indian Affairs became effective.
The current year, therefore, is the first under.
Severe climatic conditions continue to make transportation and communication one of the principal obstacles to Alaska's growth.
There are as yet no regular air mail routes.
The governor strongly recommends that an Army air squadron be established in Alaska for training and incidental assistance in maintaining communication.
The special air mail where utilized traverses in a few hours distances upon which the dog team requires weeks.
Alaska, despite the drop in mining and fishing activities, continues to maintain a fair balance of trade.
In 1931 it was about 37 per cent of total commerce as against 36 per cent in 1980.
Cruising up and down the Yukon River is a Government enterprise not paralleled elsewhere under the American flag.
The medical boat last year treated 1,493 clinical cases, performed 234 surgical operations, and 4,122 dental operations in areas where other medical attention is seldom available.
There is no general Alaskan taxation system.
Railroads pay 1 per cent of gross receipts, license taxes bring in some additional funds, and 25 per cent of the receipts of national forests go to the Territory.
Its expenditures each year range between $10,000,000 and $12,000,000 and its income covers these.
One of the great latent resources of Alaska is its forests.
Thirteen per cent of the national forest area of the United States is in Alaska, most of it on the southern coast from Ketchikan to Cook Inlet.
A billion board feet annually may be harvested each year.
Ninety per cent of all production will be usable for paper.
Hydroelectric power sites are abundant.
An interesting project now under promotion is a highway from Seattle, Wash., to Fairbanks, Alaska.
Alignment has been agreed upon by the Canadian authorities.
When this road is completed there should be an immediate benefit to Alaska as well as the Canadian territory traversed the pressure of American population will come to bear upon these areas for the first time.
Nearly 1,250 miles of this highway are already completed, principally from the Canadian border north into Britisn Columbia.
Ultimately it will be 2,200 miles long.
Construction of about 970 miles is needed.
We look forward to the hope of cooperation of our Canadian neighbors in making available to both countries the advantages of a connected line of communication.
This department comes into contact with the problems of our negro people at three points: Howard University, here in Washington, partly financed by the Government; Freedmen's Hospital, also here; and the Virgin Islands.
In addition, the Office of Education has created a new division of negro education, and we now have under way a survey by a national advisory committee on negro education.
These activities are treated in more detail below.
Freedmen's Hospital continues to perform a large philanthropic mission.
Of 4,386 indoor patients under care during the year, only 871 were paying patients.
Four thousand nine hundred and fifty emergency cases were cared for.
We have secured an improved dietary department.
Increased personnel and some staff housing buildings are asked by the surgeon in chief.
The school of nursing has 108 students.
Howard University, with 2,380 undergraduates and 307 graduates, has had a year of progress.
Sixty-three faculty members were added, bringing the prospect of a less hurried contact between the faculty and this large student body.
A 20-year program outlined for the university by the Office of Education was accepted and recommended by the House Appropriations Committee.
The law school was put on a 3-year basis and is now accredited both by the American Bar Association and the State of New York.
A building program is under way which will add new dormitories and new facilities.
The Interior Department undertook a new responsibility on February 27, 1931.
Prior to that time, Herbert D. Brown, Chief of the Bureau of Efficiency, had conducted an exhaustive investigation of conditions in the Virgin Islands, and had rendered to Congress a report recommending a detailed economic and welfare program and a transfer of jurisdiction from the Navy Department to the Interior Department.
He also selected, and recommended for appointment as governor under the new regime; Paul M. Pearson, of Swarthmore College.
Mr. Brown's recommendations were accepted, in large part, by Congress; and his recommendation for governor was followed by the President's appointment of Mr. Pearson.
The Virgin Islands were transferred to this department from the Navy by Executive order on February 27, 1931.
They brought with them an economic and social problem dating back a hundred years.
We acquired the islands (St. John, St. Thomas, St. Croix) from Denmark in 1917 as a naval base.
The population had been decreasing from 1835 on.
Its per capita wealth was about one-eighth of that of the United States.
About 90 per cent of the people are negroes or of negro blood, a peaceful and hospitable English-speaking people.
Sixty per cent of the land on St. Thomas is still owned by 15 men; 80 per cent of that on St. John is owned by 12; 70 per cent of that on St. Croix belongs to 14.
Since the United States acquired these islands it has spent more for their welfare than the former sovereignty had spent in 200 years.
Nevertheless, each of the islands has suffered from economic factors beyond its control.
St. Thomas's main income has always come from its harbor, where the native population formerly carried coal for the ships that once used this as a coaling port.
Oil has largely replaced coal which has considerably reduced employment.
The radio has made it unnecessary for ships to call there for cable instructions.
Sugar production in St. Croix, the principal agricultural activity of the entire islands, has suffered from high average production costs and low crop ratios due to droughts, and from a depressed world sugar market.
Modern methods have been lacking and the high proportion of tenant farming has not helped bring costs down.
On St. John charcoal burning has used up much of the available forest cover.
1. Giving the natives' colonial councils major responsibilities; eliminating most Executive orders, putting natives in responsible jobs.
2. Improving the educational system by beginning agricultural and vocational training; an agricultural school is already appropriated for.
3. Teaching the people to raise gardens, and do subsistence farming; over a thousand have now been planted.
4. Getting the land into more diversified ownership through homesteads; we have made a beginning by negotiating for 2,300 acres to be so disposed of.
5. Persuading landowners to rent on a crop-sharing instead of a cash basis.
6. Giving better health education; the infant mortality is very high and the total mortality rate is three times that of continental United States.
8. Encouraging new facilities for tourists.
9. Aiding cattle exportation; about $80,000 worth have been shipped this year.
10. Eradicating the bollworm in an effort to revive the cotton industry; this requires that the native wild cotton, which is infested, be exterminated.
11. Reforesting abandoned farms; experiments are under way.
12. Organizing handicraft cooperatives; over 200 women have aIready been employed.
We face a long road toward economic stability in these islands.
Rehabilitation is not the problem, for there never has been any real prosperity.
Nowhere in the world has any government made so philanthropic an experiment in the aid of a people whose sovereignty it has acquired without gain to itself.
St. Elizabeths Hospital brings us into practical contact with the problem of mental hygiene.
This past year this institution had a daily average population of 4,602 persons whose mental health was far enough below par to require that they be set apart.
At the close of the year there were 4,721, representing an overcrowding of facilities by nearly one-third.
We now have authorization and some appropriations for a new tuberculosis building of 80 beds, two other buildings of 164 beds each, and a new male receiving building of 400 beds.
These buildings will go up under a plan for future exten sion which will ultimately add nine more buildings and several thousand acres to the grounds.
The sites are all located.
St. Elizabeths is a self-contained community the size of a small town.
Its plant is valued at over $7,000,000.
The output of its farm, shops, etc., last year was valued at $817,000.
Its fine Holstein-Friesian herd has been tested free of tuberculosis for 17 consecutive years.
The shoe shop produces all of the shoes used.
The Red Cross continues its quiet and effective work at St. Elizabeths.
It maintains recreation facilities and keeps up contact with patients' families throughout the world.
It assists in the adjustment of home financial problems where it can.
It maintains 3 psychiatric social workers, 3 recreation workers, and 3 secretaries.
Occupational therapy is undertaken wherever possible.
Last year 959 patients made with their hands articles worth nearly $27,000.
Patients furnished five radio programs over local stations.
Study of mental hygiene and care of the mentally sick is a comparatively new science.
More medical students and physicians need adequate training in psychiatry.
There should be internes in every hospital for study of the care of the insane.
The presence of the inquiring student would do more to advance pathological research in our mental hospitals than any other factor.
There will be over 100 medical students interning in St. Elizabeths during the coming year, and 10 specializing in psychiatry.
More of the research energy of the medical profession should be brought into the fields of psychology and psychiatry.
Most important is the education of the public so that they will view mental diseases as they do other diseases.
Finally, the handling and care of the mentally ill should be along medical rather than legal lines.
There should be as complete a release as possible from the meshes of the law which are now so difficult to escape.
The policeman, instead of the doctor, is generally the first contact between the insane person and the Government.
A jail instead of a hospital bed is generally his first confinement.
The superintendent of St. Elizabeths Hospital, Doctor White, again urges a revision of our District of Columbia laws.
Bills to this effect (S. 5486 and H. R. 15609) were introduced at the last session, directed toward a change in the methods of admission.
1. Voluntary commitment should be allowed on the patient's request, subject to discharge on three days' notice.
2. Insane persons taken into custody should not be tried as criminals, but should be held in the hospital and treated.
They should not be subject to trial unless on request of their relatives, guardian, or friends.
3. If a trial is demanded by the insane person, his guardian, his friends, or is directed by the court, the hearing should be without a jury, unless the insane man, his guardian, or his friends demand it.
Columbia government by either the superintendent of the hospital, or by any two physicians in regular attendance at any other hospital, that sanity has been recovered or that the person is not insane.
5. There should be an automatic restoration of civil rights on discharge, provided a certificate be obtained from adequate authority that the patient is cured or that further treatment is unnecessary or undesirable.
These changes will tend to make the law more modern and more humanitarian.
In all but seven States jury trial on the question of commitment has been abandoned.
Every inducement should be offered for voluntary subjection to treatment.
The law should be as unobtrusive as possible in permitting the care of the mentally sick, without attaching a personal stigma to them through court proceedings which are akin to criminal trials.
Gallaudet College and Kendall School make up this institution.
Gallaudet this past year had 132 students from 35 States, Canada, and the District of Columbia.
Kendall had 68.
A significant ceremony took place at Gallaudet; a gift of $50,000 was tendered by the alumni in honor of the founder, Dr. Edward Miner Gallaudet.
Though given in honor of another, the gift was a testimonial to the successful lives of the handicapped donors.
The money will be used toward a library and laboratory building; Congress' help will be needed.
Gallaudet's faculty salary scale is still inadequate, and new research facilities are needed for the advancement of education of the deaf.
A questionnaire to alumni as to occupations brought the information that 82 occupations are successfully followed by 721 former students.
Teaching and printing head the list in numbers; the average salary is $150 per month.
There follows a summary of the report of each officer reporting to the Secretary of the Interior.
These reports are printed separately and may be obtained on application to the Department of the Interior.
T'he tables printed in these separate reports are not reprinted here.
The Solicttor's Office.
Beard of Indian Cemmissieners.
Terrtories: Territory of Alaska.
The Alaska Ratlrood.
Territory of Hawalf.
The Virgin Islands.
St. Elizabeths Hospital.
Freodmen's Hoepttal.
Howard Unlversity.
Columbta Inslitution for the Deaf.
Exira-Departmental Acttellies: American Anligutties.
General Edusation Board.
Fuel Alministration; Coal Comntlssion.
Perry's Victory Memorial Commission.
During the year the solicitor's office presented more than 40 oral arguments to courts of the District of Columbia in the submission of cases for decision and in hearings on various motions.
Two test cases involving losses claimed under the act of March 2, 1919 (40 Stat. 1272), commonly known as the war minerals relief act, brought in pursuance of the act of Congress of February 13, 1929 (45 Stat. 1166), are now pending in the Supreme Court of the United States on the merits.
The particular items of loss covered are interest paid on borrowed capital and money expended for the purchase of mining properties.
These two cases were decided by the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia in favor of the contention of the Secretary of the Interior that such losses are not reimbursable under the act.
That court was reversed by the court of appeals (47 Fed. (2d) 422 and 424).
A total of 346 suits were brought under this act.
To the 88 mandamus suits pending at the beginning of the year, the object of which was to require the Secretary of the Interior to issue oil and gas permits to the respective petitioners under the act of February 25, 1920, known as the leasing act, have been added 247 new cases.
There were 8 test cases, 4 of which were decided by the court of appeals favorably to the department, and under a writ of certiorari its decision was affirmed by the Supreme Court of the United States.
On June 80, 1930, there were pending in the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia 392 cases involving departmental questions.
During the year 280 new cases were filed.
Of these, 23 were finally closed, leaving 649 yet to be acted on.
A number of the pending cases eventually will be closed in harmony with the test cases iuvolving the oil-conservation policy, when conditions will permit.
At the beginning of this fiscal year there were pending in the court of appeals 14 appeals.
During the year 10 were decided—8 in favor of the department, 2 adversely.
Four new appeals have been added, thus leaving on the docket of that court eight cases for review and decision.
The office cooperated with the Department of Justice in preparing the original case of the State of Utah v. United States in the Supreme Court, and with the Department of State in a matter before the United States-Canadian Commission, involving damage to public and Indian lands and timber from smelter fumes originating in Canada.
The office also cooperated with the United States attorney for the District of Columbia in the case of Jones et al. v. The Power Commission and the Secretaries of Interior and Agriculture, involving a power project in Alaska, and with the United States attorney for the District of Columbia in the suit brought by certain Seminole Indians against the Secretaries of the Treasury and Interior.
In the Osage extension cases involving tribal oil and gas rights in the Osage reservation, the assistant to the solicitor went personally to Oklahoma and cooperated with the United States attorney and the tribal special attorneys.
At the request of the Attorney General or the Solicitor General, the solicitor's office has also assisted the Department of Justice in preparing briefs, arguments, etc., in cases in the Supreme Court of the United States involving matters in which the Department of the Interior is interested.
At the request of the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia in some 20 cases during the past year, special information in the form of memorandums, citations of authority, etc., have been supplied to the court.
The solicitor and others in his office have also in numerous instances given oral advice and counsel to bureau chiefs, and attorneys from the various bureaus and offices of the department at their request and to assist them in discharge of their duties.
For the Federal Oil Conservation Board, the solicitor's office assisted in preparation of a compilation of statutes and regulations of the several States relating to the production and conservation of oil and gas.
It has also rendered assistance in the matter of personnel classification and in other miscellaneous matters.
The office has been sustained in the greater part of the litigation disposed of by the courts during the past year.
Opinions rendered by the solicitor, in those cases where the same were reviewed by the Attorney General or by the courts, have generally received concurrence.
The solicitor is a member of the departmental oil committee, which reviews all applications for oil-permit extensions, leases, and miscellaneous matters relating to oil.
The Sixty-second Annual Report of the Board of Indian Commissioners to the Secretary of the Interior shows that members of the board during the year officially inspected 88 units of the Indian Service located in 15 different States.
In its comments on conditions in the Indian country during this period under review, the board says that Indians as well as white farmers suffered practically complete crop losses in the drought area; that there was acute distress in some sections and in several areas the Red Cross joined its efforts with the Indian field service in providing emergency relief for Indian families.
In the opinion of the board thousands of Indians probably would have suffered to a distressing degree had it not been for Congress and the Indian Service; Congress “promptly and heartily responded to the commissioners' urgent request to provide means for emergency relief.
The report features the cooperation in behalf of distressed Indians which brought together the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the Red Cross, the Department of Agriculture, State and county agricultural welfare organizations, and local associations.
Never before," says the report, "in the history of the Indian Service has there been such effective teamwork of this kind.
The result of this relief and rehabilitation effort became apparent in the spring, for in a number of jurisdictions Indians planted more gardens than had ever been known before in those parts of the Indian country.
Commenting on the unusual interest taken by the Indians in raising a part of their own food supplies, the board calls attention to a former annual report in which“subsistence farming " by Indians was stressed, and states that in planning to promote Indian progress the Indian home and Indian family should be given first consideration.
Indian Office has ever rightly appraised the Indian home as the "strategic center " of an endeavor in the scheme in helping Indians to make themselves self-reliant, and that the current appropriations for carrying on the extension of home and industrial activities is far from enough to ađequately finance a program for bettering the home and helping the family toward self-reliance.
In its report the board takes issue with the Indian Office as respects some phases of the latter's educational policy.
It believes that the new civil service requirements, set up by the Indian Office for entrance into the Indian school service, " are unnecessarily high."
We submit that for teachers and administrators in the Indian schools, experience, resourceful minds, Christian character, sympathy with the problems of the race, understanding of Indian peculiarities and common sense, grit, and gumption are more important than a college or normal-school degree.
Members of the board while in the fleld during this year became conscious of a feeling of apprehension and uncertainty among the fleld personnel.
Apparently thisunsatisfactory mental attitude had been developed by the inelastic application of the new retirement act, which places the retiring age at 65 years instead of 70, as formerly; by several investigations which have been in progress, and by reports, seemingly emanating from Washington and which were given wide publicity, to the effect that the Indian Service was about to make sweeping changes in the agency and school service personnel.
Although the reports were exaggerated it is a fact that in the last two years the changes in superintendents of agencies, reservation schools, sanitoria, and warehouses affected 58 fleld-service men.
There were 64 changes in all, two each being made at six of the units.
We still hold the opinion that the best interests of the service and of the Indians would: have been served had advantage been taken of the provision in the retirement act authorizing heads of department to continue the services of employees who had reached retiring age.
Not only has the service unnecessarily lost the valuable experience and seasoned constructive talent of a number of faithful, conscientious employees but there has developed the feeling in the feld that loyalty and experience are not regarded as service assets and desirable qualifications by the Indian Office in appraising the records of the fleld-service personnel.
One cause of the disquietude in the fleld was the abruptness which characterized a number of discharges, transfers, and promotions of employees.
We hope that hereafter before action is taken which affects the status of a fleld employee the Indian Office will give the employee advanced information and a chance to be heard.
Several years ago the Board of Indian Commissioners took the position that the Indian Service schools should strive not so much for uniformity and standardization as for adaption to actual and varying needs; that they should not endeavor to reproduce the experiments and failures of the public schools, but should apply methods suited to the special problem of the Indian, and that, above all, they should emphasize vocational training and the teaching of applicable and useful trades.
The board reports that pursuant to action taken at its annual meeting a conference was held in the board's office February 17 between a committee of the board and representatives of a number of mission boards of churches which maintain missionary stations in Indian reservations; the purpose of the conference was to promote efficient cooperation between reservation missionaries and reservation superintendents.
An outcome of the conference was the sending of a letter to the superintendents by the commissioner suggesting cooperation with missionaries, and a letter of like import to missionaries from their mission boards.
In the missionary letter there was inclosed a statement of the aim of “ the Indian Šervice as set forth by the chairman of the United States Board of Indian Commissioners.
1. The training of all Indians to be self-sustaining, self-respecting American citizens.
2. A practical and vocational educational program which will fit the Indians for absorption into the industrial, agricultural, and social life of the Nation.
3. The promotion of the health of Indians living on reservatlons by the enforcement of suitable hygienic and sanitary regulations and by adequate medical, surgical, nursing, and hospital service.
4. The enforcement of law and order on all Indian reservations.
5. The opening of opportunities for appropriate work for Indians which will encourage them in full responsibilities for their own advancement.
6. The conservation and utilization of the natural resources belonging to the Indians and the improvement of the economic condition which must underlie social and cultural progress.
7. The improvement of housing conditions by instruction in domestic economy and by using Indian earnings and resources in building better houses and stabilizing family life.
8. The encouragement of Indian arts and industry and the opening of marketing channels for Indian products.
9. It is the policy of the present administration to provide or continue separate Indian schools only where it is impossible to merge the education of Indians in the public school systems of the several States.
10. It is the expectation of the service to help Indian young people who are qualified to go beyond the ordinary school course to seek further education in appropriate institutions of higher or professional training.
11. The Indian Service welcomes the cooperation of the mission boards, the independent societies devoted to Indian welfare, and of public-minded individuals in carrying out this program, and especially in providing the opportunities for religious education and for spiritual culture which can not fall within the jurisdiction of the Government.
The depression has in no manner lessened the demand for our remaining public lands.
Since 1923 there has been an annual increase in the areas devoted to new uses under the public land Iaws.
Owing to reductions in the list of Indian allotments and in sales of Indian lands, the acreage embraced in original appropriations for the year 1981 was slightly under that of 1930; otherwise the new entries, including homesteads and mining locations, were in excess of last year's showing.
Revenues from sources other than the act of February 25, 1920 (41 Stat. 437), and sales of Indian lands compare favorably with those of recent years.
There was a falling off of Indian allotments and sales of Indian lands.
The record low price registered by oil, together with other factors affecting the oil industry, resulted in a considerable reduction in amounts realized from the mineral leasing act.
While not excessive, the arrearages were greater than they were last year.
The continuous increase in the work demanded and secured for the ensuing year a small provision for increase in the personnel, and it is believed that in a comparatively short time the work of the office may be brought current.
Additional amounts made available for fighting forest fires were the means of a more efficient distribution of our fire-prevention forces.
Sales, leases, and other disposition of public lands, etc., resulted in cash receipts totaling $4,618,255.53 and from sales of Indian lands $214,423.32, all of which was deposited in the Treasury of the United States.
Receipts of the Federal Government from bonuses, royalties, and rentals under the laws providing for the leasing and mineral rights on the public domain aggregated $3,531,655.05.
The largest amounts were obtained from mineral lands in Wyoming, $2,184,422.88.
California was the second State in the amount of receipts with $870,453.58.
Thase from other States follow: New Mexico, $163,432.73; Montana, $91,596.73; Utah, $87,813.28; Colorado, $83,581.14; North Dakota, $22,627.79; Alabama, $12,453; Idaho, $6,092.51; Washington, $4,907.88; Louisiana, $3,532.23; South Dakota, $560; Arizona, $101.30; Nevada, $80.
These: figures do not include $33,074.09 received as royalties from lands in the State of Wyoming under the act of June 26, 1926, of which the State does not receive a share.
Under the provisions.of the mineral leasing act of February 25, 1920 (41 Stat. 437), the States secure 371/2 per cent of the receipts.
Subject to final adjustments by the Comptroller general, the amounts received will be distributed as follows: Reclamation fund, $2,396,605.13; public land States and certain counties.
Total expenditures for the conduct of the business of the General Land Office, including expenses of the district land offices ($276,- 136.44), amounted: to $2;158,159.81; disbursements from deposits by individuals for surveying public lands ($29,524.26) and from appropriations and funds for surveying Indian reservations ($60,152.33) are not included in the foregoing either as receipts or expenditures.
The total area of public and Indian lands originally entered and allowed was 5,218,627 acres, not including 91,470 acres embraced in finals not heretofore counted as original dispositions of land.
Patented mineral entries embrace 25,627 acres.
The stock-raising homestead act of December 29, 1916 (39 Stat. 862), was the means for the entry of 4,201,766 acres.
The area patented on original dispositions was 1,938,864 acres, of which 1,058,102 acres were patented with all minerals reserved.
July 1, 1930, there were pending in the field for investigation 17,129 cases; 20,594 additional were received; 19,998 were investigated, reported, and closed; and 479 dropped as not constituting separate and individual cases, leaving 17,246 not investigated.
Of the report submitted, 12,744 were, adverse and 7,254 favorable.
The arrearages of 117 cases over last year's total is due to the large number of oil shale and oil placer claims, there being 9,070 such cases.
Cash collected by this service and turned into the Treasury, $25,677.74, due to the activity of the feld investigators; 123,431 acres were restored to the public domain representing fraudulent entries, etc.
Civil suits brought by the Department of Justice in connection with the activities of the field forces numbered 42, of which 80 were won and 12 lost.
Thirteen criminal prosecutions resulted in convictions and in two of these cases prison sentences were imposed.
The direct appropriations for this service, amounting to $703,060, were augmented by other special funds to the extent of $96,067.60.
Surveys or resurveys were made in 21 States and in the Territory of Alaska by 226 groups, of which 54 in 15 States were engaged in resurveys.
That part of the work that may be computed on a line basis totals 19,391 miles, the average cost of which was $18.54 a mile.
Surveys of agricultural lands applied for by settlers and the States to accommodate entries under the enlarged and stock-raising homestead acts and to provide for State selections continued to represent in point of volume the major surveying activities of the office.
There is a special effort made to complete such current work, because of its importance to the development and progress of the country.
It has not been possible in recent years to accomplish this purpose on account of the limitation of appropriations.
However, during the year 1931 approximately 2,450,000 acres of these agricultural lands were surveyed.
The increase is due partly to the concentration of funds for that purpose and partly to the character of the country.
The larger fields of present-day agricultural-land surveys are in the States of Arizona, Nevada, New Mexico, and Utah.
There was a continuation of the survey of township exteriors over parts of southeastern Utah to serve as bases for descriptions of oil placer claims and for other location purposes.
Extensive surveying operations were carried on in cooperation with the Forest Service, Department of Agriculture, National Park Service, the Geological Survey, the Bureau of Reclamation, the Indian Office, and the Coast and Geodetic Survey.
Such work aggregated during the year exclusive of boundary lines in special cases not measurable on a quantity basis approximately 780,000 acres.
There were accepted and placed on file plats representing 1,498,888 acres of original surveys of public lands and in addition 816,795 acres of lands resurveyed.
The copper plates for the 1931 edition of the map of the United States have been revised and the data thereon brought to date.
The State maps of Wisconsin and Wyoming are in the hands of the contractor for printing.
Work is progressing upon the recompilation of the map of the State of Idaho, and preliminary steps have been taken to compile new maps of Arizona and Oregon.
Two special maps of the Owens River Valley and Mono Lake districts, California, were prepared to show the status of the lands withdrawn for the protection of the watershed supplying water to the city of Los Angeles, and leasing for grazing purposes under the act of March 4, 1931 (46 Stat. 1530).
Numerous maps of the public-land States are being prepared for the use of the Department of Justice in connection with suits brought by the Sioux and other Indians.
There were sold 21,628 photolithographic copies of township plats, for which $10,896 was received and 9,168 copies were furnished other departments for official use.
Original homestead entries approved for patenting numbered 6,199.
There were also considered 1,966 applications to make second homestead entry; 934, to amend; 1,028, for leaves of absence and extensions of time; also 9,835 original entries, 19,339 appeals from action of district land offices, etc., making a total of applications for second homestead entries, amendments, extensions of time, leaves of absence, original homesteads, and appeals considered, 33,102.
One thousand five hundred and fifty-three public-sales applications received action and resulted in the issuance of 250 patents.
There were patented 211 timber and stone applications out of a total of 401 considered during the year.
The public lands located in States having no local land offices are disposed of in the General Land Office, and it is difficult to apply the usual unit of measurement to the cases arising in such States.
Restoration and openings subject to the preferences of ex-service men.
Through release from segregation or withdrawal or through survey or resurvey, public lands aggregating 3,698,798 acres and 829,373 acres, respectively, were restored to disposition subject to the preferences accorded ex-service men.
There were 26 oil and gas cases on hand involving leases and relief applications under sections 14, 18, 18 (a), 19, and 22 of the act of February 25, 1920 (41 Stat. 437) and 1,027 cases were received.
Ninety-five leases were granted.
Section 14 of the leasing act was the authority for the issuance of 90 leases covering an area of approximately 57,600 acres to permittees who showed discovery of oil or gas as result of prospecting under permits.
17, authorizing the public sale of leases, one lease was issued in the Monroe gas field, Louisiana, for 39.75 acres, on which a bonus of $596.25 was paid.
Two in the Wiley field, Wyoming, one for 519.40 acres, for which $114,400 was paid, and one for 199.84 acres, on which the bonus paid was $83,200.
There were two in the Baker gas field, Montana, one for 320 acres and the other for 480 acres, on which bonuses amounting to $4,825 and $2,450, respectively, were paid.
Final action was taken on 40 oil and gas applications, 303 assignments were considered, and 2,563 applications for extensions of time were disposed of.
One thousand six hundred seventy-six permits were held for cancellation and 1,655 finally canceled; 5,212 cases were examined on which further action was necessary, leaving 755 pending at the close of the year.
There were on hand 154 mineral entries at the beginning of the year; 697 were received, 686 were disposed of, leaving 155 awaiting action.
Of those disposed of, 223 were approved for patent.
Thirty applications for coal permits, leases, and licenses were left over from last year; 2,601 were received; 93 coal prospecting permits issued, covering an aggregate of 76,864.04 acres.
Thirty-four coal leases, embracing 3,876.47 acres, were granted, and 33 coal licenses for 1,440 acres were given.
The total number of cases disposed of was 2,577, leaving 54 for consideration.
One potash lease, involving 1,320 acres, and 58 potash permits, embracing 125,678.87 acres, were issued under the act of February 7, 1927.
Sodium permits numbering 11 were, pursuant to the act of February 25, 1920, as amended by the act of December 11, 1928, issued for an area of 17,110.25 acres.
One sodium lease for 405.20 acres was executed.
There were on July 1, 1930, 57 sodium cases on hand; 1,616 were received and 580 disposed of, leaving 93 awaiting action.
Miscellaneous mineral cases brought over from last year total 54; 935 were received, 881 adjudicated, thus leaving 108 awaiting action.
There were 36 mineral applications pending July 1, 1930; 182 were reported, 186 disposed of, while 82 await action.
Thirteen field reports on oil-shale locations not embraced in patent proceedings were pending on July 1, 1930; 865 were received, 824 disposed of, leaving 54 for consideration during the next year.
Charges were directed against 7,568 locations, embracing approximately 900,592 acres.
103 unadjudicated July 1, 1981.
During the year, 1,181 shale locations, embracing approximately 140,539 acres, were declared nul and void.
There were 85 mining applications embracing oil-shale lands on hand at the beginning of the fiscal year for 236 claims, involving approximately 37,604 acres.
Five such applications were received for 25 claims, including 3,875 acres; two applications, embracing 11 claims, with a total of 1,750 acres, were rejected; 14 applications for 64 claims, covering 9,800 acres, were allowed, leaving on hand 24 applications for 186 claims, with an acreage of 29,932 acres.
There were 48 entries for oil shale lands for 380 claims, describing 47,662 acres, awaiting action at the beginning of the year; 14 entries were received for 64 claims, including 9,800 acres.
Twenty entries were approved for patent, embracing 124 claims for 19,046 acres, leaving without action 42 entries, 270 claims, involving an acreage of 38,416.
The enactment of legislation for the Hoover Dam project made necessary the examination and adjudication of mineral locations with an area selected for purposes of that enterprise.
This has increased the work without adding to the number of employees.
On July 1, 1930, 661 field reports were pending and 1,597 cases were received during the year involving lands within the project; 2,115 were disposed of, leaving 43 awaiting action June 30, 1931.
There have been 196 contests received in connection with the lands in the project since January, 1931.
One hundred and ninety-one were disposed of, leaving five on hand at the end of the fiscal year.
Final action on these cases will be had upon receipt of supplemental reports necessary to complete the records.
The field service represents that there are approximately 1,000 additional locations for examination, which will require action in this office after reports have been received.
A number of patented salt and other mining claims within the area of the project will necessitate appraisal by the field service.
The work will require several months time.
Hearings will be necessary under proceedings already instituted and those that may be hereafter brought against mining locations.
The expenditures of large amounts of money have been required in the publication in most instances of notices of adverse proceedings for the reason that post-offiee addresses of claimants are unknown, so that publication has been necessary in order to effect service of notice upon the claimants.
Leases.
The act of May 24, 1928 (45 Stat. 728), authorizes the leasing of public lands for use as public aviation fields.
Sixty-eight applications under this act were considered, 3 leases were granted, and 1 canceled.
The area granted to the city of Rock Springs, Wyo., was 480 acres; to Needles, Calif., 625.56 acres; and to the Mid-Continent Air Express Corporation, 40.53 acres for lands in Santa Fe County, N. Mex.