If we were to take an inventory of the Bureau of Reclamation's work at the end of the fiscal year, we would find 17,623 miles of canals, 742 tunnels, 894 miles of pipe, 1,477 miles of road, 120 miles of railroad, 4,044 miles of telephone lines, and 30,308 miles of transmission lines.
In the structures it has built rest over 311,000,000 cubic yards of earth and rock and 5,115,964 cubic yards of concrete.
This is a little more than the four and one-half million yards of concrete being placed in Hoover Dam and appurtenant works.
To one who can grasp these figures, the resulting volume of concrete and excavation is equivalent to the building of a concrete highway 24 feet wide from New York to San Francisco, paralleled by a ditch 50 feet wide and 10 feet deep.
These works have cost $198,000,000, of which about $46,500,000 has been repaid.
The work of the Reclamation Service is scattered through all of our Western States.
Reclamation's concrete is the backbone and reclamation's canals are the arteries of these States.
Reclamation is currently subject to two perils.
It is subject to attack in some quarters because it is supposed to be adding new farm lands to compete with established production, whereas in fact the policy under this administration has been to spend reclamation funds on the rescue of established projects whose water supply is inadequate.
The second danger is an internal and more subtle one.
That danger is the tendency of some projects to yield to local agitation for the repudiation of their Government obligations.
Some projects need help temporarily and the department is glad to assist them in securing relief; but any determined and widespread movement to get out from under the Government debt is going to dissipate the revolving fund out of which all reclamation work is financed, and destroy the inclination of Congress to provide any new funds from other sources.
In 1927 the department laid out a 10-year construction program budgeted on an estimated income of $10,000,000 a year.
All expenditures, by statutory direction, come out of a revolving fund.
The income to that fund comes from three sources: (1) Revenue from the public domain, (2) from construction repayments by settlers, and (3) from hydroelectric projects.
None of it comes out of the Federal Treasury, except temporary loans to the reclamation fund, which must be repaid by that fund.
In 1932 the total income to the fund from all sources was about $5,400,000, or nearly $5,000,000 less than in the previous year, and about one-half of the annual budget planned in 1927.
At the present rate the 10-year program laid out in 1927 will require from 15 to 20 years for completion.
In 1927, the year in which the 10-year program of construction was adopted, the construction payments were $2,132,000.
In 1931 these payments had increased to $4,338,000.
Then followed the drop in agricultural prices, which has been especially heavy in the States where these projects are located.
This led to enactment by Congress of a moratorium relieving settlers from all construction payments in 1931 and one-half the construction payments in 1932.
As a result the construction payments during the fiscal year 1932 amounted to $1,195,000 and during 1933 are estimated at $500,000.
Income from the public domain shrank in 1932 about one-third; the drop was from $2,957,900 to $1,965,000.
The future of reclamation lies largely with the settlers on the reclamation projects.
The works which bring their water were constructed with Federal money, interest free.
Most of these districts are on a 40-year repayment program, and some of then have been given a longer time.
Freedom from interest on the outstanding investment, computed at 4 per cent, means a Federal subsidy of about $6,000,000 a year.
Every time a project exerts political pressure for further reduction of its obligations it knocks one more foundation stone from under the whole reclamation structure.
In looking to future revenues it is apparent that royalties from the public domain will not be sufficient to replace the construction repayments which have been curtailed by legislation.
A third source of revenue must be given increasing attention.
That source is profits from development of hydroelectric power.
Unfortunately, in this matter also, we face a conflict between local interests and sound reclamation policy.
We have in operation 20 power plants.
On six projects they are operated by the Bureau of Reclamation.
These six brought in $400,000 last year.
That money should be devoted first to retirement of the cost of the power systems and second toward replenishment of the reclamation fund; but there is steady pressure from the projects upon Congress for diversion of these revenues to the individual project's sole credit.
Power was developed on most of these projects for use in construction.
As these plants were expanded and new plants constructed, not as integral parts of the irrigation system but as commercial enterprises to be operated for profit, the question of equities in net profits assumed a different and important aspect.
All of the States have contributed, from public-land revenues, to the reclamation fund, and all of them are entitled to the increment from power profits which that fund has generated.
The issue is not as to how or by whom these plants shall be managed, but where their profits shall go.
We were required to contract in advance for the sale of power in sufficient quantity to reimburse the cost of the dam plus interest during construction and amortization.
We were thus required to sell in advance more than $200,000,000 worth of power, to be generated over a 50-year period.
The only market large enough to make firm contracts for this block of power lay in southern California, 250 miles away and located directly over a large oil and gas area capable of furnishing cheap energy in competition with ours.
And we recognized that the States of Arizona and Nevada, although not able now to contract for any of this power, should be preserved an opportunity to do so in the future.
It was recognized also that the financial risk involved must be spread upon as broad and sound a basis as possible.
We succeeded in negotiating contracts whereby all of this power was sold at prices which will reimburse the United States the cost of the dam and allow a margin of safety of 36 per cent.
The entire financial burden was assumed by California purchasers who, however, have contracted to release 18 per cent of the firm power to Arizona and 18 per cent to Nevada at any time within 50 years if those States demand it.
Unused State power will be used and paid for by the city of Los Angeles and the Southern California Edison Co. and associates.
The 64 per cent to be retained by Califormia was apportioned 36 per cent to the Metropolitan Water District, which will construct an aqueduct from the Colorado River to the coastal plain; 13 per cent to the city of Los Angeles; 6 per cent to other municipalities; and 9 per cent to the Southern California Edison Co. (Ltd.) and associated companies.
By subsequent agreement the municipalities relinquished a part of their power to the city of Los Angeles.
Thus, 3 States, 5 cities, and 3 public utilities serving 2,000,000 people, and a water district serving 13 municipalities, share this energy; it has been allocated on a broad regional basis.
We have three principal contractors, the city of Los, Angeles, the Southern California Edison Co., and the Metropolitan Water District, performance by any two of which will amortize the cost of the dam; and the future interests of Arizona and Nevada are protected.
We have kept the Government out of the generating business; the plant is leased to the city and the company.
Revenues in excess of those required for amortization will produce a surplus of from $30,000,000 to $60,000,000, if the rates set in the contracts are maintained when the readjustment periods prescribed by statute are reached and if the anticipated water supply is available.
This surplus will go into the Colorado River dam fund for the construction of other dams on the river.
In addition, Arizona and Nevada, under a provision of the project act which grants those States a share of surplus revenues, will receive from $300,000 to $600,000 each annually.
With power contracts behind us we obtained our first appropriation, and the Union Pacific commenced construction of the branch railroad on September 17, 1930.
On that date the dam was dedicated as Hoover Dam.
Plans and specifications for the 730-foot dam were prepared with unprecedented speed.
Electric power was brought in by a new power line of the Southern Sierras Power Co.
On March 11, 1931, we signed the principal construction contract with Six Companies (Inc.), the low bidder, at a low price of $48,890,995.
This price does not include the furnishing of materials; the total estimated cost of the work covered by the contract is about $92,000,000.
The power machinery and its installation will cost an additional $17,000,000.
Interest during construction and interest during the amortization period will require a total income over a 50- year period of about $207,000,000, covered by our power contracts.
A little more than two years after the first spike was driven on September 17, 1930, we find construction work ahead of the schedule required by contract, and the river successfully diverted through the great tunnels.
This, the most crucial feature of the entire program, has been accomplished exactly one year ahead of the date originally planned.
Four tunnels, each 56 feet in diameter, have been driven through the solid rock.
The four of them have a total length of nearly 16,000 feet and their concrete linings are 3 feet thick.
The river, diverted now at a time of low flow, is running through these tunnels at a rate of from 5,000 to 10,000 second-feet.
During the winter the temporary wing dams will be converted into 80-foot cofferdams.
When the spring and summer floods come, the upper cofferdam and the diversion tunnels will be diverting a flow twenty times that of the river at its low stage.
They will be capable of carrying a flood equal to the normal flow of the Mississippi at St. Louis.
The November period of low flow has been the goal against which all construction work has been racing; missed by two months, it would have meant a year's delay.
The goal has been reached, and at the present rate of construction the dam will be finished in 1936, barring extraordinary floods.
Work immediately in prospect is the installation of two large controls for managing the flow through the diversion tunnels.
Boulder City was transformed during the past fiscal year into a modern city of 5,000 inhabitants.
It now has paved streets, electric lights, water and sewage systems, and electrically lighted homes.
Dormitories are cooled in summer and heated in winter.
It is the most modern construction camp yet built, 'and is being administered by Federal officers on a high plane.
During the past year the contractors have been engaged in litigation with the State of Nevada, in which the United States has taken part.
That State has endeavored to enforce its own taxation laws and its own administration within this Government area.
The United States does not propose to acquiesce in the harassing of this Federal project by taxation or by the exchange of unified Federal control for conflict with the peculiar Nevada policies relating to gambling, segregated vice districts, etc.
This is the Federal Government's job and the Government proposes to administer it.
Eighteen and three-quarters per cent of all surplus revenues from power operations will go to Nevada in lieu of taxes, and further than that the department is not prepared to go.
In 1929 we faced disputes among California claimants to Colorado River water which threatened to indefinitely postpone the building of the all-American canal and the Metropolitan Water District's aqueduct.
These problems have been settled.
Through the cooperation and the recommendations of the State water authorities we have secured an agreement among seven California interests for the allocation of the water available to that State.
Under that agreement the first 3,850,000 acre-feet is divided among the agricultural areas now using Colorado River water, plus certain areas which may be added.
The next 1,100,000 acre-feet is allocated to the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California which will supply domestic water to cities of the coastal plain; and the balance is available for additional agricultural uses.
In 1930 this department contracted with the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California for sale to it of 36 per cent of all Hoover Dam firm power, and gave that district an option on all secondary power to be generated at the dam.
The water requirements of the Southern California coastal plain were regarded as the highest use which this power could serve.
We had confidence in the district's promise to authorize a bond issue and proceed with the work.
That confidence has been justified.
During the past year the district, after successfully voting a bond issue, has obtained a loan of $40,000,000 from the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, and work is expected to go forward at an early date.
Negotiations between the department and the district have been under way some months looking to the construction of a dam near Parker, Ariz., for the joint benefit of the district and of public and Indian lands in Arizona, and the contract will probably be closed in the near future.
On November 3, 1931, the Secretary approved as to form a contract with the Imperial Irrigation District for repayment of the cost of construction of the proposed all-American canal, a project to cost $35,000,000, and designed to carry Colorado River water into the Imperial Valley and adjacent areas in California.
The contract required the inclusion of certain additional lands, particularly in Coachella Valley.
After its ratification by Imperial Valley interests, Coachella Valley decided not to merge with Imperial.
The contract has not yet been consummated because of these local differences.
Negotiations are currently under way between the two groups for revisions of the contract which will permit the work to proceed.
Hoover Dam's nearest rival is the Owyhee Dam, completed in July of this year and built by the Bureau of Reclamation.
That dam, 405 feet high and now the highest in the world, will store water for areas in Idaho and Oregon.
We have completed surveys for the Columbia River Basin project.
We are ready to go forward with the construction of the great dam, a straight concrete gravity structure, 450 feet high, 4,100 feet long, containing 11,266,000 cubic yards of concrete and generating 2,100,000 horsepower, whenever Congress authorizes it.
This project will ultimately be to the Northwest what Hoover Dam is to the Southwestern States.
The General Land Office is historically the land agent of the Government.
It has disposed of the public land in response to the directions of Congress; it has adjudicated claims to these lands, and has conserved, as best it could under the powers given it, the public domain remaining in Federal ownership.
It has consistently sought Federal legislation enabling it to do its conservation work on a more effective scale, particularly in the control of grazing; but not until this year has an adequate bill progressed as far as a favorable report by a congressional committee.
Such a bill is now pending and is discussed on another page.
The Land Office is the custodian of 173,000,000 acres of public domain subject to all the applicable public land laws.
It exerts more or less jurisdiction over another 100,000,000 acres—areas which have been withdrawn from operation of the land laws, or in which the Government has parted with the surface title but retained the mineral title.
The national forests, comprising 186,000,000 acres, are administered by the Department of Agriculture, except as to minerals and title matters, which are intrusted to the General Land Office.
The forests, the vacant public lands, and the public lands withdrawn or on which minerals are reserved total slightly less than 400,000,000 acres.
Alaska contains another 378,000,000.
The grand total of the remaining Federal estate thus totals better than three-fourths of a billion acres.
The task of administering the disposition of the three-fourths of it which remain in this department's jurisdiction is not a small one.
The work is carried on at a low cost.
Last year the General Land Office took in a total of $4,065,210.76 from the public lands on account of sales, leases, and other dispositions.
Its total expenditures amounted to $2,204,224.16.
The balance remains only temporarily in the Treasury, however.
Under the statutes, 52½ per cent of revenues under the mineral leasing act is paid into the reclamation fund, 37½ per cent goes to the States, and only 10 per cent remains in the Treasury.
Thus, last year $2,100,555.87 went into the reclamation fund; the public-land States and certain counties within such States received $1,402,420.93, and the Treasury only retained proceeds of public lands to the extent of $562,233.96.
Among other activities of the General Land Office in 1932 were: The surveying of nearly 3,000,000 acres of new land and the resurvey of 1,165,000 acres in 23 States and the Territory of Alaska; the administration of over 20,000,000 acres of homestead entries, of which 4,500,000 acres were entered in the past year; the investigation of 27,000 land cases and the preparation of 32 court cases, of which 29 were won by the Government; the adjudication of 7,110 prospecting permits; the issuance of 53 oil and gas leases; the transfer of nearly a million acres to the national forests; water power withdrawals amounting to about 10,000 acres; covering into Federal reservations of various sorts about 6,000,000 acres; the maintenance of engineering offices, field service offices, and local land offices for the service of the public; the adjudication of over 1,600 mineral cases; the receipt of 38,000 homestead cases; the furnishing of about 13,000 township plats; the adjudication of 786 mineral entries; the issuance of 81 coal permits and 102 potash permits; the adjudication of 880 sodium cases; the rendering of judgment on 1,372 oil-shale locations, filing of charges against 14,395 more; and so on.
The statistics of its activities could cover several pages; and each transaction which goes to make up these large totals represents a vital service rendered to the public.
In the fiscal year 1932 the General Land Office appropriation, excluding money disbursed to the States and other nonadministrative items, was $2,239,400, or one twenty-fifth of 1 per cent of the National Budget.
For 1933 the expenditure authorized is $1,883,300.
In the first session of the Seventy-second Congress two vitally important bills were introduced with the department's indorsement one designed to carry into effect the recommendations of the President's Commission on the Public Domain, which if enacted would result in the transfer to the States of the unappropriated nonmineral public lands, and the other a bill authorizing the Department of the Interior to regulate grazing on the public lands.
As we have pointed out in the past, the remaining public lands are chiefly valuable as grazing areas, and their protection is essential to the welfare of the States in which they are located, as well as to the preservation of this national asset.
In the past the State has had no authority to regulate grazing upon them, and Congress has conferred no such power on any Government department.
Either the States or the Federal Government must do the job.
We believe these Western States are fullgrown and need not look to an absentee landlord to protect their interests.
But if the States do not accept the responsibility, and if the Federal Government is to bear it, then adequate authority should be conferred on this department.
The Public Domain Commission's bill which we have indorsed would, in any event, offer the State three alternatives—to take over these lands for their own administration immediately, or to petition for their Federal administration as "national ranges," or, in the event of nonaction by the State for 10 years, the automatic creation of such ranges on Federal initiative.
It is evident that a considerable time will elapse before a physical transfer to the States is completed, and we have therefore been pleased to indorse the Colton bill also which would vest in this department immediate authority to regulate grazing.
When the lands pass to the States the responsibility for their care can pass with them.
The Colton grazing bill has the indorsement of the Department of Agriculture, as well as this department, and has been favorably reported by the House Committee on Public Lands.
The deflation of oil-shale claims continues.
Just before the passage of the mineral leasing act of 1920 several million acres of•oil-shale lands in Colorado, Utah, and Wyoming were located under the mining laws.
The mineral leasing act preserved to the locators the right to perfect their claims to patent under the old laws, which require a certain amount of assessment work each year.
By 1930 it had become apparent that because of increasing crude-oil production and postponement of the use of oil shale as a substitute, very few of these claims were being maintained by assessment work; and that the outstanding claims constituted an unsatisfactory cloud on the Federal title.
We accordingly undertook a house cleaning, somewhat comparable with that undertaken as to the oil permits several months previously, by instituting proceedings against all invalid outstanding claims.
It was a tremendous task involving the filing of charges and the preparation for trial of cases against about 22,000 claims, covering about 2,600,000 acres.
When·the work was well under way, it may be recalled that one of our employees at Denver, a man named Ralph S. Kelley, who apparently had been harboring a fixed idea that the United States was being defrauded of these lands in some way, sold to the now defunct New York World some distortions of information he had abstracted from Government files in return for $12,000.
The World's series of "revelations" proved a fiasco, but the resulting work, involving an investigation by the Senate Public Lands Committee, necessarily delayed us.
Now, however, the proceedings against these claims have been largely completed.
Twelve thousand ninety-nine claims have been adjudged null and void and the area remaining subject to adjudication has been reduced to 1,165,000 acres.
Those claims which have been legitimately maintained are, of course, being permitted to proceed to patent, and efforts are made to protect all equities.
In 1932 the Federal Government appropriated $25,612,046.73, including some expenditures in Alaska, on behalf of citizens of Indian blood.
Their number does not exceed 320,000.
No other dominant civilization has made a comparable effort on behalf of an aboriginal population.
We are working with a race which has few inclinations to keep pace with its competitive surroundings.
A century .
The Federal Government's relationship to the Indian population is on an abnormal basis; no other segment of our population has its business affairs, it education, and the care of its health superintended by the Federal Government.
Whatever contact the normal citizen has with the sovereign in these problems is a contact with the State government.
That relationship must inevitably come for the Indian.
But the Federal responsibility can not be withdrawn fairly unless and until the States are willing to assume the peculiar responsibility which the Federal Government has recognized; that is, the responsibility to lead these Indians into competent citizenship, and to protect their persons and property until the process is completed.
It looks like a long process; but in the past four years there has been a sufficient change in direction in Government policies to bring the goal within sight.
We are not out to capture any more Indians, and our aim is to qualify those Indians now under our care, and their children, to take their place in the competitive system which surrounds them.
That means the ultimate breaking up of the reservation system and its artificial islands in our civilization.
The progress of the Indian and of our assistance to him will always be hampered by a vociferous and emotional fringe of white people who encourage his grievances.
The Indian suffers alike from enemies who exploit his property and friends who exploit his grievances.
We see no valid reason why those whò have more than one-half of white blood should not be promptly released from the wardship imposed by the Government and given control over their persons and property.
References to Indian health and educational problems will be found in Parts II and III of this report.
In agricultural work we are endeavoring to further the Indians' interest in subsistence gardens.
The Indian, speaking generally, was not by nature a farmer, and the Government's efforts to make him one have not been any more successful than could be expected.
He is a hunter who has outlived the game animals and finds himself surrounded by an agricultural and industrial civilization.
We have stressed the exploration of his possibilities in industry.
During the year a director of employment was appointed.
We have under way an effort to divert Indians into industrial opportunities, both on and off the reservations.
The progress, slow at best, has been rendered doubly so by the depression.
The Government has undertaken reclamation for the Indians as it has for the whites.
The work has been separately administered in the past; there has been little new construction during the past year.
In the future there should be opportunities for closer coordination of the engineering work of the Bureau of Reclamation and the Indian irrigation service, leaving to the latter the administrative field.
It is questionable how much of the Government's investment in reclamation work for Indians, theoretically classed as reimbursable, will ever be repaid.
A statute enacted during the past year directs a readjustment of some of these charges.
Further construction charges are deferred as long as the land remains in Indian ownership.
Old charges can be written off or reduced, subject to the approval of Congress.
Property: Pueblo lands.
In 1924 Congress enacted a unique piece of legislation known as the Pueblo lands act.
It proceeded on the theory that the United States had been negligent in failing to protect certain Indian Pueblo Tribes in New Mexico against the loss of their lands to non-Indian settlers, and authorized the creation of a board to find what part of the lands could have been recovered by seasonable prosecution in the Indians' behalf, and directed payment by the United States to the Indians in compensation for lands lost.
Conversely the board was authorized to find out what lands now in white possession still remained recoverable for the Indians.
The board was directed to recommend to Congress the compensation to be paid the white settlers: For a number of years the board created carried on the exceedingly complicated work of tracing old Spanish and Mexican titles and historical claims to possession of the Pueblos, made findings as to what land had been lost to the Indians through negligence of the Government and what lands could still be reclaimed from the whites, and ended by awarding to the Indians $620,949.28 and recommending payment to the whites of $217,250.22.
During the past year an effort has been made in Congress to more than double the Indian award and to add to the white award.
The principal claim for the increased award has been based on the charge that the Indians have lost water rights in excess of the rights for which the board compensated them.
The department, finding that the board had specifically reserved all water priorities and believing them to have many times the value assigned to them by this bill, has refused to admit their loss and has refused to acquiesce in a payment based on such a ground, which would inure solely to the benefit of the white settlers who claim to have acquired water rights inconsistent with these reserved priorities.
As it appears that the other bases offered for the increased award are vague and contradictory, the Government has insisted on protecting these Indians by requiring a new investigation of these issues before the new figures are accepted.
Incidentally, the proposed bill carries with it, subject to the Indians' consent, a fee of 10 per cent, or better than $70,000, for the lawyers who drafted the legislation and urged it on Congress.
The department is not particularly impressed with that item.
More than three and three-quarters million people visited the national parks and monuments in 1932.
The figure is about 200,000 higher than that of the year before, but the increase was due to the Colonial National Monument, where travel was counted for the first time, with 400,000 visitors.
The use of the national parks by our people has been remarkably well sustained during this period of depression; there has apparently been a great appreciation of their recreational values and of the low cost at which they may be enjoyed.
Their sustained use is gratifying; but there has been a serious shift in the character of facilities which our visitors are using.
The hotel and cottage facilities in the parks represent private investments whose rates and charges are regulated by the Government under contract.
The depression has brought a serious drop in patronage of some of these facilities, particularly the hotels and transportation lines.
There has been a decline in rail travel and a shift toward the use of private automobiles and private camping equipment.
We face a problem in the future stability of our contractors and in the service they can render.
This trend is a factor which can not be completely controlled; it will be unfortunate if the down curve in the use of these facilities continues.
Public attention should be called to the danger facing the park forests, particularly in Yellowstone National Park.
A beetle infestation there threatens the destruction of the lodgepole pine, which constitutes about 80 per cent of Yellowstone's forests.
If we had from $3,000,000 to $5,000,000 immediately available we might have an even chance of saving these trees.
Congress has not felt it possible to appropriate the money and it has not been forthcoming from private sources.
In a lesser degree the same danger threatens the forests in other parks.
It will be recalled that through the generosity of John D. Rockefeller, jr., the Government was enabled to purchase an area of great sugar pines in the vicinity of Yosemite and to save them from logging; those trees are threatened by another type of beetle infestation, and adequate control methods are imperative.
White-pine blister rust has appeared in Mount Rainier National Park and control measures last year resulted in the saving of selected stands of white pine.
In connection with all insect and tree-disease control in the national parks, the greatest need of the National Park Service at the present time is for type-map surveys, to show the various types of forests in the parks, to what disease or infestation they are subject, and the cost of control measures.
Alongside these serious problems it is a pleasure to record the progress of the system.
Last year two new national monuments were added and the areas of six parks and four monuments were increased.
Progress was made on the elimination of privately owned lands within park boundaries; enabled by exchange acts, appropriations, and gifts, we acquired over 21,000 acres of private holdings.
The Great Smoky Mountains National Park in North Carolina and Tennessee progressed toward full park regulation.
Nearly 140,000 acres of land were presented to the United States by the two States on November 2, 1931, and they are proceeding to add certain additional areas.
The total acreage now within the park is 297,719.70; when titles have been approved and when the total acreage of 427,000 has been reached, this park will come under full administration by the National Park Service.
Mammoth Cave project in Kentucky has not yet acquired national park status, but the Mammoth Cave National Park Association is continuing to acquire lands for that purpose.
Satisfactory progress continues on the Isle Royale project in Michigan.
A bill for the establishment of the Everglades National Park in Florida has passed the Senate and is awaiting action in the House.
All of these projects are characterized and made possible by the enthusiasm of private citizens; this is one form of governmental activity whose extension is generally welcomed because it means the protection of national treasures with a minimum of interference in local matters.
There remain certain areas in which we encounter local opposition.
Unfortunately some vitally necessary additions to the Grand Teton National Park in Wyoming remain incomplete despite the readiness of the owners of these lands to donate them to the Government.
The obstacle is the opposition of Wyoming local interests to the transfer of these lands from the local tax rolls to the Nation.
Another great project still in a formative status is the Kings Canyon country near Sequoia National Park.
There we have faced difficulties in reconciling local interests in water-power sites and in administrative matters.
The whole national park movement is too close to the hearts of the people to be more than momentarily halted by superficial obstacles.
Wild-life protection continues to be a major interest of the Park Service.
The great game herds of Yellowstone have been the subject of a cooperative survey with other Federal services and State authorities.
The mule deer on the Kaibab Plateau adjacent to Grand Canyon National Park continue in a precarious position, with the stock of deer at an admittedly low ebb.
Fishing has been good.
The bears, encouraged by feeding by their visiting friends, continue to be numbered among the more troublesome wards of this department.
All visitors to the national park are impressed by the careful landscaping work done there.
Roads are built where they will be least obtrusive, fire-control plans are carefully worked out, and buildings are designed and built and colored to harmonize with the scenery.
The Park Service is engaged in the preparation of what it calls a master plan for each national park.
These plans are intended to lay out 6-year advance programs for roads, trails, buildings, special areas, utilities, camp sites, and so on.
Some interesting engineering work has been completed and more is in progress.
We have added an elevator at Carlsbad Caverns National Park to save the long climb of 750 feet from the floor of the cave to the surface.
The 4,200-foot Wawona Tunnel in Yosemite National Park has been completed.
The grading of the Transmountain Highway across Glacier National Park is nearly finished; its rival, the new road across the mountains of Rocky Mountain National Park, is completed.
All of this work is done on a modest budget, the greater part of which goes into labor-producing expenditures.
In 1932 the Park Service received a total of $12,831,250.
During 1933 current operations are conducted under an appropriation of $10,640,000.
This investment in the improvement of national park facilities for public enjoyment is one of the soundest which the Government makes.
The wave of settlement and distribution of the land had reached the western mountains before the conception of the national parks.
Certain unique and beautiful areas had not lent themselves readily to exploitation.
Thus, just in time, our Government was able to carve out of the available public lands, without direct expenditure, those great western national parks which are the glory of the Nation.
The idea of the national park having gotten into our general thinking, it became evident that certain beautiful areas in the East had been passed over.
There were only two ways in which they could come into possession of the Nation, and these were by gift or purchase.
When one such national park, the Acadia, in Maine, was acquired through the generosity of private citizens, it was demonstrated that by extraordinary efforts other lands could, if the right kind and amount of energy were put behind the movement, be added to the national park system.
In the past four years we have brought into the national park system a series of great eastern projects.
Some of them remain incomplete, awaiting the acquisition of lands or the availability of money; but the policy of acquiring them has been established here and has been fixed in legislation.
The Great Smokies in North Carolina and Tennessee, parts of the Shenandoah Valley in Virginia, the Mammoth Cave National Park in Kentucky, and Isle Royale in Michigan are now approved projects, and one branch of Congress has voted to authorize an Everglades National Park in Florida.
John D. Rockefeller, jr., has given millions of dollars to this work.
It is becoming increasingly apparent that private assistance should be centralized in some manner, possibly through the creation of a national park trust fund.
Congress cut the appropriation for the Geological Survey for the current fiscal year 25.8 per cent.
That great bureau of scientific and technical service, devoted entirely to work essential to the public interest and available to the public from no other source, is therefore proceeding under a reduced he'ad of steam.
States; and only 10 States, the District of Columbia, and Hawaii are completely mapped.
The greater part of this work is done in cooperation with the States.
Last year 25,893 square miles were mapped.
These maps are of basic importance to a wide variety of undertakings.
They have literally hundreds of uses.
The Survey carries on each year its investigation and publication of data on the Nation's water resources.
It supplies authoritative information on the quantity of water available.
Reliable data are of the utmost importance to agricultural communities; to States, counties, and municipalities; to irrigation districts, to industries, to permittees and licensees of the Federal Power Commission, and to many others.
Much of this work, also, is done in cooperation with the States, with funds provided in part by them.
Last year $600,000 was appropriated by Congress for this work.
With that money and the cooperation extended by 40 States stream-flow measurements were made in 48 States and 2,791 gaging stations were maintained.
These surface-water surveys are supplemented by investigations of ground water, of power and reservoir sites, and of the chemical quality of both surfae and ground water in their relation to agricultural and industrial uses.
Last year the ground-water work was carried on in 25 States and Hawaii, and in this work 16 States and Hawaii cooperated.
Samples of water and of water-bearing material were analyzed.
Power resources were reviewed, and monthly and annual reports on the production of electricity and on the consumption of fuel by public-utility power plants and an annual report on developed water power were published.
The Survey carries on general investigations which tend to discover the fundamental facts and to develop the general principles on which the science of geology is based, and in the application of those principles to surveys of special areas it contributes to the knowledge of the mineral resources of the country and to the best methods of their utilization.
It aids the great metal-mining industry in many States by making comprehensive studies of the mining districts.
Most of the leading mining States have cooperated with the survey in support of such work.
The reports that the survey issues are widely used in mining development.
It surveys the reserve supplies of coal, petroleum, gas, phosphate, potash, and other mineral resources on the public domain and elsewhere in the United States.
It prepares and publishes detailed geologic maps of particular areas and more general geologic maps of States and of the entire country that are indispensable to the mining industry, to geologists, and to educators.
The investigations of the mineral resources of Alaska carried on by the Geological Survey aim to explore, make known, and aid in the development of the mines and minerals of our great northern possession.
Less than one-half of the territory has as yet been surveyed even on standards regarded as appropriate for reconnoitering the mineral deposits it may possess, though tens of thousands and possibly hundreds of thousands of square miles of the unsurveyed area appear to be such as to justify examination to prove whether or not they may contain workable ore bodies.
Not only are the results of these surveys used by all concerned with the development of mining in the territory, but the maps and general information secured in the course of these investigations are relied on by almost every one concerned with any industrial undertaking in Alaska.
All of this information constitutes data not available from any other source.
These investigations constitute a field of service to our citizens.
The Geological Survey is in general not an administrative agency.
It is a service body, and the curtailment of its work slows down a score of fields of private activity of our citizens dependent upon its data.
The Survey also bears the responsibility of classifying the public lands with respect to their mineral, water power, and agricultural value.
It carries on supervision of mineral and water power development on such lands in cooperation with the General Land Office and Federal Power Commission.
Coal and mineral withdrawals; oil-shale classification; definitions of "known geological structures"; designations of homestead areas; and many other scientific findings upon which depend the availability or nonavailability of our public lands for private acquisition are all made by the Geological Survey, and the public suffers from curtailment of its functions.
Adjudication of about 13,000 applications for land was aided by its advisory reports on the character and utility of the areas involved.
During the year it added 4,712 acres to the area included in power reserves, making a total of 6,570,185 acres in 21 States and Alaska from which about 15,000,000 horsepower can be developed.
This is conservation work of the first rank.
It supervises directly all oil operations on the public domain.
During the fiscal year 1932 the public domain produced nearly 26,500,000 barrels of oil under the supervision of the Geological Survey, or about 3 per cent of the country's total production.
The revenue from the oil and gas and mining operations supervised amounted to nearly $3,500,000.
It publishes scientific data of an authoritative character.
During the fiscal year it published 182 books and pamphlets, 171 new or revised maps, and 378 reprinted maps.
Among them is an outstanding publication on geological conditions in Teapot Dome, another on geological conditions of the Kaipirowits region in Utah and Nevada, another on geological conditions of the Bonanza mining district, Colorado, one on the potash fields of New Mexico and Texas, and a water-supply pamphlet dealing with methods of estimating ground water supplies.
It operated during the fiscal year 1932 on an appropriation of $3,141,740, or about one-fifteenth of 1 per cent of the Nation's Budget.
For 1933 the figure is $2,615,400.
On April 4, 1932, we embarked on the second phase of the conservation policy on the public domain.
On March 12, 1929, we had ceased the issuance of new prospecting permits, although we continued to extend all those which could establish equities.
Those which had failed to comply with the law's development requirement were canceled.
It was a house-cleaning process, designed to weed out speculative operations during a period of overproduction in the oil industry, when stimulation of new production on the public domain would have meant dissipation of our reserves and damage to the industry.
That process resulted in the cancellation of 16,600 out of approximately 20,700 outstanding permits.
Attacked in court, the Secretary's authority to refuse to issue new permits was sustained by the United States Supreme Court.
The regulations of April 4, 1932, were made possible by the Walsh amendment to the mineral leasing act, authorizing unit operation.
These regulations set up a set of stipulations upon which new prospecting permits will issue.
Secretary.
Similar stipulations, coupled with a right to hearing, are incorporated in extensions of existing permits.
The result is an assurance that our reserves will be produced only under orderly methods which will prolong their life; and that the industry will not be threatened by the outbreak of uncontrolled production on any new public domain field.
Unit operation has proven a success in the great Kettleman Hills North Dome field, where the operators entered into such an agreement under the department's encouragement.
The Kettleman Hills North Dome, one of the country's most prolific oil fields, is being produced under a unit operation agreement, consummated in 1930.
It embraces all of the public lands in that field.
This system enables the Government lessees whose lands are checkerboarded by alternate sections of private holdings to compete as a unit in these privately owned areas in the extraction of the oil.
The unit's relations with outside owners have been satisfactory; but the usual minority of outside holdings has insisted on producing more than its proportion, and the Government lessees have shown a fine spirit of cooperation in restricting their own production to keep the field's total within allowable limits.
Relations between the Government and its lessees in this field have on the whole been excellent and the unit plan has operated successfully.
There has been a fundamental difference of opinion between the Government and the lessees as to the basis upon which Government royalties should be computed, and it is probable that litigation of a test case will be required to set this important issue permanently at rest.
The issue is whether the values on which royalties are computed shall be fixed by the prices the lessees receive (being in some cases prices quoted in transactions between two departments of the same company) or whether the values shall be fixed by the Secretary.
We have endeavored to lay the basis for equitable solution through litigation.
Cooperating with the Departments of War, Navy, and Commerce, through the Federal Oil Conservation Board, we initiated in 1930 the first system of national planning in the oil industry—a system of periodic forecasts of demand and recommendations of crude-oil production to meet it—and laid the foundations for an interstate compact to put this work, under auspices of the oil-producing States, on a permanent and effective basis.
Refinery operations were cut back to the equivalent of a 6-day week.
Imports of oil, during a period of domestic overproduction, were cut 25 per cent at this board's request.
1) The creation of a joint Federal and State fact-finding body to forecast demand, recommend crude-oil production, and allocate it among producing States and imports.
2) A commitment by each producing State to adhere to its quota.
3) Federal regulation of imports to keep them within the prescribed quota.
4) Formulation by this interstate body of uniform conservation principles for adoption in local legislation centering around unit operation and the preservation of reservoir energy.
Hawaii has suffered during the past year from the notoriety attracted by one criminal case, and its aftermath, a lynching.
Despite the exploitation of that case by sensational newspapers, Hawaii remains one of the most peaceful communities of the world.
It is free from organized graft and corruption, the courts there are well administered, and even in Honolulu the proportion of crimes of violence is distinctly lower than that in a majority of mainland cities.
One benefit which the Territory has derived from the notoriety of the past year is the local support drawn to the governor's program, which he has urged for several years, for remodeling of the police and prison system and the method of selecting juries.
These have all been easy-going, in tempo with the peaceful character of the people.
The island's principal problem now is the counteracting of the influence of a chain of mainland newspapers which have done their best to promote racial controversy within the islands and prejudice from without.
We propose to continue to insist upon the American policy of local self-government and to hold the local government responsible for the results.
We trust that this experience has aligned the solid elements of the island's population behind the governor's program of judicial and police reform.
The Virgin Islands were acquired by the United States from Denmark in 1917, solely for their strategic position as an outpost of military defense of the Panama Canal.
With the cessation of the World War and the subsequent years of peace, a diminution of this military importance has taken place.
The Navy has long since discontinued its naval base at St. Thomas, and its complete withdrawal from the islands was effected by the Executive order of February 27, 1931, transferring the supervision of the government to the Interior Department.
A civilian administration was installed and the problem of rehabilitation was begun shortly thereafter.
In order that an idea may be obtained as to the nature of the difficult situation confronting us, it should be observed that the per capita wealth of the Virgin Islands is about one-tenth what it is in the United States.
How poor the masses of the people are may be understood when it is realized that in order to vote a man must have an income of only $300 a year, and yet only 908 men out of a total population of 22,012 in the islands can qualify as voters.
The plight of this comparatively small group of our citizens is worthy of the recognition being given to it by our Government.
The people of the Virgin Islands were absorbed as an integral part of the United States and made American citizens some 15 years ago, and thus a responsibility for their economic and moral welfare was definitely established and sympathetically assumed.
Since the United States acquired these islands it has spent more for their welfare than the former sovereignty had spent in 200 years.
Our government is making a philanthropic experiment in the aid of this people without gain to itself.
The rehabilitation program was well started during the year and, while necessary delays were encountered in the clearance of titles to lands for the homesteading and hotel projects, the entire program has moved with expedition and a spirit of cooperation which augurs well for success.
Every effort is being made to initiate and further all projects which tend to promote the welfare of the people of the Virgin Islands with the ultimate objectives of improving their standards of living through a coordinated educational program and leading them upward to a position of economic self-sufficiency.
The act of June 30, 1932, transferred the duties of the Board of Road Commissioners in the Territory of Alaska to the Secretary of the Interior.
Formerly this activity functioned under the War Department with a large civilian staff in the field.
Under the new plan Army officers theretofore detailed to the road work in Alaska have been relieved and a civilian staff placed in charge of the work.
Under the reduced appropriation provided by the last Congress practically the only work will be maintenance of existing highways.
The reindeer industry in Alaska has been receiving the active attention of representatives of the department in the field since the spring of 1932.
A special force of field representatives has been in the Territory during the past summer for the purpose of reorganizing the administration of reindeer, following recommendations of the reindeer committee appointed by the Secretary of the Interior on November 5, 1930.
This committee, consisting of Hon.
John B. Kendrick, United States Senator, Hon.
Scott Leavitt, Representative in Congress from Montana, and Hon.
Charles P. Sisson, Assistant Attorney General, found the major problems to be herding and marking, establishment of new range rules, and marketing.
After a season of intensive work in the Seward area, the field representatives of the Interior Department are now preparing their reports and findings for the consideration of the Secretary of the Interior.
War minerals claims are being adjusted under authority of an amendment to the original act, passed February 13, 1929, which amendment gave claimants the right to take their claims into court, and under decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States, dated December 7, 1931, by which decisions the Secretary was required to pay losses incurred in the purchase of property and in interest paid on borrowed capital.
Since receipt of the first court decree 85 claims have been adjusted and awards totaling $405,532.04 have been made, accepted, and certified for payment.
An advancing civilization is characterized by its preservation of dependents of all sorts.
The controlling idea in the saying "Women and children first"is an almost instinctive reaction of preparation for the future.
In the century that we have been building up our present form of world civilization based on the striking advances made in information and in the practical application of inventions and discoveries, we have learned to think of our children in other terms than as prospective cannon fodder or as brainless working machines.
The biological facts of life, the necessity of the established wholesome and simple home, remain the same, but the machine, the engine, the steamboat, the radio, telegraph, and the telephone, have given us and our children millions of neighbors; and with these and the problems which they bring, we and our children must learn to work and to live.
We have been so close to the benefits derived from the discoveries of such men as Pasteur and Koch that we have failed to grasp the revolutionary effect that they have had upon the protection of childhood.
Our new knowledge of nutrition, particularly of infant feeding, has had much to do with the improvement in our morbidity and mortality rates.
The White House Conference on Child Health and Protection took the measure of these present methods and outlined for us many undeveloped possibilities for the future.
In that conference were brought together several thousand people interested in this field: Officials, doctors, and the people themselves, represented in women's organizations, newspapers, radio, and so on.
The work of that conferences includes not only a vast amount of preliminary investigation but the printing of a series of authoritative publications during the past year.
These books constitute the first encyclopedia on child health and protection available to the forces of this Nation fighting in that cause.
This work was followed by a continued series of State conferences which should go forward, regardless of any change in administration.
In 25 years our people have built a whole new structure around scientific methods, public-health workers, public-health nurses, and nutrition experts.
The accomplishments of that period have been showing up for the benefit of our children during this depression; the mortality and morbidity figures for children have shown a significant decrease during this period of strain, largely because there was in existence a slowly built structure of public assistance.
In the White House conference it was recognized that while much was being done there was loose organization and coordination between the forces working for the welfare of children.
The school was doing its work well, the playground was of growing importance, the health departments were effective organizations, and the welfare agencies and workers were doing a good job.
But a common approach to all of the forces dealing with the child was necessary if the best job possible was to be done.
Out of the conference came a new unity and an authoritative program for the children of America.
It was a gigantic self-survey of far-reaching significance.
It was found impossible in that conference to separate education, health, recreation, and welfare.
In this conference and its follow-up work there is a rare opportunity for a continuation of the interest of the public in public health with particular reference to children.
The conference brought out the need of a harmonized social program for children.
Health, education, recreation, and welfare each has its own weight and importance, but each can play its full part only when joined with the other.
Children are living single complexes.
Unity of plan is needed for all of the forces which build them up and give us a great Nation.
The White House Conference on Child Health and Protection brought together the available knowledge of what is happening to the children of this country in the schools, in their communities, as well as in the clinics, the courts, the hospitals, and the various institutions.
Instead of thinking in terms of certain types of children, the endeavor was to have all children studies, regardless of economic status or behavior.
Particular efforts were made to round out the studies of childhood by securing information regarding those who were handicapped by blindness, speech defects, deafness, heart disease, or other physical elements, and by damaged nervous systems.
Emphasis was given to the 1,500,000 children of exceptional ability now in our schools.
In them we see the greatest hope of leadership for the rest.
The picture of national child life shown in this survey indicates that it is possible to make life better, healthier, happier, and richer for our children and for our Nation.
In the document kpown as The Children's Charter, the findings of the conference were summarized.
The 19 points of the charter have in them the highest hopes of the nation for its children.
There is not 1 of these 19 points that can not be put into effect in any part of the country if there is sufficient desire on the part of individuals or communities.
We have been inclined to measure wealth by gold, oil, lumber, wheat, coal, and turning wheels.
We now think of our children as our real source of wealth.
Our educational system is to train each child so that he will have not only more satisfaction and happiness, but so that he will be a more productive element in society.
The economic unit of the future is the human unit, not the dollar, nor the bale of cotton, nor the sack of wheat.
The storing up and protection of wealth depends not upon strong-boxes, battleships, and bayonets, but upon properly prepared and trained children.
The Children's Charter gives an index for such knowledge and such training.
It indicates those new responsibilities of the home, the school, and the community which are to equip the child for such a world as it will have to meet.
No one can foresee what two decades will bring forth in the way of new discoveries in science and in organization and of management, but we can all foresee that there will be no fundamental change in our physical and mental equipment.
Only by the proper training of all of our children can we give reasonable insurance for the future of our Nation.
The Children's Charter lays out before us a definite goal which can not be achieved in any one day or year, or perhaps in any one generation, but by keeping it constantly before us and by striving to meet the ideals and standards which it raises we can go far in preserving our children and in preparing them for the absorbing and complicated tasks of a civilization of great promise.
During the past year a whole series of regional follow-up conferences has been held; let us trust that this work will go forward.
During the past year, for the first time in the history of the Nation, representatives of each of the many professional and commercial groups interested in one way or another in home building and home ownership have been assembled to pool their wisdom and work out cooperatively their common problems.
The occasion was a conference on home building and home ownership, held under joint auspices of the Departments of Commerce and Interior, and representing more than a year of continuing work.
If the eradication of slums and of similar blights on American living conditions is to be effected, this type of work must be of a continuing character.
Committees of this conference brought forward certain simple and concrete proposals for every community.
They involve such factors as the making of so-called master plans for city growth; zoning programs; design and construction; and financing.
To this has now been added the President's great structure of the home-loan banks.
Public participation in slum eradication and legislation authorizing the exercise of the power of eminent domain for the demolition and rebuilding of certain areas was recommended by the conference.
New systems of taxation were brought forward, relieving homes and dwellings from excessive assessments.
The President in his closing message to the members of this conference when they met in Washington said: "This housing war is not to stop until every American home is clean, convenient, wholesome, sanitary, and a fit place for a mother and father to bring to maturity young citizens who will keep our Nation strong, vigorous, and worthy."
For two or more decades there has been a steady growth in the public-health services on the North American continent.
The present self-analysis through which society is going permits a clearer evaluation of the benefits of modern medicine and public health than ever before.
Out of the confusion is coming the beginning of a national strategy in the matter of public health.
The progress goes forward with little publicity.
The record is being written on the run.
The combination of administrative ability, organizing capacity, and information that could be applied promptly has made such accomplishments as the maintenance of a pure water supply, the protection of a milk supply, and the prevention of disease seem almost commonplace.
Aside from the field of infectious diseases, the information in regard to nutrition and other work in the field of hygiene has been of great significance in the general health problem.
The present world depression has disclosed the marvelous structure of care and of prevention which has been constructed by research workers, donors of funds, community chests, hospitals, social-service workers, publichealth nurses, and others, all under the generalship of the trained doctor of medicine and doctor of public health.
The great problem of the cost of medical care brings more and more into focus the question of the Federal Government's relationship to medicine.
One of the first suggestions brought forward is that the Federal Government should provide medical care to all citizens.
In many parts of the world this is the answer that has been given.
In this country the extension of Government medical service to veterans and their families and the care of non-service-connected disabilities has been a recent and a serious phenomenon.
Nevertheless in spite of the vast concentrations of power and authority now in Washington and the growing and dangerous tendency of the people to turn to the Capitol for all necessary reforms, we have retained in America a healthy local responsibility and control over two important functions—education and medical service.
In so far as these functions are supported by taxes, the funds are assessed, collected, and disbursed locally.
With no central authority attempting to enforce uniformity of action upon all parts of the country, we can try out a great variety of plans.
We have no tradition that impels us to consider personal health matters as a Federal concern.
We have no need of ever tying ourselves hard and fast to any one type of proposal.
In health, as in education, we should keep sharply in focus the primary function of the Federal Government as one of research and the dissemination of information.
Its function here is not administration.
Health work among the Indians continues to improve.
About 4,200 patients were treated.
A new hospital was completed and six more are under construction and nearly completed.
As long as the Federal Government retains the responsibility for Indian health we shall insist on the best medical care which the appropriations of Congress make possible.
St. Elizabeths Hospital is a Federal institution for the care of the insane.
It is located in the District of Columbia and cares for patients of the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, certain other Government services, veterans, etc.
At the end of the fiscal year it had 4,930 patients.
Here the Government has its most direct contact with the problem of mental hygiene.
We have repeatedly urged a complete revision of the lunacy legislation in the District of Columbia.
Bills are now pending to accomplish that result.
The principal changes would be to permit volunteer commitment for treatment, relieving insane persons from trials comparable to criminal trials, and the substitution of determinations in the hospital, except where the insane person or his family demands a trial; a change in trial procedure to eliminate the stigma attached to an adjudication of lunacy; and more liberal provisions for release and automatic restoration of civil rights on certificates of cure.
During the past year the physical plant of the hospital has been improved.
A new tuberculosis building housing 80 patients was completed, and contracts were let for additional buildings.
An interesting feature of the work is the effective cooperation given by the Red Cross in welfare work at the hospital and in maintaining contact between patients and their families.
The future of the negro in the United States rests entirely with the way in which some 4,000,000 negro children are brought up.
Their health, education, and development are the responsibilities of our whole people, but in particular the responsibilities of the adult men and women of the Negro race.
Within the last few years there has been a migration from the South to the North and West.
This migration has been largely from rural to urban centers.
Urban localities are peculiarly ill adapted to children, particularly those who have been raised in the open.
The problem of the negro child in the less favored parts of industrial and metropolitan centers is one of great difficulty.
Sunshine is his natural habitat.
With the migration to urban centers in the North he faces a new set of conditions.
The morbidity and mortality figures show that he is particularly susceptible to the two diseases that flourish best in the absence of sunshine.
These are tuberculosis and rickets.
Whatever else is done for the negro child he must be brought up under open-air conditions in so far as it is possible.
Because of the lowered economic level and various zoning questions, too many negroes, as has been shown by our housing conference, are forced into unsatisfactory houses and in the undesirable parts of many communities.
Here, as in all forms of housing, there is need of the adoption of codes and their maintenance.
In the geographical shift from agriculture to industry and from the open country to the city and its streets, the negro has suffered both in health and in other qualities.
Freedmen's Hospital isan institution maintained in the District of Columbia for the care of negroes.
It was founded to take care of refugees who had come to Washington in large numbers following the close of the Civil War.
20 per cent over last year.
Of these only 798 were paying patients.
Outside work cared for 9,616 patients, and the emergency department took care of 5,668.
A total of 20,212 received some kind of benefit from the hospital.
We can keep democracy safe in the world by making the most of our opportunity to build in our schools strong, self-reliant, independent men and women united in sound small units of self-support and self-government.
In this era of too rapid growth, of amalgamation, of centralized power, we must fight for safety through effective local government and local control.
It is bad enough to have more people on the pay roll than on the land without making it worse by overcentralization in Washington.
So complete is the mastery of the nervous system over our bodies that the prick of a knitting needle in one place in the upper spinal cord means death.
We want no such mastery of our central government over the welfare of the people of a continent.
The American public-school system, local and self-governed, is one of the outstanding achievements of democracy.
From fitful and scattered beginnings it has developed that firm structure upon which the stability of our country depends.
We have been building schoolhouses for a hundred years in every pioneer district.
We built them out of the trees, rocks, bricks, adobe, or sod, in accordance with the handiest building material.
Every community as soon as there were enough children in it managed to get together and hire a school-teacher to start on the process of training young Americans.
These were the roots of our educational system and that system has grown great because these roots were nourished by their closeness to the people.
The training of the child is like sharpening a knife.
If the material is good we can sharpen it, as well as we can, without any knowledge of what it is going to cut.
Our training is to prepare it to cut right.
We can not change the quality of the steel but we can give an edge appropriate to the quality of the steel so that it will do its work.
All that a pupil has is his time.
If we waste it in the school or elsewhere, we are wasting life.
We must make the most of these lives, whether they be handicapped or competent, for each must live carrying along a properly proportioned load if civilization and our democracy are to be a success.
What we do in our public schools with our children determines what our Nation shall be.
In spite of temporary economic difficulties, it is no time for back-tracking in education.
In many ways our schools stand at the crossroads.
We are in a period of retrenchment of public expenditures.
The question of how to secure the greatest possible advantage to the commonwealth from every dollar going into education is being presented to every group having responsibility for the maintenance or administration of schools.
At the same time education is starting to undergo a renaissance based upon the new needs of a society which has shifted from a largely agricultural base over to an industrial one.
The training period of our youth must now be adjusted to a civilization in which science has become more decisive.
A part of this renaissance is the conception that health, recreation and education are inseparable in the training of youth; and during the past four years we have endeavored to bring those factors into focus together, through the work of the White House Conference on Child Health and Protection, the National Advisory Committee on Illiteracy, and surveys of the Office of Education.
We have kept the Office of Education largely out of the field of administration.
Its primary function is the finding out of facts about education and all its various phases throughout the States and foreign countries and the dissemination of such information in order to help the people in the States to establish more efficient school systems.
Education is a local responsibility and must be kept so.
The Federal Government's main function is assistance to the States in improving their own systems and not in dominating those systems.
The Office of Education operates on a small appropriation—$572,000 for 1932.
With that money it has done a good job.
Education in general has been going through a rapidly developing emergency, not only on account of reduced State and local appropriations but of lack of confidence on the part of governing bodies and the public generally in the powers which have always been claimed for education in general.
This stress is reflected in the increasing requests received here for information and fact-finding service.
During the fiscal year the office answered over 100,000 individual inquiries, issued 114 different publications, and distributed over 450,000 copies of such material.
It participated in research on a wide front.
It completed four studies in public-school administration, including a study of the status of teachers and principals employed in rural schools.
Improvement and progress in the education of rural children comes slowly unless we have sufficient facts upon which the educators may build and which can enable the public to understand the true need for funds and personnel.
The office has published two curriculum guidebooks, one in safety education and one in science for the elementary school.
The Office of Education is the great clearing house of educational statistics for the country.
The biennial reports of national statistics include one on personnel and finance of city schools, one of private schools, others on colleges, and a number in special fields.
Its rural school studies show that 45 per cent of the high schools in the United States enrol 50 pupils or fewer, and that more than 80 per cent have an enrollment not exceeding 100 pupils.
In the field of school health other interesting studies have included a study of the relationship of physique and physical education to intelligence and scholarship, and a study of the posture of 9,000 elementary school children.
The office has participated in vocational guidance studies in cooperation with the National Vocational Guidance Association; it has embarked on a survey of educational tests and measurements; it has begun a series of studies on management of institutions of higher education, involving particularly problems of financing, curricula, and consolidation of institutions; furthering the work of the White House conference, it has published several bulletins on the education of exceptional children; it has carried on three major research projects in negro education, including a survey of secondary education, elementary rural schooling and a personnel survey of negro college students; a study in the education of children speaking foreign languages in some Southwestern States has opened up a new problem in American education.
A continuous study of school-building problems is under way in cooperation with local school-building authorities.
Several surveys have been made.
The office has investigated particular problems of school administration at the request of such cities as Youngstown, Ohio.
The Office of Education maintains one of the finest libraries on educational subjects in America, and assists local school libraries in improvement of their own material.
It maintains a foreign school system department which is of invaluable assistance to American universities in evaluating foreign credentials and assisting foreign universities to evaluate ours.
It handled 819 such requests last year and is publishing a series of monographs on education in foreign countries.
This past year, more than ever, educational opportunities have been needed for unemployed adults.
In cooperation with the President's Organization for Unemployment Relief a report has been made of the extraordinary responsibilities now undertaken by schools in this phase of adult education.
The war on adult illiteracy is being aided by this agency as well as by the many thousands of individuals cooperating in the work of the President's committee on illiteracy.
It is essential that a well based system of handling school finances be established so that the schools can be just as close to the established and permanent values as possible.
Beginning two years ago, we undertook in the Office of Education a great survey of education and a great survey of school finances; the condition of the Treasury has made it necessary to suspend it for the time being.
It is one of our most important long-time problems.
It is essential that our State school systems do not go off onto transient forms of support.
A gasoline tax can properly support roads and highways; but it will be unfortunate if school support comes from that source.
Gasoline and highways automatically go together; land and landed property and home property naturally go with the schools.
The experience of some of our States in relying upon oil royalties—which represent the consumption of capital—for the maintenance of their school systems, lies before us.
Nevertheless it is apparent that the essential support of education and health can not be adequately given in many places under existing methods of taxation.
A number of States require new constitutional provisions in order to meet present-day requirements.
A considerable number of those who came from the original native stock became isolated through war or economic necessity in the more remote mountain regions of some of our States.
There they and their descendants have remained, succeeding in the simple conquest of nature and in making a living, but without the privileges that come with the common school.
Contact with them or their children of to-day indicates that their brain quality is just as good as that of their more literate neighbors.
The human material is first class, but exposure to the process we know as education has been practically absent.
The result is that we have islands where people are living on the basis of a century ago.
They are not active contributors to our national life and have a minimum participation in it.
We have brought into being and action the National Advisory Committee on Illiteracy, dedicated to the restoration of these latent human assets, and to steady pressure in behalf of that other block of handicapped citizens, those whose old-world associations have insulated them from the current of our language and our educational system.
There is no doubt that the task of education has on the whole been well carried out, but the 1930 census showed that illiteracy was prevalent in every State.
There are large gaps in the working of our educational machinery.
Certainly in the education of the Indians and in the education of the Filipinos the end result has not been all that could have been achieved.
In many centers of American life, in nearly every State, we have regional committees at work on these problems as a result of the studies of the National Advisory Committee on Illiteracy.
Specific progress during the past year includes the acceleration of a constructive Indian education policy.
School attendance has been transferred to local day or public schools wherever possible.
At the end of the year six more boarding schools had been closed or changed into day schools and two had been placed on the list to be closed at the end of the current year.
The number of students in boarding schools, and particularly the number of small children, has been reduced.
This program was begun several years ago.
There were at the beginning of the present school year about 2,000 fewer Indian children in boarding schools than there were a year ago.
The number of children in public schools had increased from 43,000 to 48,834; another 8,000 were in mission schools.
In Government schools we have 27,000 of which about 22,000 are in boarding schools.
During the current school year we have contracts with 1,160 school districts as compared with 998 for the last year and 891 the year before that.
In the field of higher education we are offering educational loans, room and board at Indian schools located close to universities in return for work, in some cases payment of tuition to State universities, and in other cases scholarships in advanced institutions.
Howard University, located in the District of Columbia, is a college for the higher education of negroes.
Last year its enrollment was 2,464 from 42 States.
Over recent years special efforts have been made to raise the number and qualifications of its faculty.
Last year we reached a ratio of about 1 teacher to 12 students.
Its law school was elected to membership in the Association of American Law Schools and there was increased interest in all branches of graduate study and research.
Standards of admission to certain of its colleges were raised and its college of medicine was strengthened by five major appointments and increased cooperation between the college and Freedmen's Hospital.
Its university consists of colleges of liberal arts, education, applied science, music, medicine, dentistry, pharmacy, law; and it maintains a graduate division and a summer school.
It operates on a budget of about $1,750,000 and has assets close to $8,000,000.
Columbia Institution for the Deaf is maintained by the Federal Government.
Its advance department, known as Gallaudet College, last year furnished instruction to 148 students coming from 35 States.
It is one of the few institutions of advanced education for those afflicted with deafness.
The institution's primary department, known as Kendall School, furnished instruction to 64 students, most of them admitted from the District of Columbia.
The steady growth of the institution has created a necessity for new buildings to relieve congestion.
This school and Howard University represent the Government's two most direct ventures into direct education, and both of them are based upon exceptional and peculiar responsibilities, largely connected with Federal business administration of the District of Columbia.
The following are summaries of the reports of officers responsible to the Secretary of the Interior.
These reports are printed separately.
The Solicttor's Office.
Board of Indian Commissioners.
Territorles: Territory of Alaska.
The Alaska Railroad Terrtory of Hawali.
The Virgin Islands.
Instttutions: St. Elizabeths Hospital.
Freedmer's Hospital.
Howard Untverstty.
Columbia Institution for the Doaf.
Extra-Departmenlal Aclioities: American Anliqutties.
General Education Board.
Fuel Administralion; Coal Commission Perry's Viclory Memorial Commission.
During the year the solicitor's office presented 37 oral arguments to the courts of the District of Columbia and filed 46 briefs in the submission of cases for decision and in hearings on various motions.
The two test cases brought to determine legal questions arising under the act of March 2, 1919, commonly known as the war minerals act, and mentioned in the last annual report, were decided by the Supreme Court of the United States December 7, 1931.
This decision has been followed in the disposition of pending cases and thereunder approximately one-third of the 346 suits brought pursuant to the act of February 13, 1929, have been disposed of.
Seventeen other test cases brought under the act last mentioned are now under consideration by the courts of the District of Columbia, which suits, when finally determined, will dispose of many of the remaining cases.
Separate trials will only be required in those cases which involve questions peculiar to the respective claim or claims.
One hundred and three war minerals suits have been finally closed in the courts by decrees or dismissals.
Fourteen miscellaneous cases, involving Indian, reclamation, and public land questions, have' been finally closed.
All cases involving oil conservation matters pending at the date of the last report have been finally closed on the court dockets in favor of the Government.
There were 284 cases in this class.
There remained at the close of the year 248 suits on the dockets of the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia, and 3 cases on the docket of the Court of Appeals.
New or additional legal work has devolved on the solicitor's office during the past year as a result of the transfer to the jurisdiction of the Interior Department of the Virgin Islands and the Alaskan Road Commission.
Decisions by the courts in war minerals cases hereinbefore referred to have resulted in the reopening and reconsideration of a substantial number of these claims.
The solicitor's office has assumed the legal work incident to the adjudication and disposition of these cases by the Secretary of the Interior and the War Minerals Relief Commission.
Sixty-two of these cases were reviewed during the past year.
There was a decrease in the number of Indian matters reviewed by the solicitor's office during the past year because of change in practice which permitted final disposition of some minor matters in the field.
There was an increase of about 25 per cent in opinions rendered by the solicitor, and an increase of nearly 300 per cent in reports on legislation reviewed, written, or considered.
Throughout the year the office cooperated with the Department of Justice and other departments in matters of common interest affecting the United 'States, and has in many instances given oral advice and counsel to department officials and others in matters involving affairs within the jurisdiction of the Department of the Interior.
Considerable work has also been performed for the Federal Oil Conservation Board in compilation and review work and also in other miscellaneous matters.
The solicitor is a member of the departmental oil committee which reviews all applications for oil permit extensions, leases, and miscellaneous matters relating to oil.
The issuance of departmental instructions of April 4, 1932, reopening the public lands to the filing of prospecting permits for oil and gas subject to the express agreement of all permittees to join in unit or cooperative plans of development and to hold their permits subject to the provisions of the act of Congress of March 4, 1931, has resulted in the filing of a substantial number of new permit applications.
The Sixty-third Annual Report of the Board of Indian Commissioners to the Secretary of the Interior shows that during the year members of the board visited schools, agencies, and other branches of the Indian Service in 17 different States.
According to the report the Indian Service passed through unusual conditions during the year.
Like their white neighbors, the Indians were brought face to face with many disturbing and perplexing problems.
Unfavorable economic conditions were aggravated in some parts of the West by bad weather which resulted in serious crop and livestock losses and suffering to many people.
The report states that the serious situation confronting the Indian Service calls for the active cooperation of every one who has an active interest in the advancement of the Indian people.
The need of the hour is a hearty working together by all organizations and individuals to do everything possible to help the Indian and those working for him and with him in order that there shall be no slackening of progress while we await the return of better times.
Within the service itself there is imperative need for closer coordination of all the activities directed toward the uplift of the Indian people.
Because of the shortage of funds and a reduced field personnel, technicalities should be brushed aside and the spirit of teamwork given the greatest emphasis.
In order not to give encouragement to the idea that the Indian is under no obligation to support himself as long as the Government is willing to supply food and clothing, the Indian Service, in furnishing relief to the needy and also in the case of part of the Red Cross issues, required all able-bodied Indians to perform some useful labor in return for the assistance received, whenever it was at all practicable.
The demoralizing influences of the old ration system and the distribution of per capita payments are well known.
Even in times of distress there should be no let-up in the policy of impressing upon every Indian the necessity for maintaining himself and family by his own labors.
In its report, the board renews its recommendation for the adoption of a policy of decentralization of authority by giving more discretion to the field superintendents and reducing the handling of detailed matters of the Indian Service in Washington.
Orders issued from time to time have given the superintendents in the field more authority within certain limits but the recent reorganization of the Indian Service has resulted in some progress in the wrong direction.
The various specialized branches of the service are now in charge of staff officers who have administrative direction over their particular line of work in the field and representatives of the specialized services are stationed at the various field units.
The effect has been that authority of field jurisdictions has gravitated toward the officers of these special branches or divisions and away from the superintendent.
As stated by Commissioner Scott, a member of the board, "practical decentralization has not been effectuated so as to reach the superintendent, the man who is always in contact with the Indians, whose initiative has been further weakened and whose whole administration has been cramped down tighter than ever. He is held responsible for results without the necessary power to secure them."
The board urges that appointees to positions in the schools and other parts of the Indian Service be persons who have had experience in Indian work, whenever it is possible to obtain them.
We are in hearty sympathy with the efforts that have been made to raise the standards of the Indian school, but our observations have led us to believe that in making appointments too much emphasis has been placed upon academic qualifications rather than upon character, common sense, and practical experience in dealing with Indians.
We disapprove the practice of appointing new, untried, and inexperienced persons to key positions instead of promoting those who have already demonstrated their efficiency by good service in less important posts.
The principle of promotion is an elementary and basic feature of all good administration.
To deny recognition and promotion, or the expectation of it, to those who have worked up through the service by merit and demonstrated efficiency, and to appoint instead persons with no knowledge of Indian history and temperament and the elementary principles of the Federal administration of Indian affairs is a mistake for which one finds little justification.
The board recommends the enactment of legislation by Congress which will specifically define an Indian.
In years past, according to its report, persons of varying degree of Indian blood have been enrolled and become entitled to a share in the property and rights of different tribes.
As long as a person has shown an appreciable amount of Indian blood, no matter how small the percentage may have been, the Bureau of Indian Affairs has enrolled him and granted him all the rights of full tribal membership, if entitled thereto under existing law.
Thousands of persons, more white than Indian and often with but a trace of Indian blood, have thus received rights which entitled them to shares in tribal estates and other benefits as Indians and wards of the Federal Government.
Although a large part of the Indians have been enrolled and considerable areas of their land have been allotted it is recommended that Congress pass legislation so that no person of less than one-fourth degree of Indian blood shall be enrolled and become entitled to tribal rights in the future.
The board also recommends legislation to bring about better law enforcement on Indian reservations.
It urges the passage of a simple act extending the jurisdiction of State laws over Indian reservations, but where the aboriginal life is still primitive and it is not considered that there exists a sufficient comprehension among the Indians of the laws and customs of the white people the Secretary of the Interior should be given the authority to decide whether the laws of the State should be put into effect or not.
In its observations on the desirability of the conservation of tribal funds the board states that it is opposed in principle to the making of per capita payments to the members of Indian tribes.
In periods of great distress, as has occurred in the past year throughout parts of the Indian country, there is some justification for drawing on the tribal funds to relieve pressing need for food and clothing, but in normal times the board believes such payments should not be made from Indian funds.
The report states that tribal moneys should be conserved and used only for productive purposes; per capita payments usually mean a gradual depletion of the tribal estate without worthwhile benefits to the Indians.
The anticipation of these payments tend to hinder economic progress, for the expectation of receiving money without necessity of performing labor in return encourages indolence and deadens initiative.
Congress, the Indian Service, and all disinterested friends of the Indian people should take a firm stand in opposition to the continuation of this undesirable practice which is harmful to the individual Indian and tends to fritter away funds which should be used for more beneficial purposes.
The policy of placing a large part of the Indian children in local schools near their homes rather than giving them institutional training in boarding schools, at least in the elementary grades, is an educational development which we in principle indorse.
It has been the announced policy of the education division to study carefully each existing boarding-school situation to determine whether the school is one that should be closed down, continued for some other purpose, or maintained indefinitely.
As a result of those studies several schools have been closed during the past year.
We urge that in carrying out this policy due caution be exercised.
We warn against the premature or precipitate closing of boarding schools before definite information is at hand to determine where the pupils,if transferred, are to be placed and whether such transfers will be for the best interests of all concerned.
We believe that there is still a place in the Indian Service system for boarding schools giving both elementary and intermediate instruction.
There will always be a need for taking care of orphans, the children from broken homes, those living in districts remote from public schools, and those coming from small Indian groups still too nomadic in life to make day-school attendance practicable.
New public entries.
The area embraced in original entries and selections for the fiscal year 1932 exceeded the annual average for the past 10 years by more than 50,000 acres.
The homestead laws retained their usual leadership.
They accounted for almost 90 per cent of the new segregations and more than 75 per cent of the areas patented.
The additional appropriations made available for the year 1932 enabled the commissioner to reduce the arrearages in the General Land Office to a minimum, and while there was no appreciable difference in the number of field cases received there was a gain of nearly 7,000 in investigations and final adjudications.
Disposition of public lands through sales, leases, and otherwise resulted in cash receipts of $4,065,210.76 and the proceeds from Indian lands, $63,874.01, an aggregate of $4,129,084.77, all of which was deposited in the Treasury.
Bonuses, royalties, and rentals secured from leasing and mineral rights on the public domain total $3,236,978.35.
The State of Wyoming continued in the lead with $1,435,109.81; California was a close second with $1,402,264.05.
Receipts from other States were New Mexico, $118,108.42; Utah, $84,545.04; Colorado, $70,023.06; Montana, $69,098.81; North Dakota, $23,871.41; Washington, $11,924.45; Alabama, $8,982.20; Louisiana, $5,577.62; Idaho, $4,833.97; Nevada, $2,255.71; South Dakota, $362.16; and Michigan, $21.
These figures do not include $20,732.85 received as royalties in the State of Wyoming under the act of June 26, 1926, of which the State does not receive a share, nor $4,523.25 received as royalties on coal leases in Alaska of which the Territory receives no part.
Under the provisions of the mineral leasing act of February 25, 1920 (41 Stat. 437), the State within which the lands are situated receives 37½ per cent of the receipts, bonuses, rentals, and royalties, the reclamation fund 52½ per cent, and the other 10 per cent remains in the Treasury.
The reclamation fund will receive $2,100,555.87, the States within which the lands are located $1,402,420.93, the various Indian tribes, $63,874.01, and there will remain in the general fund, United States Treasury, $562,233.96.
There was expended in the conduct of business of the General Land Office $2,204,224.16, and disbursed from deposits by individuals for surveying, etc., an additional amount of $19,503.95, and from appropriations for surveying Indian reservations, $47,432.60.
Original entries allowed covered 4,551,774 acres, not including 53,102 acres embraced in finals not theretofore counted as original disposition of land.
The area included in original patents was 1,897,- 978 acres, of which 1,120,332 acres were patented with all minerals reserved.
The acres included in homestead patents numbered 1,438,075.
Among other patents were 49,613 acres in Indian fee, 2,865 acres in timber sales, Oregon, and 92,144 acres of reissues.
The appropriation for this service was $485,000.
Of this sum, $60,000 was set apart for prevention and suppression of forest and other fires on the public lands, leaving $425,000 for the prosecution of routine work.
Due to the activities of field investigations $88,954.35 was collected and turned into the Treasury and 107,270.92 acres were restored to the public domain, representing fraudulent entries canceled on field service proceedings.
There were pending field investigations on July 1, 1931, 17,246 cases, 20,455 new cases were received, 26,695 were investigated, reported and closed, leaving only 11,006 at the close of the year.
Of the 26,695 reports submitted, 7,673 were adverse and 19,022 favorable.
The recommendations of this department resulted in 44 civil suits brought by the Department of Justice; 32 of these cases were tried, 29 won and 3 lost.
Owing to the exceptionally heavy forest fires during the summer and fall of 1931 the special appropriation of $60,000 for prevention and suppression was inadequate, and it was found necessary to invade the general fund for protection of public lands by an additional $6,000.
The cadastral engineering operations under the administrative control of the Commissioner of the General Land Office are conducted in the field by the supervisor of surveys with headquarters at Denver, Colo.
A field office under the associate supervisor is located in the General Land Office.
There were 12 public survey offices maintained during the year at the following places: Helena, Mont.
Cheyenne, Wyo.
Denver, Colo.
Santa Fe, N. Mex.
Phoenix, Ariz.
San Francisco, Calif.
Reno, Nev.
Salt Lake City, Utah; Boise, Idaho; Olympia, Wash.
Portland, Oreg.
The office at San Francisco was transferred to Glendale, Calif., on June 30, 1932.
Direct appropriations for the sùpport of this service were $700,000, and this amount was augmented from other sources by $63,271.52.
Cadastral surveys were carried on in 23 States and the Territory of Alaska under 224 groups of which 85 in 20 States were of resurveys.
That part of the work computable on a line basis amounted to 17,803 linear miles.
For the execution of this work the average cost was $18.32 a mile.
Public survey lines were extended over 2,027,000 acres of agricultural lands.
The larger fields of operations were in the States of Arizona, Nevada, New Mexico, and Utah.
There are many governmental agencies whose activities are based on or are directly related to the public lands and they are dependent upon the cadastral service of the General Land Office for geographical position and description.
Approximately 800,000 acres were surveyed in cooperation with the Department of Agriculture.
Other departments for which surveying work was done under cooperative arrangements were War, Navy, Treasury, Commerce, Federal Power Commission, Coast and Geodetic Survey, as well as other bureaus of the Interior Department.
Original field work in the various classes of surveys measurable on an area basis totaled 2,967,000 acres and the quantity resurveyed, 1,165,800 acres.
The commissioner accepted and placed on file plats representing 1,598,220 acres of original surveys of public lands and 768,093 acres of resurveys, comprising an aggregate of 2,366,313 acres.
The 1931 edition of the map of the United States has been prepared and is now being distributed.
New maps of Wisconsin and Wyoming have also been issued and those of the States of Idaho and Oregon are in the office of the contractor for printing.
Work is progressing upon the recompilation of the maps of the States of Arizona and Colorado and preliminary work has been undertaken for a new map of the Territory of Alaska.
Preparation was continued of numerous maps for the use of the Department of Justice in connection with suits brought by various Indian tribes for lands for which the Indians claim they have never been compensated.
New maps were supplied the Department of Justice showing land grants of the Northern Pacific Railway for use in the case of United States v. Northern Pacific Railway Co. et al, now pending in the courts.
Photolithographic copies of township plats to the number of 5,697 were furnished other departments for official use and 7,991 such copies were sold for which $4,048.50 was received.
Two hundred sixty-one thousand six hundred and seventy-nine circulars covering the various public land laws and the regulations thereunder were distributed, 2,303 maps mounted, and 3,414 map publications furnished.
Homestead entries under the various public land laws were allowed as follows: The general provisions of section 2289, R. S., title 43, chapter 7, section 161, U. S. C., 2,942 for 303,545 acres; enlarged, act of February 19, 1909 (35 Stat. 639), title 43, chapter 7, section 218, U. S. C., 772 for 202,727 acres; stockraising, act of December 29, 1916 (39 Stat. 862), title 43, chapter 7, section 291, U. S. C., 7,291 for 3,543,582 acres, a total of 11,005 entries for 4,049,854 acres.
There were brought over from last year 2,359 cases involving homestead and other associated applications, 38,088 were received.
Disposition was made of 35,531 and those not reached for action, 4,916.
The approvals for patent included 5,639 homestead entries.
Consideration was also given to 1,837 applications to make second homestead entry, 802 applications to amend, 1,008 applications for leave of absence, and for extensions of time to establish residence, 8,033 original entries and 14,875 appeals from actions of district land offices and this office.
Isolated tracts, or public sale applications under section 2455, R. S., as amended, were 1,089 and of these 286 sales were approved for patenting.
Ninety timber and stone entries were passed to patent out of total of 324 receiving action.
Answers were given to 65,667 letters relating to homestead matters.
Instructions were issued involving the filing of 270 township plats.
Pursuant to the provisions of joint resolution approved June 12, 1930 (46 Stat. 580), extending preference to ex-service men, public lands were restored from withdrawals to the extent of 3,578,768 acres and 809,664 acres became subject to entry through the approval of new surveys.
There were awaiting action at the beginning of the fiscal year 26 oil and gas relief and lease applications under sections 14, 18, 18a, 19, and 22, act of February 25, 1920 (41 Stat. 437).
One thousand two hundred and nine cases were received, and 53 leases involving 37 cases were granted.
Section 14 of the general leasing act awards the discoverer of oil and gas proceeding under a prospecting permit a preference right to a lease.
Twenty-four thousand six hundred and four and seventy-four hundredths acres were embraced in 44 leases under the foregoing authority.
Public sale provisions of the leasing act resulted in the issuance of leases for lands in the Virgin oil field, Utah, Kirby oil field, Wyoming, Artesia oil field, New Mexico, and the Kevin-Sunburst and Buffalo Basin fields, Montana.
Such leases, 9 in number, involved 4,676 acres, from which bonus payments of $68,002.75 were received.
Canceled in their entirety were 11 leases affecting 9 cases, while 16 leases covering 14 cases were canceled in part.
One thousand one hundred and fifty other actions were taken and only 21 cases awaited consideration at the close of the year.
Oil and gas—Cooperative and unit plan of development.
Pursuant to the act of March 4, 1931 (46 Stat. 1523), the Secretary on February 11, 1932, approved operating agreements submitted by the Mountain Fuel Supply Co., covering plan of development of gas to be supplied through a pipe-line system to towns in Colorado, Wyoming, and Utah, including Ogden and Salt Lake City, Utah.
The plan as at present outlined covers 46 permits and leases and anticipates an ultimate expenditure of approximately $33,000,000.
Under the same act there were approved with the cooperation of lessees and permittees unit plans of operation on three geologic structures in Wyoming, namely, Little Buffalo Basin field, Big Draw gas field, and Baily Creek gas field.
Based upon applications filed prior to the order of March 13, 1929, 43 permits were granted, 11 applications for permits, and 38 permits which had been canceled were reinstated.
Final action was taken on 55 applications, 178 assignments were considered, and 249 applications for extension of time were disposed of.
The order of March 13, 1929, was on April 4, 1932, modified by the Secretary of the Interior and under appropriate regulations the public domain was again opened to the filing of applications for prospecting permits under section 13 of the leasing act and subsequent legislation providing for unit development.
Seventeen hundred and ten applications for permits were filed under the modified regulations.
Action was taken on 7,110 permits, leaving 2,239, including those recently filed under the amended regulations of April 4, 1932.
Brought over from last year were 155 mineral entries and 694 were received, 786 were adjudicated, leaving 63 on hand.
Two hundred and eighty-two were patented.
July 1, 1931, 32 mineral applications were pending, 132 received, 157 disposed of, only 7 await action.
There were in the office at the beginning of the year 108 miscellaneous mineral cases, 673 were received, 700 decided, and 81 were not reached for action.
Fifty-four applications for coal permits were pending at the beginning of the year, 2,199 were received, 81 coal permits were issued for an area of 71,055.67 acres, 33 coal leases were made covering 3,330.72 acres, and 46 coal licenses were given for 1,747.93 acres.
The total number of coal cases adjudicated was 2,153; 100 remain.
Potash leases in three cases involving 6,808.59 acres were granted, and 162 potash permits for an acreage of 218,938.73 were issued under the act of February 25, 1920, as amended by the act of December 11, 1928.
Disposition was made of 880 of the 950 sodium cases before the office.
Fifty-four reports on oil shale locations not embraced in patent proceedings failed to receive action during 1931; 1,367 such reports were received.
Judgments were rendered affecting 1,372 and 49 were left over.
Charges were preferred against 14,395 locations embracing approximately 1,713,000 acres.
Undecided at the beginning of the year were 103 oil-shale contests, to which number was added 1,794 new cases.
Decisions were rendered in 1,777, leaving 120 pending.
Locations numbering 10,918 for 1,294,500 acres were declared null and void.
There were on hand at the beginning of the year 24 oilshale applications for 186 claims, affecting 29,932 acres.
A claim embracing 160 acres was received; 7 applications for 29 claims with an acreage of 5,592, were rejected, and 4, including 34 claims for 5,321 acres, were passed to entry, leaving for consideration 14 applications covering 124 claims with an acreage of 19,179; 42 oil-shale entries, including 270 claims for 38,416 acres, were pending July 1, 1931; 4 entries for 34 claims covering 5,321 acres, were received.
Approved for patenting were 23 entries for 139 claims with an acreage of 23,- 489.17; 23 entries including 165 claims for 20,248 acres were not reached.
The creation of the Federal reservation in Nevada in connection with the Hoover Dam and reservoir project added considerably to the area to be examined and 630 additional field reports were submitted.
These together with 43 on hand total 673; 648 received action, leaving 25.
Five Hoover Dam reservoir contests were brought over from last year.
Four hundred and thirty-six were received, 428 were adjudicated, involving 1,017 locations.
Mining claims in the San Gabriel Canyon in conflict with rights of way of the cities of Los Angeles and Pasadena, Calif., for reservoir purposes in connection with their water supplies have interfered and retarded the construction of necessary dams.
It became necessary to cause an examination to be made of such claims to determine their validity in order that unlawful ones situated in the area desired for construction purposes might be declared null and forfeited.
Examination on the ground by representatives of the land office resulted in reports that 246 locations were invalid and proceedings were instituted against them; 163 have been declared of no effect, 145 were finally disposed of, leaving 83, against which adverse proceedings are now pending.
The investigations were not completed and considerable field work is necessary.
To effect legal service on numerous persons found from examination of records to hold rights under various claims situated in both the Hoover Dam and the San Gabriel Canyon regions, it was necessary to publish notice of adverse proceedings in many cases.
The publication of such notices added materially to the expense of the proceedings.
The devotion of public lands for aviation fields through leasing was authorized by the act of May 24, 1928 (45 Stat. 728); 82 claims presented under this act were considered, 2 leases were canceled, 3 applications finally rejected and closed, 1 extension of time was granted on a lease for compliance with the terms thereof, and 7 applications for leases await the revocation of the withdrawals involving the lands applied for.
Leases were granted to the town of Saguache Colo., for 555.25 acres, and to Anchorage, Alaska, for 140.24 acres.
Scattered tracts between the cities of Tucson, Ariz., and Los Angeles, Calif., embracing 1,600 acres of public lands, were withdrawn• for landing fields and other aviation purposes.
Similar areas of public lands aggregating 2,552 acres in Arizona, California, Nevada, Oregon, Utah, and Wyoming were withdrawn for use as intermediate landing fields and the maintenance of air navigation facilities, and 1,025 acres were released from withdrawal.
The public lands within the States are not subject to lease for furfarming purposes, but by the act of June 3, 1926 (44 Stat. 821), leases on public lands in the Territory of Alaska may be made for fur farming, 221 cases were considered under this act, 77 leases were issued, 5 were canceled, the assignment of 1 approved, and 5 were authorized, awaiting execution by the applicants, 24 applications were finally rejected and closed.
Leases may be issued in the Territory of Alaska for stock grazing purposes pursuant to the provisions of the act of March 4, 1927 (44 Stat. 1452); 113 cases relating to stock grazing matters in Alaska received action, 5 leases were issued, 5 authorized, 1 extension of time permitted for compliance with the terms of the lease, and 16 applications were finally rejected and closed.
The remaining cases await report from the field.
An association of stockmen was organized in the Mizpah and Pumpkin Creek regions, Montana, for the purpose of entering into an operative agreement affecting the leasing of public lands for stock grazing purposes; pursuant to the provisions of the act of March 29, 1928 (45 Stat. 380), a lease was issued to the said association on May 9, 1932, for approximately 25,124 acres, at a yearly rental of $785.
The use of the lands withdrawn by the act of March 4, 1931 (46 Stat. 1530), for stock grazing purposes was approved by the Secretary of the Interior, as authorized by section 2 of the act; 58 applications for grazing permits were filed under the act, 32 were granted, 3 rejected, and the remainder was suspended awaiting further field investigations.
Petitions presented by 4 States and 1 county resulted in 5 withdrawals for recreational classifications under the act of June 14, 1926 (44 Stat. 741); 822 acres including 200 revested Oregon & California Railroad lands were included within such withdrawals.
Sale of 200 acres under the reclamation law was made to Marion County, Oreg.
200 to the city of Cheyenne, Wyo., and 170 to the State of California.
A lease was issued to the State of Oregon for 206 acres.
Section 10 of the act of December 29, 1916 (39 Stat. 862), as amended by the act of January 29, 1929 (45 Stat. 1144), was the authority for 9 new stock-driveway withdrawals, and pursuant to the same provisions 31 driveways previously established were modified and 1 revoked.
The area withdrawn was 84,980 acres, and that released from such withdrawals, 7,595 acres.
There were embraced within the exterior limits of such withdrawals at the close of the fiscal year, 9,535,955 acres distributed among the States as follows: Colorado, 217,099; Idaho, 822,797; Montana, 234,008; Nevada, 3,567,052; New Mexico, 1,102,084; Oregon, 456,465; South Dakota, 22,155; Utah, 1,254,960; Washington, 10,919; and Wyoming, 1,311,087 acres.
Changes in forest boundaries under the act of June 4, 1897 (30 Stat. 34–36), were as follows: 8 were reduced, 5 abolished, and 15 interforest transfers effected.
Two forests were enlarged and one reduced by special acts of Congress; the areas in 15 were increased under the national forest consolidation act of March 20, 1922 (42 Stat. 463).
Recomputation of the areas of certain national forests due to recent surveys decreased the areas theretofore reported by 122,457 acres.
The changes made included a gross addition of 1,434,670 acres, and an exclusion of 470,996 acres from forest boundaries.
Two forests were created and two enlarged under the so-called Weeks Act of March 1, 1911 (36 Stat. 961).
The area now within existing forests under such act is 478,053 acres.
Applications for fee or trust patents for the benefit of Indians were examined in 3,295 cases, and 710 fee and 1,555 trust patents were issued.
The adjudication of 467 cases under section 4 of the act of February 8, 1887 (24 Stat. 388), as amended, allowing allotments to Indians not residing upon a reservation, resulted in the issuance of 26 patents.
Quieting title to lands within Pueblo Indian grants in New Mexico was provided by the act of June 7, 1924 (43 Stat. 636).
There were 329 non-Indian land cases adjusted under such act and 265 patents granted.
The general repeal of the preemption laws by the act of March 3, 1891, did not affect certain ceded Indian lands.
Preemption claims were considered in 47 instances involving such lands and 3 patents were granted.
There were 2,441 cases involving ceded Indian lands upon which action was taken resulting in 25 patents for homesteads and 97 for sales of such ceded lands.
The compilation of data concerning claims to Indian lands involved in suits before the Court of Claims is progressing as rapidly as the intricacies of the work will permit.
Awaiting action at the beginning of the year were 412 miscellaneous contests.
Those received numbered 1,844.
Judgments were rendered in 1,714, leaving without consideration 542.
This group includes all contests both Government and private involving claims to public lands except those affecting minerals or mining claims or land situated in the Hoover Dam project or the San Gabriel Canyon, Calif.
One hundred and twenty-one contests affecting mineral lands generally were added to the 62 awaiting action.
Decisions were rendered in 129 cases and 54 were not reached.
Left over from last year were 103 oil-shale contests; 1,794 were received, 1,777 decided, and 120 not considered.
Four hundred and twenty-eight of the cases before the office were disposed of and 13 not reached for action.
San Gabriel Canyon contests.
Proceedings were instituted against 246 claims in the San Gabriel Canyon, Calif.
Disposition was made of 163 of these claims and 83 were not reached.
In all, 4,211 contest cases were decided and 812 await consideration.
Railroad rights of way applications to the number of 116 were received which, added to the 5 pending, made a total of 121.
Twentysix were approved and requirements made in 81; not adjusted, 14.
Seventy-two reservoir declaratory statement applications were presented, requirements were made in 8, 59 were disposed of, and 5 not reached for action.
Irrigation, telegraph, telephone, public road, pipe line applications numbering 623 were received.
Seven were brought over from last year, 151 were approved, 27 canceled, 81 otherwise disposed of, and requirements made in 358; 13 were not considered.
One hundred and fifty-six maps for approved rights of way in forest and Indian reservations were received from the Forest Service and Indian Office and approvals promulgated.
Thirty memoranda or opinions were submitted to the department on rights of way matters referred to the Land Office for consideration.
The number of approved rights of way awaiting action July 1, 1931, was 55; those received were 718.
Of these, proof of construction was accepted on 43.
There were canceled, by relinquishment or default, 84.
Requirements were made in 462 and 169 were otherwise finally disposed of.
Six suits were recommended and 10 decrees of forfeiture obtained as result of previous recommendations.
Twenty-seven suits are now pending in the Department of Justice.
One hundred and six restorations in accordance with the terms and conditions of section 24 of the Federal water-power act were promulgated; 54 hydroelectric power project applications were transmitted to the General Land Office by the Federal Water Power Commission involving public lands and lands within national forests in 12 States and in the Territory of Alaska; 19,050 acres were withdrawn under the Federal water-power act.
Previous withdrawals for like purposes total 2,100,520 acres.
Water-users associations and irrigation districts operate either in whole or in part 19 Federal reclamation projects.
There are 31 such Federal projects and in addition 5 Indian reclamation projects; 2,242 entries of various kinds in reclamation projects were received, and 1,953 adjudicated.
There were promulgated 29 orders of restoration and 11 orders of withdrawal under the reclamation act.
The area restored in the various States totals 3,399,400 acres, while that withdrawn amounts to 1,250,640 acres.
There were 6 openings to entry subject to the reclamation act of a total of 140 irrigated farm units located in the Klamath, Minidoka, Belle Fourche, Vale, Riverton, and Sun River districts.
State irrigation districts, acts of August 11, 1916, and May 15, 1922.
Seventy-nine applications by districts for approval under the act of August 11, 1916, have been received at various dates in the General Land Office.
During the fiscal year 1932, 1 application involving 9,605.29 acres was approved and 1 for 27,665 acres rejected.
In all, a total of 59 applications involving 2,441,863.69 acres have been approved and 17 for 351,073.09 acres have been rejected.
Three applications are now pending.
Four contracts under the act of May 15, 1922, were promulgated.
Four private irrigation companies were approved as dependable sources of water supply for desert-land entries, 8 new cases were presented, 13 formerly approved were reopened, 5 were rejected, and 24 are now pending.
Since the adoption of the regulations of September 30, 1910 (39 L. D. 261), 1,418 projects have come before the Land Office on reports from field representatives.
Two thousand six hundred and forty-four cases under the desert land laws were received and 86 were pending.
The approvals numbered 359, the cancellations 392, while requirements were made in 1,097 cases, and there were otherwise disposed of 693; 189 were not reached; 123 entries were patented.
Withdrawals, segregations, and applications for patents covering 915,676.22 acres were considered under the act of August 18, 1894 (28 Stat. 422).
Either interlocutory or final action was taken thereon.
The area now remaining segregated and unpatented under the act is 238,923.23 acres.
There are now withdrawn under the act of March 15, 1910 (36 Stat. 237), 34,930.15 acres, and applications for 635,896.42 acres are pending.
Additional to the 13 applications not disposed of last year were 217 received.
Of these 62 were approved, 55 canceled, 46 referred to the Geological Survey as petitions for designations, and 55 otherwise disposed of, leaving 12 awaiting action.
New claims for 175,375.25 acres were added to the 105,813.66 acres of swainp-land claims on hand at the beginning of the fiscal year.
Lists affecting 129,515.72 acres were not reached.
One hundred and sixty-six cases in Minnesota and 19 cases in Arkansas were considered under the acts of May 20, 1908 (35 Stat. 169), and January 17, 1920 (41 Stat. 392).
Executive or departmental orders withdrew 6,049,905.80 acres of public lands and placed them in a state of reservation.
The purposes of the several withdrawals were set forth in the various orders.
Lands previously withdrawn were restored to the public domain to the extent of 3,619,457.07 acres.
In some instances privately owned lands were scattered among the public tracts.
More important withdrawals and restorations follow.
There were added to national forests 1,434,670 acres and 407,996 acres were excluded therefrom.
All additions to national monuments and parks amounted to 302,205 acres, of which 280,970 acres are public.
Among the withdrawals in connection with rights of way matters was that made by Executive order of approximately 2,748,000 acres in California and 708,870 in Nevada pending definite location of transmission line to convey power from Hoover Dam to the city of Los Angeles.
One million two hundred and fifty thousand six hundred and forty acres were withdrawn for reclamation purposes under the act of June 17, 1902, and 3,399,400 acres previously withdrawn were restored.
Selections of school indemnity lands including new selections and those in connection with which requirements had been made approximating 725,010 acres were received.
Such selections were in addition to those involving 57,670 acres in the office July 1, 1931.
Titles affecting 78,617 acres were conveyed to the States by approvals, lists embracing 11,782 acres were canceled, requirements were made as to selections involving 534,746 acres.
Other disposition was made of 12,267 acres, leaving selections covering 145,268 acres awaiting consideration.
New selections together with those previously received embrace 319,514 acres.
Of these lists for 132,613 acres were approved and title conveyed to the States.
Selections for 3,212 acres were canceled, requirements were made affecting 122,862 acres and lists for 1,131 acres were otherwise disposed of.
Selections for 59,696 acres were not reached.
All minerals were reserved to United States in conveyances made to the State of Nevada for 13,423 acres.
Specific minerals were reserved in 6,735 acres.
Under cooperative agreements 833,723 acres have passed to certain States.
Of this amount 14,324 acres were conveyed during the past year.
The act approved May 2, 1932, amending the act of January 25, 1927, and the act of Mav 7, 1932, amending the enabling act admitting certain States into the Union, together with the act of March 31, 1932, making an additional grant to the State of New Mexico for normal school purposes will result in largely increasing the work of adjudication in connection with State grants.
The grant made by the act of January 25, 1927 (44 Stat. 1026), of mineral school sections has necessitated a determination by the Land Office whether the title to the State passed under the original cession grants or by such special act.
Adjudications were made involving 176,677.23 acres.
Title was found to have inured to the States under the original grants in cases involving 150,211.06 acres, and it was held that 24,243.26 acres passed to the various States under the special act.
Railroad and wagon road listings and selections were received to the extent of 288,714.02 acres; 62,344.78 acres were certified or patented in satisfaction of the grants.
Selections of 1,746.43 acres were rejected.
The total area adjudicated was 287,150.19 acres.
The grants to the Northern Pacific Railway Co. made by the act of July 2, 1864 (13 Stat. 365), and joint resolution of May 31, 1870 (16 Stat. 378), were altered and amended by the act approved June 25, 1929 (46 Stat. 41).
Certain claimed rights were declared forfeited and the institution of a suit for the purpose of carrying the amendatory act into effect was directed.
The Attorney General has instituted in the District Court of the United States for the Eastern District of Washington, the suit authorized by said act, Equity No. 4389, and preliminary hearing on the points of law involved was held during the month of May at Spokane, Wash., before a special master appointed by the Federal court.
No decision has been announced.
The work of adjusting the grants to the St. Paul & Pacific, the St. Joseph & Denver City, Atlantic & Pacific western division, Atlantic & Pacific eastern division, was completed.
Two of said adjustments, the St. Joseph & Denver City, and the Atlantic & Pacific eastern division, were approved and the grants closed.
The adjustment was also closed of the grant to the Amboy, Lansing & Traverse Bay Railroad Co.
In connection with the adjustment of the land grant to the Leavenworth, Pawnee & Western Railroad Co., to which the Union Pacific Railroad Co. succeeded, 19,910 acres of land in Colorado within the limits of the grant were restored to the public domain.
Claims were alleged to all this land by various parties, particularly under claim of color of title by virtue of purchase from the railroad company.
The act of May 14, 1932 (Public No. 135), provides a method by which claimants may file applications for United States patents.
Title to lands formerly granted to the Oregon & California Railroad Co. was revested in the United States pursuant to the provisions of the act of June 9, 1916 (39 Stat. 218).
The revestment act provided that such lands should be separated into three groups or classes, to wit: Power sites, timber, agricultural lands.
The classification as made under the said act and the status of the land, June 30, 1932, were as follows: Power site lands, 56,682.49 acres; cruises developed that such power site lands contain a stand of 825,421,000 feet b.
The Federal Power Commission has jurisdiction over these projects and withdrawals, but the timber on the lands is subject to sale under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior by the act of June 4, 1920 (41 Stat. 758), in the same manner as timber on lands classified as timber under the provisions of the said act of June 9, 1916.
Timber lands: There were classified as timber lands 1,231,125.87 acres, containing a stand of 33,469,812,000 feet b.
Agricultural lands: 1,073,523.91 acres have been classified as agricultural in character, of which 211,114.65 acres have been patented; 83,493.92 acres are embraced in pending entries; 761,284.05 acres are vacant and subject to entry.
The foregoing does not embrace areas within the indemnity limits of the grant to the Oregon & California Railroad Co., which at the date of the revestment act, June 9, 1916, were unsurveyed and included in national forests.
The status of such lands is set forth in item 13-K in the decree of September 15, 1925, of the District Court of the United States for the District of Oregon in the case of United States v. Oregon & California Railroad Co. (8th Fed. Rept. 2d series, 645).
It was disclosed upon survey that the total acreage of such lands is 528,004.18.
No information as to such areas can be given as the General Land Office has not classified or cruised the lands.
Restorations were made during the year 1932 of 4,244.19 acres, classified as agricultural lands.
Pursuant to the provisions of the act of June 9, 1916 (39 Stat. 218), and May 17, 1928 (45 Stat. 597), 26 sales of timber involving an area of 1,789.66 acres, containing 58,645,000 feet of timber were made for which the sum of $92,460.75 was received.
In all 821 sales covering 107,576.88 acres containing 2,418,622,980 feet of timber have been made for which a total of $6,001,610.39 has been received.
The terms of the act of February 26, 1919 (40 Stat. 1179), under which the lands formerly granted to the Coos Bay Wagon Road Co. were reacquired provided that the lands should be classified and disposed of in the manner provided for the disposition of the revested Oregon & California Railroad grant lands by the act of June 9, 1916 (39 Stat. 218).
Coos Bay Wagon Road lands have been given the following classification: First, ·power site, 4,543.67 acres.
These lands contain 181,460,000 feet b.
The timber is subject to sale under the act of June 4, 1920 (41 Stat. 758).
Second, timber lands, 55,963.77 acres, containing 2,171,857,000 feet of timber.
Of this 15,068.83 acres containing 615,854,000 feet of timber have been sold to private individuals and corporations in a manner provided by law, leaving 40,894.94 acres with a stand of 1,556,003,000 feet of timber unsold.
Third, agricultural lands, 34,147.95 acres have been classified as agricultural.
Of this area 8,841.15 acres have been patented, 7,871.25 acres are embraced in pending entries, 17,435.55 acres are vacant.
During the fiscal year 1932, 2,929.80 acres of reacquired Coos Bay Wagon Road lands within the Roseburg district were restored to homestead entry.
Two sales were made involving 160 acres of land containing 7,105,000 feet for which the sum of $17,332.50 was realized.
There have been to date 98 sales covering 17,380.78 acres containing 693,177,000 feet of timber, for which $1,609,947.34 was received.
Extensio sn of time in which to cut timber under the provisions of the act of May 19, 1930 (46 Stat. 369), authorizing the Secretary of the Interior to extend the time for cutting and removing timber from revested and reconveyed lands in Oregon under the acts of June 9, 1916, and February 26, 1919, were granted involving 1,913.79 acres.
Oregon-California tax unit, act July 13, 1926 (44 Stat. 915).
Approximately 2,300,000 acres of land the title to which revested in the Government under the act of June 9, 1916, is made subject to payments for amounts in lieu of taxes under the provisions of the act of July 13, 1926 (44 Stat. 915).
The valuations used are those employed by the Secretary of the Interior in the payment of the accrued taxes for the year 1915 and the rates are fixed by the annual lawful levies on privately owned properties.
The General Land Office checks, audits, and certifies for payment, if found correct, the accounts of the several counties under the foregoing act.
Claims receiving consideration during the fiscal year 1932 were as follows: 14 for the year 1930 were examined and certified for $383,189.64, and 9 claims for the year 1931 for $308,016.42.
Total payments approved and certified during the year $691,206.06, net disallowances from the above claims amounted to $2,369.31.
Three claims for the year 1931 for $73,203.08 were pending at the end of the fiscal year.
Forty cases involving sale of lands in Alaska for trade, manufacturing or other productive industry under section 10 of the act of May 14, 1898 (30 Stat. 413), were examined and 5 patents issued.
Permission was granted to the Alaska Road Commission to conduct the sale of certain buildings located on the former Fort Egbert Military Reservation.
The buildings were appraised at $645 and the sale was held on June 15, 1932.
Regulations were issued governing the sale of lands within the abandoned Point Campbell Military Reservation at Point Campbell near Anchorage, Alaska.
The Government lands in 5 abandoned military reservations and 21 signal corps stations in Alaska were restored to the public domam.
Town sites, parks and cemeteries.
Reservations for the town sites of Macon and Wheaton and withdrawal orders for town-site uses in four other localities in Montana were revoked.
Extensions of time within which to make deferred payments were granted to purchasers of lots in Harding, Fla.
Patent for the west side addition to Superior, Ariz., was issued on the application of the judge of the superior court.
Sale of town lots was conducted at Salina, N. Mex., and a survey was ordered for lots in Wadsworth, Nev.
Two Indian villages at Hoonah and Wrangell, Alaska, were surveyed.
Thirteen town-site matters were adjudicated, 813 town lots considered, 'and 253 patents were issued.
Patents for parks and cemeteries were granted to the towns of Hatch, N. Mex., Wickenburg, Ariz., Fruita, Colo., and Skagway, Alaska, under the act of September 30, 1890 (26 Stat. 5010).
Thirty-seven reports were submitted on enrolled bills.
Office became laws through the approval of the President.
Instructions or regulations affecting 51 of such acts were promulgated.
Memoranda on proposed reports on 273 bills pending before the committees of Congress were submitted for the consideration of the department.
Tract book notations, preliminary examinations, cancellations, and relinquishments.
Public-land withdrawals made by 1,174 letters or Executive orders were noted on the records.
These include withdrawals for stock driveways, national forests, power-site reserves and classifications, restored lists, designations under the various homestead acts, etc.
Cancellations on 2,780 relinquishments and 1,255 entries for failure to make proof within the statutory period were noted.