The first annual report of a Cabinet officer assuming his duties with a new administration is necessarily brief, as the period covered is only from March 4 to June 30.
I will not attempt to interpret or give a résumé of the detailed reports of the various bureaus, divisions, and offices of the Department of the Interior contained herein.
They will speak for themselves.
Under this administration several new administrative agencies have either been brought into the Department from other departments or have been newly created.
The Bureau of Mines, retransferred from the Department of Commerce in anticipation of an Executive order to that effect to be issued later.
The Federal Board for Vocational Education which has been set up as a branch of the Office of Education.
The Office of Public Buildings and Public Parks of the National Capital.
The Soil Erosion Service.
The Subsistence Homesteads Division.
The Adviser on Economic Status of Negroes.
In addition to the foregoing, the Department of the Interior has been designated by the President as the Federal agency responsible for certain administrative duties under the petroleum code, and the Secretary of the Interior has been made administrator under the oil code as well as Administrator of Public Works.
However, since all of these additional activities were brought under the jurisdiction of the Department subsequent to June 30, they are not discussed in this report.
The detailed reports of the various divisions of the Department have been materially cut down in volune in this roport for reasons of economy.
Full details of the activities of any part of the Department during the year covered by the report are available in the files of the Department to whomever may be interested.
The work of the solicitor's office shows a considerable increase during the fiscal year, notably in the matter of reports on proposed legislation, the number attaining a total of 982.
Two cases of outstanding importance affecting the jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Interior over the property of Indians of the Five Civilized Tribes in Oklahoma were decided by the Court of Appeals of the District of Columbia on April 3, 1933, namely, King v. Ickes (64 Fed. 2d, 979), and Ickes v. Perry (64 Fed. 2d, 982).
The purpose of both suits was to compel the Secretary to release large sums of money held by him belonging to Indians of the Five Civilized Tribes of one half or more Indian blood.
These funds were the proceeds from leases of restricted lands.
The restrictions having been removed from the lands, it was contended that this operated to remove the restrictions from the funds.
The decision of the trial court in one case was for and in the other against the Secretary.
Appeals were perfected; and while the cases were before the appellate court, Congress enacted the act of January 27, 1933 (47 Stat. 777), section 1 of which declared that all funds then held by or which might thereafter come under the supervision of the Secretary belonging to Indians of the Five Civilized Tribes of one half or more Indian blood are restricted, and that all such moneys shall remain subject to the jurisdiction of the Secretary until April 26, 1956.
The Court of Appeals ruled in both cases that this enactment applied to the funds involved in the pending suits and made them restricted and subject to the jurisdiction of the Secretary irrespective of whether the property was theretofore restricted or unrestricted.
Federal irrigation development by the Bureau of Reclamation and the Office of Indian Affairs continues to entail legal problems.
During the year 12 cases were taken to the United States Circuit Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit and wero decided in favor of the United States.
The construction of Boulder Dam and appurtenant works, with a contemplated expenditure of $165,000,000, produces many legal problems; and these come to the solicitor's office.
Complicated specifications and attendant contracts are examined, while purchase contracts of large magnitude must be passed upon.
Questions involving conflicting rights between the States and the United States in the construction of the Boulder Canyon Project have been numerous.
In the establishment of Boulder City and its government, questions of law have arisen concerning construction of waterworks, public buildings, streets, establishment and maintenance of schools, a police force, and the trial of cases involving misdemeanors.
Under the oil-conservation policy which became effective March 13, 1927, no oil and gas prospecting permits were issued.
On April 4, 1932, the Department approved regulations providing for the issuance of permits on conditions giving the Department wide control over drilling and production as provided in the act of March 4, 1931.
The result has been renewed activity in permits.
In cases where these have been denied, appeals have been taken to the Secretary and have been considered in the office of the solicitor.
The order of August 6, 1932, that the volume of oil produced be measured without deduction, except for the actual percentage of impurities, has had far-reaching effect.
The validity of the requirement that annual assessment work be performed in oil shale placer claims is before the office in a number of appeals from the decision of the Commissioner of the General Land Office.
A suit for injunction restraining the Secretary from taking proceedings against these claims because of default in annual assessment work is now before the Court of Appeals of the District of Columbia.
During the year the office has actively participated in the trial of a number of cases arising under the War Minerals Relief Act of March 2, 1919, selected for hearing because they involved questions whose determination would enable the solicitor to dispose of other pending suits.
The outstanding cases finally determined were two which involved the claim of the Chestatee Pyrites & Chemical Corporation.
These cases were before the Court of Appeals of the District of Columbia and the Supreme Court of the United States several times, and were finally settled in accordance with the mandate of the Supreme Court.
In the first of these cases (no. 335, decided January 16, 1933), the Supreme Court held that in claims presented under the War Minerals Act as amended February 13, 1929, purchase of equipment, salaries paid to executive officers, and similar items, might properly be included.
In the second case (no. 767, decided May 29, 1933), the Supreme Court sustained the Secretary of the Interior in declining to pay interest, amounting to over half a million dollars, claimed to have accrued after the enactment of the act of March 2, 1919, which permitted interest to be charged.
Fifty-eight war mineral cases remain to be determined by the Secretary of the Interior.
Four cases are now before the courts on appeal.
The most important is Ickes v. Cuyuna Mining & Investment Co., which probably will be heard by the Court of Appeals of the District of Columbia during its October Term.
This case involves the question of the assignability of war minerals claims.
The reorganization of Federal functions has brought to the Department of the Interior additional activities—notably in the new establishment of the Office of National Parks, Buildings, and Reservations which present for consideration many legal problems not heretofore within the assignment of the duties of the solicitor.
The Secretary of the Interior under section 5 of the act of March 2, 1919 (40 Stat. 1272) was authorized to adjust, liquidate, and pay certain losses suffered by persons by reason of producing or preparing to produce certain minerals in compliance with the request or demand of named agencies of the Federal Government.
This act was amended February 13, 1929 (45 Stat. 1166) authorizing the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia to review the decisions of the Secretary of the Interior upon questions of law, with the usual right of appeal; but providing, also, that "the decision of the Secretary of the Interior on all questions of fact shall be conclusive and not subject to review by any court."
Under this amendment 337 petitions were filed, of which 5 have been dismissed by the court, and 173 decrees, mostly by consent, have been referred to the Secretary of the Interior for review.
On June 30, 1933, 159 cases were pending in the court.
At the beginning of this fiscal year there were 62 decrees pending action by the Secretary of the Interior; and, in addition, 52 decrees were handed down during the year.
Under these decrees, 56 cases were considered, of which 53 resulted in awards, 2 in disallowances and one in a decision from which an appeal has been taken.
There are 58 cases remaining for consideration by The Secretary of the Interior at the end of the fiscal year.
The United States Supreme Court in the Vindicator-Chestatee, decided December 7, 1931, held that a claim under the act might properly include the purchase of property (land) and interest to March 2, 1919, on money borrowed and lost in operations; and, in the (second) Chestatee, decided January 16, 1933, held that expenditures for salaries of officers, legal services, taxes, and expenditures prior to stimulation were permissible; and, in the (third) Chestatee, decided May 29, 1933, held that interest paid or accured was allowable only to March 2, 1919.
The area irrigated in 1932 with water from Government works was 2,769,605 acres, a decrease of 77,002 acres over that of 1931.
The area cropped was 2,775,280 acres, an increase of 3,096 acres.
The total value of crops was $50,158,381, a decrease of $23,801,996 compared with 1931, and of $69,503,439 compared with 1930.
This decrease in crop values was due largely to the agricultural depression and the prevailing low prices of crops.
During the period 1906, when water was first available, and to and including 1932, the cumulative value of crops grown on land irrigated from Government works amounted to $1,886,048,258.
Construction payments in cash and credits from power and other sources received·during the fiscal year 1933 were $887,460.68, a decrease of $616,990.75 compared with the previous year.
Payments for operation and maintenance were $1,138,403.19, an increase of $30,694.66 compared with the previous year.
Total payments amounted to $2,025,863.87 compared with $2,612,159.96 in 1931, a decrease of $586,296.09.
Income to the Bureau from all sources during the fiscal year was $4,688,255.57, or $711,059.37 less than in the previous year.
The operation expense for the year was $1,127,394.40, a decrease from the previous year of $321,795.34.
Excess of operation and maintenance receipts over expense for the period amounted to $11,008.79 compared with an excess of expense over receipts of $341,481.21 for the previous year.
The appropriation available for construction was $4,060,198.
The amount expended on construction was $3,488,034.62 conpared with $7,255,188 the previous year.
Reduced revenues coming into the reclamation fund have brought about a sharp reduction in construction activities and unless some means be found for resuming work on a more extensive scale, funds that have been spent on storage works and canal systems will remain tied up until projects have been completed and water made available for the irrigable lands, and until water can be furnished, the Government is not in a position to call for the return of the construction costs.
In other cases there is urgent requirement for the construction of storage reservoirs to provide additional water for well-developed projects that are handicapped because of a shortage particularly after the middle of July.
The Boulder Canyon project comes under a separate authorization and appropriations for this work are made direct from the General Treasury.
The relief acts of April 1, 1932, and March 4, 1933, granting to water users on Federal projects a suspension of payment of construction charges that became due in 1931, 1932, and 1933, resulted in a further reduction in reclamation revenues.
Accretions to the revolving fund from the sale of public lands was $293,863.78, which is a shrinkage of about one third of the revenues received from this source in the previous fiscal year, and from oil leases $1,833,721, an increase of $404,449.
Construction progress on Boulder Dam has been continued at the same rapid pace that characterized the work during the first 2 years and at the end of the year the contractor was approximately 18 months ahead of the original schedule.
The river was diverted through the 50-foot tunnels in November 1932, the cofferdams completed during the winter months, the foundation excavation completed in the spring, and the first concrete placed on June 6.
The contractors have planned to place the mass concrete in the dam 3,400,000 cubic yards—in 23 months, which is 9 months less than the time allowed in the first estimate.
The principal contracts awarded during the year covered the installation of the 150-ton permanent cableway by the Lidgerwood Manufacturing Co., the price being $172,110.
The Westinghouse Electric & Manufacturing Co., of East Pittsburgh, Pa., was awarded a contract for furnishing eight plate-steel cylinder gates, 34 feet in diameter, for the intake towers, their bid being $334,737.
The Goslin-Birmingham Co., of Birmingham, Ala., has the contract for supplying entrance liners and other appurtenances for the intake-tower gates at a price of $56,000.
On February 3, 1933, bids were opened for furnishing hydraulic apparatus for the Boulder power plant, including four 115,000-horsepower and one 55,000-horsepower, vertical shaft, hydraulic turbines, with governors.
The Allis-Chalmers Manufacturing Co., of Milwaukee, Wis., was awarded a contract for the four large wheels at $1,087,600, and the Newport News Shipbuilding & Dry Dock Co., of Newport News, Va., was the successful bidder for supplying the small wheel at $124,684.
The Woodward Governor Co., of Rockford, Ill., is furnishing the five governors at a price of $60,605.
At the end of the year specifications were being prepared for the furnishing and installation of four 82,500-kilovolt-ampere and one 40,000-kilovolt-amperes vertical-shaft alternating-current generators for the Boulder power plant.
During the year 859,500 barrels of cement were purchased.
A combination of four southern California mills—the Riverside Cement Co., California Portland Cement Co., Southwestern Portland Cement Co., and the Monolith Portland Cement Co.
On the Owyhee project, Oregon, construction work has been in progress throughout the fiscal year.
Owyhee Dam and the two long tunnels at the head of the canal system were completed.
Contracts have been awarded for the first 10 miles of the main canal and good construction progress has been made.
The Cle Elum Dam, on the Yakima project, Washington, was 94 percent completed at the close of the fiscal year.
This is a rolled-earth and gravel-fill dam 135 feet high, 770 feet long, with a reservoir capacity of 435,000 acre-feet of water.
On the Kittitas division of this project the Wippel pumping plant was completed and also the Badger Creek wasteway, while on the Kennewick division the Prosser Canal and power plant were put into operation.
A power plant was also completed on the Grand Valley project in Colorado.
On the Minidoka project, in Idaho, work was continued on the enlargement of the South Side Main Canal and lateral extensions on the Gooding division.
Drainage work was continued on the Sun River project, Montana; Rio Grande project, New Mexico-Texas; Klamath project, California-Oregon; Belle Fourche project, South Dakota; and the Willwood division of the Shoshone project, Wyoming.
During the year 76 miles of canals and 109 miles of drains were constructed, making the total to date 17,808 miles.
The construction work at Boulder Dam increased the number of tunnels from 142 to 190 with a distance of 260,841 feet.
There were 1,665 new canal structures built, 75 bridges, and 355 culverts.
The Bureau has laid 4,792,055 feet, or 908 miles, of pipe; completed 1,498 miles of road, 120 miles of railroad, 4,086 miles of telephone lines, and 3,587 miles of transmission lines.
Building these numerous canal systems has required the excavation of 319,004,119 cubic yards of earth and rock, and the placing of 5,651,168 cubic yards of concrete, in which 6,502,636 barrels of cement have been used.
Farmers on Federal reclamation projects have felt the depression with a force equal to that experienced in other agricultural sections.
One encouraging exception, however, is noted on thesugar-beet projects where the crop is contracted before planting and where is known within reasonable limits what is to be paid at harvest time.
The average value of crops grown on all Federal projects in 1932 dropped to $20.69, which is the lowest average during the entire existence of reclamation activities.
Fortunately, there is very good evidence at hand to show that the bottom has been reached and that we have started on the upgrade.
Early in the spring of 1933 there was a substantial increase in the price of dairy products, wool was being contracted at about double the price received the year before, the price of cotton had advanced, and, with increased prices being received from livestock, there was a corresponding increase in the selling price of alfalfa.
The prospects for better prices for the 1933 crop were very promising, particularly for potatoes and beans, which are two of the important cash crops on northern projects.
A brief statement as to general trends in crop production during recent years gives some idea of the contribution of Federal reclamation to the agricultural life of the country and particularly to the unimportant part it plays in increasing the agricultural surplus.
The area cultivated remains approximately four tenths of 1 percent of the total cropped area of the United States and about 1 percent of the value of all crops.
Wheat has been decreasing in area and the production is now about three fourths of what it was 5 years ago.
Cotton has also fallen off to approximately one half of the 1928 area.
On the other hand, irrigated pastures, alfalfa, barley, and oats have been increasing year by year.
These are the crops that are consumed on the farm and do not enter into competition with crops produced in humid sections.
Potatoes and fruits have shown both increases and decreases in area and production during recent years, but the general trend has been upward.
7 percent less than the maximum of 1929, although the average yield has increased about 25 percent.
Federal reclamation has furnished an important market for the sale of manufactured products in the 43,377 irrigated farms with a population of 181,007, and 227 cities and towns with an additional population of 515,423, which in large part have resulted from the construction of these projects.
The act of April 1, 1932, granted to water users on Federal projects a moratorium on the construction charges that became due in 1931 and one half of the charges that became due in 1932.
As the economic conditions that justified this moratorium still continued during the calendar year 1932, it was evident that further relief would have to be extended to the water users.
A meeting of the Federal Irrigation Congress was held in Boise, Idaho, September 1-2, and resolutions were passed recommending a continued suspension for a term of 3 years, without interest, of payments on construction and other charges due the United States on Federal projects and that said charges, together with accrued interest, as well as interest that became due under the act of April 1, 1932, be deferred to the end of the contract repayment period on the projects.
Several bills providing for relief were introduced in the Congress and hearings were held on January 25-27 before the Senate Committee on Irrigation and Reclamation, and on February 23 before the House Committee on Rules.
Under date of March 3, 1933, Congress passed an act extending the provisions of the act of April 1 to include the remaining half of the charges due for 1932, and all similar charges to become due in 1933, such deferred charges to bear interest at the rate of 3 percent per annum, which rate was to apply to charges deferred under the first act which, by regulation of the Secretary, provided for interest payments at the rate of 5 percent per annum.
This moratorium resulted in a marked reduction in receipts to be credited to the reclamation fund and limited the amount appropriated by Congress for continuing the construction work, exclusive of sums carried over from previous appropriations, to $2,065,000, which is about one third of the amount that would have been available under normal conditions.
In order to offset this difference and give opportunity to continue work on the few projects that were not completed, an act was approved on May 12, 1933, which authorized the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, upon request of the Secretary of the Interior, to advance funds in an amount not exceeding $5,000,000 for construction of projects or divisions of projects now under construction or approved and authorized.
The funds so advanced were to be repaid out of any receipts accruing to the reclamation fund within 5 years of the date of advance, with interest at 4 percent.
It has not been necessary to take advantage of the provisions of this act nor is it expected that such action will be taken.
The National Industrial Recovery Act approved June 16, 1933, authorized an expenditure of $3,300,000,000, and plans were made for carrying on construction work on Federal projects with funds to be allotted by the Public Works Administration.
Contracts amendatory of the 1926 repayment contracts with the Malta Irrigation District and the Glasgow Irrigation District were entered into September 10, 1932, and September 20, 1932, respectively, which provided principally for adjustment of payments during the life of the original contracts.
In spite of the very great reduction in the amount to be repaid during 1932, very few water users were able to meet the first payment due, and it was necessary that all districts accept the provisions of the moratorium act.
Adjustment contracts under the act of May 25, 1926, were completed with the 3 of the 6 small irrigation districts under the Sunnyside division of the Yakima project which had not previously contracted for extending the time for payment of construction charges.
These districts were the Grandview, Snipes Mountain, and Outlook.
The relief granted these six districts permits them to carry on without taking advantage of the act of April 1, 1932.
However, at the end of the fiscal year four of these districts had filed applications accepting the amendatory act of March 3, 1933.
The Sunnyside Valley Irrigation District secured relief under the original act, as did also some 80 percent of the individual water users on the Tieton division.
Inasmuch as the charges covered by the amendatory act are not 12 months in arrears, little interest has been manifested in this act up to the close of the fiscal year.
A supplemental contract dated June 3, 1933, was voted and signed by the Deaver Irrigation District, permitting the district to retain its construction collections during the next ten years and use them for additional drainage construction, which is badly needed.
This district has a crop repayment contract, so that the period of repayment is automatically extended.
On April 12, 1933, a contract was made with the Shoshone Irrigation District whereby the district is relieved of paying construction assessments on State-owned land within the district which may not by law be subject to assessment by the district.
August 22, 1932, Lower Yellowstone Project, Montana-North Dakota, 4.
January 3, 1933, Belle Fourche Project, South Dakota, 2.
February 2, 1933, Pavillion and Pilot divisions, Riverton Project, Wyoming, 69.
March 4, 1933, Kittitas Division, Yakima Project, Washington, 47.
May 17, 1933, Gooding Division, Minidoka Project, Idaho, 68.
Owing to the depressed financial condition prevalent on a large majority of the projects there was little to encourage settlement of the vacant public lands.
Results, however, would seem to justify the recital of a few exceptions to this rule.
On the Belle Fourche project the season of 1933 showed a satisfactory increase over that of 1932 in point of new settlers and in the area under cultivation, and although there was an absence of much needed capital, the settlers were improving their farms, their indedtedness was inconsequential, and they were able to face the future with confidence.
There was much demand for the farms on the Kittitas division of the Yakima project, and from January 1 to the close of the fiscal year 30 families located in the valley.
Of the 47 farm units opened to entry on March 4, 88 applications had been received to June 30, and 38 of these applicants made entry.
Irrespective of economic conditions similar to those existing on the other projects, the Riverton project closed the fiscal year with the addition of 12 carefully selected settlers.
In spite of the low prices received for farm products on the reclamation projects, in general the morale of the settlers has not been seriously disturbed, and in the realization that their condition compares favorably with that of farmers in other sections of the country where crop prices have been at an exceedingly low ebb, they have taken on new hope and have determined to fight the depression to a finish.
The effects of the prolonged economic depression have been severly felt in all activities, rural, urban, and suburban, throughout the project and vicinity.
Construction was practically at a standstill during the year, the State's largest industry, copper mining, was almost completely shut down, and the prices of agricultural commodities were the lowest of record.
There was no advance in agricultural development and no market for farm property, or, for that matter, any other kind of property.
The collapse of the mining industry seriously affected an important market for farm products in the mining towns, and the shutting down of the mine plants cut off one of the most important markets for hydroelectric power from the project system.
These revenues, formerly depended on to defray a considerable part of operation, maintenance, and overhead expenses, had to be made up by direct assessments.
Under the circumstances banks were more conservative in extending credit, resulting in some increase in the amount required to be provided in cash for current financing, over normal times.
The meeting of current expenses, plus a large floating indebtedness would undoubtedly have resulted disastrously for many landowners, but for a loan of $880,000 from the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, made on notes signed by the individual shareholders, endorsed by the association as an organization.
This enabled the association to pay its outstanding notes, and to acquire the stock of the locally organized "Agricultural Credit Finance Corporation", with a paid-up capital of $350,000, which sum was thus made available for crop and water loans to association shareholders.
This relief undoubtedly saved many farms from foreclosure.
The increase in water stored in the four reservoirs on Salt River and in the underground gravels tapped by the project irrigation pumps, which resulted from the river flow of early 1932, made it possible to discontinue pumping during that year, except as needed for drainage.
Failure of fall and winter rains to follow this run-off, however, made it advisable in 1933 to again draw heavily on the irrigation pumps in order to conserve surface storage waters.
As a result, at the end of June 1933 the quantity stored was still 1,000,000 acre-feet, approximately 250,000 acre-feet less than at that date in 1932.
This is a fairly satisfactory condition, assuring an adequate reserve at the end of the time of heavy use, September 30, with possibility that fall and winter run-off may reduce the amount required to be pumped in 1934.
The slight advance in prices received for farm products, particularly during the last 6 months of the fiscal year, and the more economical methods of farming which of necessity were adopted by the farmers, contributed to the slight improvement in the general financial condition of the project water users over that of last year.
The relief from reclamation charges afforded by the acts of April 1, 1932, and March 3, 1933, has been of very material assistance to water users.
Additional relief in the form of reduced operation and maintenance charges, made possible by the drastic economies practiced by the Bureau, has also been of assistance.
A preliminary survey now indicates that approximately 14,000 acres have been planted this year, as compared to 9,918 acres in 1932, 18,895 acres in 1931, 28,073 in 1930, and 36,029 in 1929.
Of this year's crop, approximately 3,000 acres have bee signed up for destruction under the plan of the Cotton Administration of the Farm Relief Act.
Under the contract of February 5, 1931, the Yuma County Water Users'Association makes all collections from individual water users in the valley division, containing 47,372 irrigable acres.
As of June 30, 1933, the association had paid all O. & M. bills for the division, and had cleared for water, having paid in advance all individual assessments due, 42,579 acres, or 90 percent of the lands in the division.
Of the 13,467 acres in the Reservation division, 93 percent are eligible for water at this time.
The unfavorable economic conditions of the previous year continued to a greater degree throughout 1932 in that prices for all farm products, with but few exceptions, were lower.
As a result of an ample water supply, crop yields were uniformly high, but prices were ruinously low.
Collections of reclamation charges, aggregating $52,285, compared favorably with those of the preceding year (which were only $3,500 more), especially in view of the low prices received for farm produce generally and the fact that payment of nearly $69,000 of construction charges was deferred under the relief act of April 1, 1932.
The crop value of $24.43 per acre for 1932 is the lowest in the 22 years of the project's operation with the exception of the drought year of 1924.
Farm equipment depreciated about 25 percent in value, while values of livestock decreased over 50 percent, owing partly to a reduction of nearly 500 cows among the dairy herds of the project.
Reduction in available funds made it mandatory to curtail concrete lining operations on the project to 450 linear feet of laterals subject to excessive loss of water and high maintenance cost.
Broken control parts on the 42-inch needle valves at Stony Gorge Dam were replaced.
There were 459 farms irrigated during the 1932 irrigation season.
The average crop value per acre was $16.26 as compared with a 10- year average of $35.
This extremely low return was caused entirely by low prices for all farm products.
Yields were normal for the year and sufficient irrigation water was available for all needs.
The average water user has adapted himself to the changed conditions and has cut his cost of production to the minimum.
A number of land transfers were made by local people during the year at very low prices.
The price of farm lands ranged from $5 to $75 per acre depending on the soil qualities, improvements, location, etc.
The beet-sugar factory at Delta processed all beats grown in the territory, and the Grand Junction factory remained idle.
Sufficient acreage was contracted for the 1933 season to insure the operation of both factories.
During the year the Grand Valley power plant was constructed at a cost of approximately $209,000.
All funds in this connection were advanced by the Public Service Co. of Colorado and the plant was turned over to the company for operation on April 1, 1933.
During the 1932 irrigation season 1,592 farms were irrigated.
Of this number 782 were farmed by owners and 810 by tenants.
The average crop value per acre was $11.84, which was only about one half the previous lowest return in the history of the project.
This ruinously low return was due entirely to low prices received for agricultural products.
All principal crops brought the lowest returns of record, with the result that no general project revenue was available from any source.
A few farms were transferred by purchase and others by foreclosure, but no settlement activity was noticeable.
The price of farm land ranged from $25 to $150 per acre, depending upon the quality of the soil, improvements, and location with reference to shipping points.
Farmers on the project have been handicapped by low prices for produce.
Prunes, apples, and potatoes on many ranches were left unharvested because of lack of demand.
As a result, farm financing has become a problem.
There have been few sales, but a fair demand for rentals.
Cooperatives have been active.
The project continues to produce diversified crops and dairy products, with about half the project acreage in alfalfa hay and pasture.
There were 122 farms on the project operated by owners and 70 by tenants.
There has been an increase in the demand for rented farms, but in too many cases by persons without sufficient funds and equipment to carry on farming operations.
As a result of the poor market for potatoes in 1932, there was a reduction in acreage this year, with a demand for early potatoes that was encouraging, although shipments had been limited to the markets that could be reached by trucks.
There has been an increase in the area of small grain and all crops are looking better than in 1932.
Alfalfa that survived the freezing weather is doing well, but much of this crop was killed during the long and very cold winter months.
The canal system is in need of the replacement of some important structures comprising siphons, repairs to concrete flume floors, and headgates on the main canal.
There were 2,384 farms irrigated on the old divisions of the project as compared with 2,285 during the preceding year.
The number of irrigated farms is divided between the gravity and pumping divisions in the proportion of 1,522 on the former and 862 on the latter.
There was little change in tenantry, about 40 percent of the farms being operated by tenants and 60 percent .
Sales of farm property were comparatively few and prices were only fair.
Most crops produced good yields in 1932, but prices were very low.
The total crop value was $1,444,575, or an average of $14.50 per acre.
Sugar beets, with an average yield of $78 per acre, proved to be the most profitable crop.
Most of the other farm products, however, especially potatoes, declined in price to such an extent that they yielded little or no profit.
In spite of these conditions, collection of operation and maintenance charges on both the gravity and pumping divisions has been gratifying.
Most of the construction charges either have been postponed or have been paid out of power profits.
It is estimated that 30,242 acres on the Gooding division were irrigated with water from American Falls Reservoir, there being 134,000 acre-feet of storage delivered to these lands.
As a result, the water supply for lands both above and below the Milner-Gooding Canal was more than doubled and the crop yields increased accordingly.
The money loaned by the United States to rehabilitate the project has had a most encouraging effect.
During a number of years the uncertainty as to whether the project could finance itself to reconstruct many old wooden structures had caused much land to become tax deliquent to the extent that it was taken over by the county.
During the past year many new settlers have purchased these lands in small tracts and are building their homes.
These people are coming from the mining and dry-farming regions.
There is also evidence of new building and other improvements by the original landowners.
The prices prevailing for farm products have reduced the farmers' income in most cases to less than the cost of production and, notwithstanding lower overhead expense, a condition making difficult the meeting of water assessments has resulted.
Employment of landowners on new construction work helped the tax payment situation to some extent.
The district's income from water charges was 60 percent of normal.
The Bitter Root Irrigation District has an irrigable area of 18,240 acres.
In 1932 there were 227 farms with 15,374 acres of land cropped and irrigated, a slight increase over the preceding year.
During the 1932 irrigation season 649 farms were irrigated.
Of this number 324 were operated by owners and 325 by tenants.
The general population trend, back to the farm, held true for the Huntley project.
The annual census showed an increase in the farm population of 513 during the year and an increase in the town population of 80, making a total increase for the project of 593.
The average crop value per acre in 1932 was $24.84, which is the lowest in the project's history with the exception of 1921.
The water supply was adequate at all times and yields were good, the low value being due to depression prices.
Sugar beets were the principal cash crop and provided 72 percent of the total income from the farms.
The yield of this crop was 2 tons per acre above the average.
The year of 1932 was favorable for crop production and yields were somewhat above normal.
The general low price level of all farm produce, however, resulted in a crop revenue far below that of several years past.
The sugar-beet acreage was the largest and yields were the best in the history of the sugar industry on the project.
Although an unusually low price was received by the farmers for beets, this crop was the only one that yielded a profit to the producer.
Contracts, amendatory of the 1926 repayment contracts with the Malta and Glasgow irrigation districts, were executed during the year, which provided principally for an adjustment of payments during the life of the original contracts.
In spite of the very great reduction in the amount to be repaid during 1932, very few water users were able to meet the first payment due, and it was necessary that all districts accept the provisions of the Moratorium Act.
About 80,000 tons of sugar beets were refined by the Chinook factory of the Utah-Idaho Sugar Co., which constituted the greatest volume of any campaign in the life of the industry upon the project.
Slightly over 10,000 acres are contracted for 1933, which, with the crop prospect now in sight, should yield a tonnage at least equal to the capacity of the mill, during a normal operating season.
Major repairs to the plant are being made, however, which are designed to increase its daily output, and it is anticipated that the crop can be handled without difficulty.
The program followed since 1929 of changing the larg€ grain acreage to alfalfa, sweetclover, forage, and cultivated crops was continued during 1932.
Good progress was made as evidenced by the fact that at the end of 1932 there were 2,561 acres in sweetclover, 12,716 acres in alfalfa, 400 acres in potatoes, 100 acres in corn, compared to the year 1929, when there were 1,148 acres in sweetclover, 4,893 acres in alfalfa, 43 acres in potatoes, and none in corn.
In 1933 considerable interest was aroused in the raising of sugar beets and 80 acres were contracted.
That the nearest sugar factory at Chinook now has more than 10,000 acres under contract and the freight charge from the Sun River project amounts to about $1.30 are indications that a factory will have to be located near the project before sugar-beet raising can be extensively adopted.
The Fort Shaw division was successfully operated by the Fort Shaw Irrigation District.
The Greenfields and Big Coulee divisions as well as the main canals and storage works were operated in an efficient manner by the Greenfields Irrigation District.
During the last half of the calendar year 1932 the W. H. Puckett Co., of Boise, Idaho, constructed 16.2 miles of drains which were urgently needed to protect and reclaim lands from waterlogging.
Additional drainage work should be done in the very near future to protect additional lands from waterlogging.
There were 481 irrigated farms on the project.
In addition 54 farms were wholly dry, with small returns.
The area irrigated was 31,235 acres, which was about the same as the previous year.
The total area assessed for charges was about 44,000 acres.
This figure includes roads, laterals, and farmsteads, so it is probable that an area of about 6,000 acres susceptible of irrigation was not being irrigated.
A large percentage of this acreage is very undesirable for irrigation.
During the current year 55.3 percent of the irrigated farms were operated by owners or managers compared to 54.7 percent the previous year.
No attempt has been made to encourage settlement owing to the depressed agricultural condition.
The irrigation districts made no sales of lands taken over for nonpayment of taxes.
Two contracts for sale were canceled and one farm was purchased because of the nonpayment of taxes.
In spite of the low prices received for farm products the financial record of the district was satisfactory.
Both districts raised sufficient money to keep the operation and maintenance work on a cash basis.
The run-off of the North Platte River for 1932 was slightly above normal and the irrigation water supply was ample.
The area irrigated was about the same as that of the previous year.
All of the irrigation districts, except Pathfinder, delivered water to all lands not in arrears for more than 2 years in the payment of water charges, and this policy no doubt resulted in a larger area being watered than would otherwise have been the case.
Yields of all crops, with the exception of potatoes, which were poor in quantity and quality, were normal or better.
Prices received for all farm products were low.
The price paid for sugar beets at the time of harvest was $4 per ton.
An additional payment of about 40 cents per ton was made in June 1933 and a small additional payment may be made if the price of sugar remains favorable.
On account of their previous good financial condition, all of the irrigation districts, except Northport, were still on a cash basis.
Power credits and the moratorium acts have taken care of construction payments.
The Northport district continues to be in a precarious financial condition and additional assistance is needed.
The only construction work undertaken by the Bureau was the building of approximately 11 miles of 33,000-volt transmission line between Lingle power plant and the town of Torrington, Wyo.
This line was about 75 percent completed at the end of the fiscal year.
The irrigation districts excavated 13 miles of new drain ditches for the protection of irrigated lands.
The water supply was ample for irrigation of lands in the Carson division, but the extremely low elevation of Lake Tahoe and a deficient run-off into the Truckee River necessitated the purchase by the irrigation district, at heavy expense, of privately owned stored water in Donner and Independence Lakes for use on bench lands under the Truckee Canal during the 1932 season.
In order to prevent a shortage of irrigation water for the Fernley and Hazen districts after July 15, 1933, negotiations were again in progress at the end of the fiscal year for a similar purchase.
The installation of a pumping plant to pump water from Lahontan Reservoir into the lower end of the Truckee Canal for irrigation use on the Swingle Bench area was undertaken.
Run-off in the Truckee and Carson Rivers was retarded and greatly reduced during the spring of 1933 on account of cold, unfavorable weather.
The irrigated area on farms totaled 44,304 acres, in addition to which 7,623 acres in outside community pastures received some regulatory and drainage waters for irrigation.
Farms operated by owners numbered 525 and by tenants 182.
During the year the directors of the district authorized the sale of water rights for a number of small tracts of privately owned land upon which drainage and other district charges had been assessed, but no new water-right applications were completed.
Crops with a total estimated value of about $516,500 were harvested during 1932.
This was a decrease over the crop value of the preceding year of $222,500, although the yields were considerably greater.
Alfalfa production, stock feeding, and dairying continued to be the major agricultural pursuits.
Faced with the prospects of another severe water shortage on the bench lands, the board of directors of the district on May 1, 1933, authorized the construction of the Lahontan-Swingle Bench pumping plant.
The installation of this plant, at a cost of approximately $11,000, was completed on June 30.
The capacity of the plant is about 70 cubic feet per second and the equipment comprises two 20-inch centrifugal pumps and motors.
Operation of the plant was commenced on July 9, 1933, water being pumped from Lahontan Reservoir, through connections with the 78-inch power penstock, into the lower end of the Truckee Canal.
There were 438 farms cultivated during the year, of which 279 were cultivated by owners or managers and 159 by tenants.
The total area irrigated was 24,760 acres: Prices of farm lands ranged from $100 to $250 per acre.
There were no farms sold during the year.
About $650,000 was borrowed from the Federal land bank.
Considerable difficulty in meeting mortgage payments was experienced by farm owners and the delinquency at the close of the year was about 60 percent.
Crop yields for 1932 averaged $19.59 per acre, or $10.67 less than the low value of the previous year and the lowest since the early years of the project.
Financial conditions were serious throughout the year.
The local bank deposits as of June 30, 1933, were $460,000.
Very few loans were made by the local bank and none for crop production.
Loans totaling about $60,000 were made by the loan agencies of the Government, namely, the so-called "seed loan" and the "agricultural credit agency" of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation.
Prices for staple crops had improved at the end of June.
Practically all of the project is in private ownership and approximately 90 percent was in cultivation.
The number of irrigated farms increased from 4,496 in 1931 to 4,557 in 1932.
However, the cropped area was reduced from 137,378 to 134,531.
This reduction in area was brought about by lack of finances among the water users.
Only 2,846 farms, or 62 percent, were farmed by the property owners, and 1,711, or 38 percent, by menagers and tenants.
The farms average from 60 to 120 acres in size.
However, the average size is reducing every year, owing to subdivision of properties into suburban tracts near El Paso.
Crop financing has become more difficult to obtain through private sources each year and as a result the Federal seed and other Federal loan agencies have been freely used to finance the 1933 crops.
The financing of these crops on the whole is an improvement over the previous year even though the general depression and economic conditions have not improved.
The area contracted for irrigation on June 30 this year was 131,826 acres as compared to 110,298 acres on the same date last year.
The irrigation districts are issuing special permits to users to receive water and on June 30, 1933, there were 10,598 acres receiving water in this way as compared to 36,661 acres on June 30, 1932.
The condition of the banks is very good.
One of the project banks was closed for about 6 weeks after the revised banking laws became effective in March of this year.
There were 4.07 miles of intercepting drain constructed in the Elephant Butte Irrigation District in connection with levee reconstruction during the year.
This will provide drainage for about 200 acres and will furnish flood protection to the adjacent lands of a much greater area.
In the El Paso County Water Improvement District No. 1, there was constructed 3.28 miles of spur drain which will furnish complete protection for about 600 acres that were only partly protected by the existing drains.
Construction of this project was approved by the President March 18, 1931.
The plans provided for furnishing a supplemental water supply to an area of 7,000 acres of land in lower Powder River Valley, about 18 miles northeasterly of Baker City, Oreg.
The lands are now farmed to the limit of the available water supply, and the increased crop production to result from the supplemental water supply will, it is believed, be reflected in an increase in crop values much larger than the cost of the proposed irrigation works.
Since the reclassification and cancelation of certain lands within the district in the east division, the irrigable area amounts to approximately 10,940 acres, for which the distribution system is prepared to deliver water.
The area irrigated is about 7,300 acres.
Although the operation and maintenance assessment was reduced by 20 percent over that of 1931, payment of this charge in the west division would have been impossible for three fourths of the farmers had they not received seed loans.
Many head of livestock were sold at a very low price in order to avoid further losses in feeding.
Turkeys alone paid a small margin over feed costs.
Public Order No. 6, issued March 23, 1933, established water rental charges for the irrigation season of 1933, for the Harper and Little Valley, Bully Creek West Bench, and Bully Creek East Bench units.
Good progress was made by the settlers despite the unfavorable conditions which obtained during the past year.
Approximately 5,000 acres were seeded to crops by 118 settlers during the season and development of new lands continued.
About 2,000 acres of land now in sagebrush were contracted for purchase during the last month of the fiscal year.
With few exceptions the farms are being operated by the owners.
Crop yields have been good, but prices were low for all farm products and there was no sale for onions and potatoes.
The Vale-Owyhee Land Settlement Association continued to function throughout the year, being active in securing a number of new settlers on the project.
The advertising conducted by the association in conjunction with the On-to-Oregon advertising campaign of the Oregon State Chamber of Commerce resulted in the receipt by the association of 1,050 inquiries and calls at the office of the association and the project superintendent of about 200 interested persons.
No cooperative associations have yet been formed on the project.
Two excellent highways trayerse the project and a State highway extends through the project lands.
The main division of the project contains 578 farms, 526 of which were farmed during the calendar year 1932.
Of the farms irrigated, 379 were cultivated by owners and 147 by tenants.
In the Tule Lake division there were 321 farms, of which 296 were operated by owners and 25 by tenants.
No difficulty has been experienced in getting settlers for lands in the Tule Lake division and on the 68 farm units containing 4,752 acres of irrigable land, opened October 16, 1931, under Public Order No. 28, there were 185 qualified applicants, a few of whom showed assets in excess of $10,000 each; the majority, however, had $3,000 to $6,000 worth of property, most of which was in equipment and stock.
In 1932 crop yields were about average, but net returns were unsatisfactory, as prices for all farm commodities were the lowest in years.
Alfalfa hay sold for as low as $3.50 per ton during the winter, but jumped to $10 late in the spring of 1933, after all had been sold.
Fat steers sold for 3½ cents, while hogs sold for as low as 1½ cents.
With these low prices prevailing, farmers found it impossible to meet their obligations.
However, owing to the recent rise in the market prices of farm products and the general upward trend of business conditions, there is now a feeling of optimism among the farmers.
On the enlargement of the first 9 miles of the J Canal, excavation was completed from station 0 to station 445 + 40, 7 bridges were rebuilt, and 38 minor structures modified to meet the requirements of the enlarged canal section.
During the fiscal year ending June 30, 1933, the project was brought from 58 percent to about 63 percent completion.
The General Construction Co. contract for the Owyhee Dam was completed in October 1932, 4 months ahead of schedule.
Grouting of the contraction joints is to be done by the Government when the heat in the mass concrete has been lowered to mean annual temperature, probably in the spring of 1934.
Gates in the dam were closed December 8, 1932, and 150,000 acre-feet of water stored before the release of Owyhee Ditch water began lowering the reservoir.
Work on the inlet end of Tunnel No. 1 was concluded in December, 1932, but clean-up of camp and plant was deferred until award of contract for the controlling works.
The lining of the inlet, construction of portal, trash rack, and controlling works was awarded to Connolly in December 1932, and concreting begun immediately.
By the end of the fiscal year the work was completed and ready for final payment.
The outlet end of Tunnel No. 1 was practically finished in May 1932, 16 months ahead of schedule, and the clean-up around the portal of Tunnel No. 5 was done in 1933, the lining having been finished in February 1932, 20 months ahead of stipulated time.
Construction of the North Canal to station 242 + 20 and structures was carried on during the fiscal year, the contract being completed in April 1933, on time.
The contract for the open cut, stations 29 + 45 to 36 + 35, was finished in September 1932, and the lining of Tunnel No. 3 and the approach tunnel to Owyhee River siphon in October, 7 months ahead of schedule.
Economic conditions were noticeably improved during the fiscal year, largely as a result of better prices received for commodities and the favorable crops produced in 1932.
The wool clip of 1933 brought 25 cents per pound as compared to 10 cents the previous year, and the bonus on sugar beets amounted to 55 cents per ton in addition to the regular payment of $5 per ton received late in 1932.
Butterfat doubled in price, moving up from 10 to 20 cents per pound.
Wheat reached a low of 19 cents per bushel in 1932, but was quoted locally at 73 cents at the close of the fiscal year.
The 1932 crops were valued at $601,121, the lowest since 1924, but the decrease resulted entirely from low unit values, since yields in nearly all cases were considerably above the previous year.
Sugar beets averaged 11½4 tons per acre, while many growers reported 16 tons per acre or better and the total value of the crop reached $325,000, which was more than all other crops combined.
Corn, oats, and barley, the principal feed grains, yielded 600,000 bushels, or nearly three times the production of these grains for 1931.
A contract between the United States and the Belle Fourche Irrigation District was executed May 2, 1933, under which a small pumping plant, costing $6,500, is to be constructed for supplementing the water supply of the Johnson lateral, a canal dependent on direct flow.
Work began June 14 and the plant was about 75 percent completed at the end of the month.
Weber River division.
The use of storage water during 1932 from the newly constructed Echo Reservoir increased the gross value of all crops at least 25 to 30 percent.
This is the first year that a full water supply has been available for the division during the entire irrigation season.
The storage water has proved to be particularly valuable for late season use where the main crops are sugar beets, fruits, vegetables, berries, and alfalfa.
It has also made possible the growing of more of the intensified crops and less wheat and other grains.
The lands of the division are mostly in small ownerships.
A large percentage of the farmers live on their farms.
The remainder live in the adjoining towns and cities.
Along with the growing of crops, dairying and stock raising are important industries.
The division is well supplied by a large number of fruit and vegetable canning factories, several fruit-packing plants, 3 sugar factories, 3 or 4 creameries, and 1 meat-packing and by-products plant.
Most of these factories and plants operated during 1932, although business in many cases was below normal.
In the case of the sugar factories, however, the number of tons of sugar beets received was larger than for the preceding 5 or 6 years.
The receipts from the sale of such crops as sugar beets, fruits, and vegetables resulted im a good economic condition being maintained in the farming districts.
As far as known no farms were abandoned during the year and mortgage foreclosures were limited to a very few.
The value of farm crops varied from $2 per acre for poor pasture to $137 per acre for asparagus and grapes.
The average crop value for the division was $29.11 per acre.
There was an increase in the acreage of higher-priced crops due to the availability of storage water.
The project members, as a whole, are experiencing the most acute water shortage since the project was first utilized in 1918.
The effect upon crops is, of course, adverse, and in many cases settlers are being forced to abandon a portion of their planted crops in order that water be reserved for late irrigations to mature the balance.
Alfalfahay production is materially less than the production of 1932, and sugar-beet tonnage will not reach the 1932 production figure, even in view of the 1933 increase in acreage planted.
In view of the almost constant and steady decrease in the average number of acre-feet of water delivered under the project since completion in 1918, it is very important that water be conserved to a most stringent degree.
The first step along that line resulted from the interchange contract with the Utah Power & Light Co., completed July 18, 1931, for the intersale of electrical energy.
Such connection provides a complete breakdown service, furnishes an outlet for surplus power generated, and entirely eliminates the practice of drawing water from reservoir storage for the single purpose of power generation during consumption peaks.
The second step in the direction of improving the available water supply is the proposed cancelation of water-right contracts covering marginal and nonirrigable lands.
This procedure, if carried out, will increase the water supply applicable to the remaining contracts in force.
The population of the project remains practically unchanged.
There was a small decline in the irrigated acreage during the past year, comprising unfit areas and orchards that had suffered permanent injury through drought.
Approximately 90 percent of the project farmers have negotiated for loans to carry on their season's operations during 1933, either through the Intermediate Credit Bank or the Regional Agricultural Credit Corporation.
The return for the 1932 apple crop was very poor and the Government loan agencies have preserved the solvency of the district.
The project is assured of the largest supply of gravity water since 1921.
Approximately $6,000 was spent during the fall of 1932 and spring of 1933 in concrete lining of the main canal, where seepage loss was excessive.
Two thousand two hundred and fifty linear feet of canal were lined with 3 inches of concrete which involved the placing of 386 cubic yards.
Six old wooden weirs were replaced with concrete.
Future plans call for installation of about 10 miles of 4- to 12-inch pipe line to replace lines in poor condition, and elimination, wherever possible, of high checks in order to conserve water.
Sunnyside and Tieton Divisions.
There were 86,639 acres irrigated in 1932 on the Sunnyside division, comprising 3,403 farms, or 24 more than for the previous year, of which 2,163 were operated by owners and 1,240 by tenants.
Total values of crops declined 28 percent from the previous year under the handicap of low prices.
Alfalfa continued the principal crop in area and total value.
Although distressingly low in price, dairy and poultry products proved to be the stabilizing factors.
The irrigated acreage on the Tieton division increased to 26,100 acres, a gain of 1 percent, although the number of farms declined further from 1,330 to 1,320, of which 84 percent were operated by owners.
Apples remained the principal crop in both acreage and total value.
The acreage in bearing orchard increased from 17,402 to 10,002 acres, or 9 percent.
The returns on fruits, comprising 71 percent of the gross area cropped, amounted to $775,536, representing a decline of 63 percent from the 1931 valuation.
At the beginning of the 1933 season unpaid operation and maintenance charges for 1931 on the Sunnyside and Tieton divisions were 57 and 64 percent, respectively, of the totals.
A large proportion of the delinquent payments were finally made, so that practically all lands previously cultivated were receiving water at the close of the fiscal year.
Funds for this purpose have been secured from Government loan agencies by direct application and also through various fruit organizations.
In order to assist them in raising funds to meet their operation and maintenance payments, water users were given employment on operation and maintenance work to the greatest possible extent.
In addition to the regular operation and maintenance work on the two divisions, including removal of silt and repair and replacement of canal and lateral structures, a small program of betterments was continued on the Tieton division.
Improvement consisted of replacement of three steel flumes with concrete lining and pipe lines, involving 409 linear feet of 46-inch redwood stave pipe, 480 linear feet of 30-inch reinforced concrete pipe, and 400 linear feet of reinforced concrete canal lining.
Studies were made and preliminary plans and estimates prepared for increasing the water supply for this division.
Kittitas Division.
Water was delivered in the spring of 1933 to 50,442 acres of irrigable land lying under the Main, North Branch, and South Branch Canals of the Kittitas Division.
This water was delivered to 71 landowners under the Main Canal, 120 under the South Branch Canal, and 440 under the North Branch Canal, all of whom have signed for water deliveries with the Kittitas Reclamation District.
The Bureau of Reclamation is operating the project during the calendar year 1933, under appropriate contract, for the Kittitas Reclamation District, the entire cost of operation being paid in advance by the district.
The Northern Pacific Railway Co. and its subsidiary, the Northwestern Improvement Co. have sold, at the appraised valuation, all but 300 acres of their irrigable lands.
On March 4, 1933, there were 47 farm units opened to entry and 88 applications had been received to June 30, 38 of whom made entry.
Three were pending action of the examining board and 47 had either been rejected or declined to accept the farm units offered.
Seven hundred and fifty inquiries were received concerning the 47 tracts opened and the 26 other units to be opened later.
There are on file in the project office approximately 500 names of inquirers to whom will be sent the new order opening the 26 tracts later in the year.
Kennewick Division.
The Kennewick Irrigation District continued the operation of its pumping plant, serving, however, only about 2,600 acres of a total of 4,000 acres.
Under existing economic conditions, settlement of the additional area is expected to be slow.
Development is further retarded on account of the necessity for removing many of the apple orchards and replanting to other crops, such as soft fruits, berries, asparagus, etc., to which the district is better adapted.
The district is requesting a more favorable contract for purchase of power to lighten the annual charges for a few years in order to encourage settlement.
The construction of the power canal and 4,200-horsepower hydroelectric power plant at Prosser was completed on August 31, 1932.
The diversion works are located at the Prosser Dam, which was acquired under the terms of a contract with the Kennewick Irrigation District.
The canal is about 2.4 miles in length and has a designed capacity of 1,100 second-feet.
Storage division.
Satisfactory progress was made on the construction of the dam for the Cle Elum Reservoir by the contractors.
At the close of the fiscal year the work was about 94 percent finished and the time 73 percent elapsed.
The embankment, which was the principal feature of the work, was practically completed at the close of the year.
The stilling basin for the combined outlet for spillway and tunnel was completed before winter.
Storage capacity for about 150,000 acre-feet was provided for the season of 1933 under the control of two emergency butterfly gates.
A capacity of 360,000 acre-feet will be available in 1934.
The full capacity of 435,000 acre-feet will require the installation of the spillway gates.
The season of 1933 showed a satisfactory increase over 1932 in the number of settlers and in the area under cultivation.
Most marked is the increase in area of excellent stands of alfalfa.
There is also a substantial increase in the number of cattle and sheep on the project.
Although the settlers have little money, they are all improving their farms.
They owe little and face the future with confidence.
The maintenance work has been done almost exclusively by settlers, a policy which has assisted them in paying irrigation assessments.
The water-rental charge for the current year has been paid for all land previously irrigated and the books show no delinquent water charges.
A considerable number of new settlers is already assured for 1934.
The project water supply was ample and production was about on a par with former years.
The prices received have steadily declined so that the returns for the 1932 crops showed a decrease of 25 to 30 percent from those of the previous year.
The average per acre gross returns ranged from $12.09 on the Garland division to $4.48 on the Willwood.
Shipments of agricultural products totaled 1,373 carloads compared to 1,651 the previous year, and livestock shipments were 107 cars compared to 91.
At the close of the year quotations on nearly all crops and livestock had made decided advances and while the farmers had little left to sell, the outlook for 1933 was decidedly more optimistic.
New construction was limited to the Willwood division and consisted of 2.91 miles of lateral extensions, 1.04 miles of open drain, and 1.59 miles of tile drain with the necessary structures.
Temporary transmission lines, 5.25 miles in length, were required.
A large flume on the Willwood main canal was damaged by unstable foundation conditions.
This was repaired by lowering some of the piers, extending the length of the flume 25 feet, and building a new concrete inlet and head wall.
At the Shoshone Dam and power plant one of the 48-inch emergency valves in the line leading to the power house was broken and this required installation of a new shell.
One of the two power pipes leading through the base of the dam was thoroughly cleaned and painted.
New trash racks were installed at the inlet of each pipe.
The 58-inch balanced irrigation valves were repaired by electric welding where cavitation had occurred on the valve bodies and throat liners.
The concrete lining in the outlet tunnels leading from these valves was also repaired.
Funds for the investigation of prospective projects and kindred work are derived from appropriations by Congress, from contributions by States and other organizations for expenditures by the Bureau of Reclamation, and by direct payment by States and other organizations to personnel operating under the direction of or in cooperation with the Bureau.
Additional data became available for the use of the Bureau as the result of work by other agencies wholly independent of the Bureau's activities, involving the expenditures of large amounts which are not reported to the Bureau.
Federal funds for work done during the past fiscal year as hereinafter described were available from the acts of March 26, 1930; May 14, 1930; July 3, 1930; February 14, 1931; March 4, 1931; April 22, 1932; and March 4, 1933.
Of $160,370.57 disbursed by the Bureau during the past fiscal year, including $77,033.83 for work under section 15 of the Boulder Canyon Project Act, $143,733.81 was provided by the United States.
All-American Canal investigations.
Prior to April 1933, a small amount of preliminary investigations was carried forward in assembling available data on silt carried by the Colorado River at the Imperial Dam site and minor consideration was given to methods for its disposal.
In April 1933 following the availability of $25,000 from the Second Deficiency Appropriation Act for the fiscal year 1933, silt studies and nvestigations were outlined involving determination of present silt oad at Laguna Dam and efficiency of Yuma project desilting works, silt inflow from washes between Parker and Imperial Dam sites, character and extent of river bed deposits which are likely to be eroded from the stream channel between the Parker and Imperial Dam sites, stream cross-section and silt content for various Colorado River discharges at Imperial Dam site, and the best cross-section for the All-American Canal to prevent excessive scour or fill.
Field work on these investigations was well under way at the close of the fiscal year.
On June 9, 1933, a contract was executed with the Imperial Irrigation District providing for investigations, surveys, estimates, and preparation of plans and specifications covering the construction of that portion of the proposed All-American Canal from Pilot Knob through the sand hills.
The contract contemplates maximum expenditures of $20,000 all to be advanced by the district.
Sacramento-San Joaquin investigations.
Data were assembled and field and office studies continued on plans for an initial development to relieve present distressed conditions in the upper San Joaquin Valley.
Volume I, which is a general description of the results of investigations and reports made by the State of California on initial and ultimate developments for the Great Central Valley and in particular the Upper San Joaquin River, was prepared and authorized for release.
Volume II, which covers work done by the Bureau of Reclamation on plans for an emergency project for the relief of the Upper San Joaquin Valley, is in the course of preparation.
For use in connection with the Bureau report on an emergency project, preliminary designs and estimates were prepared for a reservoir of 400,000 acre-feet capacity at the Friant site on San Joaquin River, a reservoir of 355,000 acre-feet capacity at Folsom on American River, including power plants at each site, the San Joaquin-Kern County Canal with initial capacity of 3,000 c.f.s. and length of 120 miles from Friant Reservoir to Tulare-Kern County line, Madera Canal with capacity of 1,500 c.f.s. and length of 20 miles from Friant Reservoir to Fresno River, and Sacramento-San Joaquin cross-cut channel with a cross-sectional area of 3,000 square feet and a length of 9 miles along Snodgrass Slough from the Sacramento River to Mokelumne River.
Crane Creek project.
A preliminary examination was made during September 1932 of the works and lands comprising this project to determine the desirability of conducting investigations looking to the rehabilitation of the Washington County Irrigation District.
Some repairs are needed at the Crane Creek storage dam, the canal and distribution system would need to be reconstructed, and a short feed canal would need to be built from Little Weiser River to Crane Creek to augment the water supply for the reservoir.
The lands would need to be reclassified to determine the economic feasibility of rehabilitating the project.
With unavoidably high construction and operating costs, threatening project feasibility, and in view of the lack of funds for construction in case the project should prove to be feasible, it was concluded that detailed investigations were not justified.
Twin Falls—Oakley project.
The Oakley project is located in Goose Creek Valley, a tributary of Snake River, in Cassia County, Idaho.
The project works, consisting of a reservoir with a capacity of 74,000 acre-feet and a canal system to irrigate 40,000 acres, were constructed during the period 1909 to 1913 by the Twin Falls-Oakley Land & Water Co.
Water supply proved inadequate for the 40,000 acres proposed for irrigation and much reduction in area has taken place.
The construction company became insolvent.
Upper Snake River storage investigations.
Reconnaissance surveys were made of the watershed of Henrys Fork and its tributaries and of the canyon section above Alpine, Wyo., of the South Fork of Snake River to locate possible reservoir and dam sites.
Much of this region is inaccessible and aerial pictures were secured with the cooperation of Army fliers to facilitate the investigations.
A geological examination was made of the possible sites and the more promising ones were surveyed in detail.
A preliminary geological report covering 14 of the reservoir sites examined was prepared in January 1933.
Reservoir topography was taken at the following reservoir sites: Shotgun Creek site on Henrys Fork; Boone Creek, Squirrel Meadows, and Wyoming Creek sites, on tributaries of Fall River; and Trail Creek and Teton Creek sites on tributaries of Teton River.
Dam-site topography was taken as follows: Teton Canyon site on Teton River; Mountain Ash, Bechler Meadows, Grassy Lakes, Lake of Woods, and Canyon Creek sites on Fall River tributaries; and Dry Creek and Station Creek sites on South Fork of Snake River.
Location surveys were made for reservoir feeder canals as follows: From Cascade Creek to Grassy Lakes site, Bechler River to Wyoming Creek site, Squirrel Creek to Squirrel Meadows site, and Fall River to Boone Creek site.
A canal line was also located from Henrys Fork to serve canals diverting from Fall and Teton Rivers.
Reconnaissance surveys were made to determine the possibilities of transmountain diversion from adjacent watersheds to the Henrys Lake drainage basin.
Further work on these investigations has been suspended pending receipt of funds from local interests to pay one half of the costs after January 1, 1933, in accordance with the provisions of the law.
Humboldt River investigations.
A total of 144,000 acres are irrigated from Humboldt River and its tributaries, exclusive of Little Humboldt River, which is no longer connected with the main stream.
Investigations were undertaken to determine the feasibility of improving the present deficient water supply.
An inspection was made of known reservoir sites, such as the North Fork, Devils Gate, South Fork, Upper Maggie Creek, Lower Maggie Creek, Rock Creek, and Oreana, for which maps are available.
Topographic surveys and geological investigations were made of the Imlay, Callahan, and Rye Patch Dam and Reservoir sites on Humboldt River near Imlay.
Argenta Swamp was investigated with a view of draining the swamp and improving channel conditions in that vicinity to conserve water wastefully evaporated.
Grants Pass Irrigation District.
A brief inspection, with report dated September 24, 1924, was made of the Grants Pass Irrigation District to determine the advisability of conducting investigations on reconstruction and extension of project works and the paying ability of the district.
The district is largely devoted to suburban type of agriculture with holdings averaging 5 acres.
Irrigation growth have been small but steady and now amounts to 6,500 acres.
The distribution system is adequate for the present area, but may eventually need improvement by concrete lining of canals or pipe lines to reduce water losses to a minimum.
Operation and maintenance costs are high on account of power purchased for pumping, necessity of delivering water to small holdings, and repairs to the canal system occasioned by floods and slides along the steep side hills on which they are located.
The future agriculture of the project is uncertain and additional investigations are not warranted at this time.
Brogan project investigations.
The Brogan project was built in 1910 and consists of two reservoirs on tributaries of Willow Creek and a canal system to serve about 20,000 acres.
The water supply from Willow Creek has been disappointing and the irrigated area has shrunk to about 2,000 acres, in part dependent for water on pumping from deep wells at a high cost.
A preliminary water-supply study has been made to determine the surplus water available from Burnt River and as soon as the investigations are authorized an engineer will be assigned to investigate the feasibility of developing and bringing such waters into the the Willow Creek watershed.
Baker secondary project.
A reservoir is desired on Powder River to supplement the supply for about 25,000 acres of developed lands at Baker, the supply usually failing about July 1.
The Oregon Legislature, together with individuals and counties of the interested area, has arranged for an advance of $8,500 to pay one half the cost of the requested investigation, but a start thereon awaits decision by the Comptroller General as to availability of Federal funds.
Cache Valley project.
On January 3, 1933, a petition was filed with the Cache County Commissioners for the organization of the Wellsville-Mendon Conservation District to furnish water for lands not already included in an irrigation district or served by a canal company.
After the usual legal procedure prescribed by the laws of Utah, on June 5, 1933, the district was organized by a practically unanimous vote and a board of directors was selected to act officially for the district in negotiations for the formation of the water users' association which will contract with the United States for construction of project works and of which the district will be a stockholder.
The favorable vote was due largely to a careful delineation of district boundaries to include only landowners desirous of project water as determined by canvass.
Ogden River division.
A report on these investigations was completed in August 1932.
The report covers a lower-valley development and an upper-valley development, both with water from Ogden River.
The lower-valley development contemplates the construction of an earth and rock-fill dam just below Huntsville on Ogden River to form a reservoir with a capacity of 38,000 acre-feet; relocation of highways around the reservoir; reconstruotion and enlargement to a capacity of 280 c.f.s. of 4½ miles of pipe line of the Utah Power & Light Co. from the Huntsville Dam site to the mouth of Ogden Canyon; construction of the south Ogden High Line Canal, with an initial capacity of 35 c.f.s., from the mouth of Ogden Canyon to a point south of Ogden City, a distance of 8 miles; and construction of north Ogden High Line Canal, with an initial capacity of 120 c.f.s., from the mouth of Ogden Canyon to Brigham City, a distance of 23 miles.
The cost of this development is estimated as $2,693,000.
The project would furnish 6,000 acre-feet of storage annually to Ogden City for municipal purposes, provide a supplemental supply for 14,700 acres of irrigated lands, and furnish a full irrigation supply for 4,520 acres of new lands.
The irrigated area as a whole is highly developed and well colonized, but is seriously handicapped by lack of an adequate water supply, except where water is obtained by pumping at high cost.
Where a full water supply is available, crop returns are higher than on most irrigation projects, and it is concluded that the project is feasible if constructed with interest-free funds.
The upper-valley development contemplates the construction of a rock-fill dam with concrete-slab face at the Magpie site on South Fork of Ogden River to form a reservoir with 14,000 acre-feet of capacity at an estimated cost of $1,907,000.
It would provide 8,000 acre-feet of storage for Ogden City and furnish a supplemental supply to 6,000 acres of irrigated lands in the upper Ogden Valley.
Assuming that the lands irrigated would pay only for the additional cost of obtaining 14,000 acre-feet of capacity instead of 8,000 acre-feet at this site, the cost to irrigation interest under this project would be $322,000, which amount could be repaid by the lands benefited.
Utah Lake investigations.
These investigations are being conducted to determine the feasibility of increasing the water yield of Utah Lake by diking off Provo Bay and Goshen Bay and conserving water lost by evaporation from these areas.
During August and September 1932 field tests were made along the line of the proposed Goshen Bay dike to determine the character of foundation and construction materials.
Twenty-three borings were made at intervals of 1,000 to 1,300 feet across Utah Lake and 2 borings were made several miles south of the dike line and 1 boring near the middle of Utah Lake.
The material was found to be a fine clay.
Eight bearing tests were made of the material in place.
Data were assembled on past dredging operations at the north end of Utah Lake and on dikes constructed in Great Salt Lake with similar foundation conditions.
Sanpete division.
Investigations were continued on plans for transmountain diversions of Colorado River Basin waters for lands in Sanpete County, with particular attention to the present and future water requirements of lands along Cottonwood Creek, Huntington Creek, and Price River.
Field tests were made to determine the character and extent of embankment material for the proposed Gooseberry Dam.
Designs and estimates were prepared for various heights of dam at the Gooseberry site to aid in selecting a project plan for the Gooseberry unit.
Ouray Valley project.
A reconnaissance was made of the Ouray Valley project to determine the general feasibility of a plan for diverting waters from Duchesne River to lands which are now partially irrigated by means of a long canal diverting from the Uintah River.
Inadequate stream flow records preclude an immediate conclusive report on project possibilities.
Columbia Basin project investigations.
Preliminary studies were made in the Denver office to determine the feasibility of a 2-stage development, contemplating the construction of a low dam and power plant at the Grand Coulee site, with a view of later enlargement, when conditions warrant, to that ultimately required for the complete Columbia Basin project development.
A report dated May 24, 1933, presented an estimate of $59,235,000 for a dam of the multiple-arch type producing a head of 150 feet and a power plant of 8 units with an electrical capacity of 65,000 kilowatts, together with transformer and switching equipment.
The general design for this development was arranged to permit the dam to be raised to the ultimate head of 353 feet without interfering with power production.
Financial studies of this development based on an interest rate of 4 percent indicate that such a step development is at least as desirable as the plan for initial construction to the ultimate height, interest savings offsetting increased construction investment occasioned by increased quantities and an interrupted construction program.
With long delays in ultimate development, net investment is materially reduced through intervening repayment of initial construction costs.
Roza Division—Yakima project.
A report dated September 1932, presents a plan and estimate for this division and was prepared after a full review of alternative plans for the production of power needed for pumping water to almost one half of the total area of the division, including one of a power canal through Moxee Valley solely for power production, this plan being discarded in favor of enlargement of the main canal of the division to the lower end of the tunnel piercing the Yakima Ridge.
The main canal with a total length of 99 miles will have an initial capacity of 2,165 second-feet of which 1,200 second-feet would be for irrigation purposes and 965 second-feet for power purposes, power water being carried for a distance of 12 miles where it would be returned to the Yakima River at Yakima with a power head of 140 feet.
The principal construction features of the canal are the diversion dam, a low concrete dam surmounted by drum gates, a tunnel 9,700 feet long through Yakima Ridge between East Selah and Moxee Valleys, and a tunnel 5,000 feet long through Rattlesnake Ridge near Union Gap.
The division comprises 72,000 acres of irrigable land, of which nearly 10,000 acres lie in Selah and Moxee Valleys near Yakima, with the remainder lying in a strip averaging 2½ miles wide along the north valley slope from Wapato to Benton City, a distance of 50 miles.
The lands are located well above the river bottoms, generally of superior soil and topography requiring little artificial drainage and adapted to the growing of fruit and general crops.
They were classified as to irrigability in 1927.
The construction cost is estimated at $18,161,000, of which $934,000 would be allocated to commercial power, leaving a net irrigation cost of $239 per acre, including power production and pumping facilities.
The estimates reflect construction conditions as of 1930 and under conditions prevailing in the past fiscal year the cost would be somewhat less.
Expenditures have already been made to the extent of $2,800,000, principally for storage, the needs of this division being taken care of along with other divisions of the Yakima project in the construction of the completed reservoirs.
North Platte River power investigations.
Preliminary designs and estimates were prepared for a dam and power plant at the Kortes site on North Platte River.
A geological map was prepared of the Northgate dam site and preliminary water-supply studies were made to determine the operation and utilization of the Northgate reservoir site.
A profile was prepared of the North Platte River from the head of the Northgate reservoir site in Colorado to Casper, Wyo.
Further progress on these investigations has been delayed, pending the outcome of negotiations between the States of Colorado, Wyoming, and Nebraska on the division of waters from the North Platte River.
Proposals by Colorado interests to divert a part of North Platte River flows to Cache la Poudre River in the vicinity of Cameron Pass, will, if carried out, materially affect the plans for power development in Wyoming.
Work was continued along the general lines followed in the previous fiscal year, in the main being directed to an inventory of irrigation resources, with an average working force of 35.
Arizona.
Topography and other appurtenant data were secured on a canal line from the Parker Dam site to the Gila River Valley for a study of the relative feasibility of irrigating the Gila Valley by diversion at Parker and by pumping from the proposed Imperial Dam which will be constructed to deliver water to the All-American Canal.
It is expected that the final results will show the pumping plan to be preferable.
A land classification was made of the Colorado River Indian Reservation (Parker Valley) under difficult conditions because of heavy brush and the lack of passable roads or trails.
Colorado.
In the latter part of the year a survey party was engaged upon investigation of possible reservoir sites, and particularly sites which had not been covered by private surveys on the Little Snake River and its tributaries in the Yampa River drainage area.
Consideration is also being given to feasible canal routes to serve the lands on the divide between Little Snake and Yampa Rivers.
Nevada.
Field surveys were completed on possibilities of irrigating with waters from the Boulder Canyon Reservoir of lands lying adjacent thereto within practicable pumping lifts, including classification of such lands.
New Mexico.
Reservation to determine the areas that might be irrigated by diversions from the San Juan River.
Some consideration was also being given to the possibilities of diverting waters of the tributaries of San Juan River to the Rio Grande draimage area, such plan if carried out to be largely in lieu of irrigation of lands in New Mexico with San Juan River waters.
Utah.
Surveys were completed of possible reservoir sites to utilize the surplus waters of the Paria and Virgin Rivers and of Kanab Creek in southern Utah, and land classifications were made of irrigable areas reclaimable with such waters and particularly areas to be served with Virgin River waters in the vicinity of St. George, Utah, and Littlefield, Ariz.
In connection with investigations of transmountain diversions from tributaries of the Price and San Rafael Rivers to the drainage area of the San Pitch River, investigations were made of the irrigability of lands that could be served by these tributaries of the Colorado River in the vicinity of Price and Castle Gate, Utah.
Wyoming.
Classification of the irrigable area in the Green River Basin of Wyoming was continued through the year except as such work was suspended during the winter.
Investigations were also conducted on reservoir sites to conserve flood and winter flows now escaping in the Green and Blacks Fork Rivers.
Test pits were dug at the dam site for a reservoir on Green River immediately below Kendall, Wyo.
The work of the General Land Office originates through the administration of the public land laws enacted by Congress.
Its volume depends upon the degree to which citizens, associations, other Federal agencies, and the States avail themselves of their legal rights, and is in no manner within the control of the office.
The appropriations for the operating expenses of the Land Service were reduced from $2,224,- 400 for the fiscal year 1932, to $2,033,300 for the fiscal year 1933, and a corresponding decrease took place in personnel of from 641 to 583 employees.
Notwithstanding these reductions the work of the office, which is constantly increasing in complexity, may, as a whole, be reported as current.
During the fiscal year the total original public land entries, including those on Indian lands, fell to 3,117,781 acres from 4,551,774 acres the previous year.
The acreage included in public land entries is not, however, an infallible yardstick with which to measure the work accomplished, for each year adds to the already intricate land system many new laws that further complicate the work; 71 public land laws were enacted during the second session of the Seventy-second Congress and first session of the Seventy-third Congress that affect the activities of the office.
Homestead entries continued to account for over 87 percent of the public lands appropriated.
Nearly three fourths of the lands homesteaded during the year were in the four Rocky Mountain States of Montana (233,237 acres), Wyoming (678,777 acres), Colorado (254,228 acres), and New Mexico (721,579 acres).
The geographic center of homestead entries remains, as for the past 10 years, in northwestern Colorado, but the geographic center of the vacant, unappropriated and unreserved public lands is 300 miles west on the Utah-Nevada boundary near Ely, Nev.
There remained on June 30, 1933, 172,084,- 580 acres, exclusive of Alaska, of vacant, unappropriated and unreserved public lands.
In the annual report of the Commissioner of the General Land Office for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1930, attention was called to a number of uncontrolled fires in the coal beds on the public domain, particularly in Colorado, Montana, North and South Dakota, Utah, and Wyoming, which have been burning for years.
Under authority of the Emergency Conservation Act, approved March 31, 1933 (Public No. 5, 73d Cong.), for the relief of unemployment through the performance of useful public work and for other purposes, a camp was established in May to control a number of these coal fires in the Little Thunder Basin, Wyo.
The superintendent and foremen were selected from those having years of experience in coal mining and kindred work in the coal fields of Wyoming, and at the close of the fiscal year the camp of 200 workmen was completely organized and work commenced on five separate and distinct fires.
Three important changes in organization took place during the year.
In July 1932 the Public Survey Offices at Phoenix, Ariz.
Reno, Nev.
Gainesville, Fla.
Cass Lake, Minn.
Cash receipts.
The total cash receipts from sales, leases, and other disposition of public lands (including receipts from copies of records, sales of Government property, etc.) were $3,812,208.11 and from proceeds of Indian lands $47,222.86, an aggregate of $3,859,430.97, all of which was deposited in the Treasury.
Receipts under Mineral Leasing Act.
Receipts of the Federal Government from bonuses, rentals, and royalties under the act of February 25, 1920, providing for the leasing of mineral rights on the public domain, aggregated $3,256,440.19.
The largest receipts were from mineral lands in California, the amount under this act being $1,643,222.88.
Wyoming came second with receipts totaling $1,224,017.37.
Receipts from the other States were: New Mexico, $139,092.96; Utah, $79,856.89; Montana, $57,715.57; Colorado, $53,400.04; North Dakota, $33,515.65; Washington, $9,537.22; Alabama, $9,101.90; Louisiana, $4,813.02; Idaho, $1,225.44; South Dakota, $498.05; Nevada, $240; and Arizona, $203.20.
These figures do not include $14,377.91 received as royalties in the State of Wyoming under the act of June 26, 1926, of which the State does not receive a share, nor $7,834.28 received as royalties on coal leases in Alaska, of which the Territory receives no share.
Under the provisions of the Mineral Leasing Act of February 25, 1920 (41 Stat. 437), the State receives 37½ percent of bonuses, rentals, and royalties thereunder from the public lands within its borders, the reclamation fund receives 52½ percent, and the other 10 percent remains in the Treasury to the credit of miscellaneous receipts.
Distribution of receipts.
The aggregate receipts for the year, $3,859,430.97, are distributed under the law approximately as follows: Reclamation fund, $1,981,445.99; to the public-land States and certain counties within such States, $1,328,585.59; general fund, $502,176.53; and to the various Indian tribes $47,222.86.
Five percent of the net proceeds from cash sales of public land is paid to the public-land States within which such sales were made, and the balance of such net receipts from States named in the reclamation act is credited to the reclamation fund; 90 percent of the receipts under the mineral leasing act are divided between the States from which the minerals (principally oil) were taken and the reclamation fund; the receipts from sales of reclamation town sites and rentals and royalties from potash leases are credited to the reclamation fund; all of the receipts from sales of land and timber in the forfeited Oregon and California railroad grant will likely be paid to certain eounties in Oregon in lieu of taxes that would be collected by the eounties if the lands were in private ownership; 25 percent of the proceeds from land and timber in the Coos Bay wagon-road grant is paid to the counties from which the proceeds were derived; and the receipts from Indian lands, with the exception of 37½ percent of the royalties from the Red River oil lands in Oklahoma, which are paid to the State, are deposited in the Treasury to the credit of the various Indian tribes.
All other moneys are deposited in the Treasury to the credit of the general fund.
Expenditures.
Total expenditures for the conduct of the business of the General Land Office, including expenses of the district land offices ($226,491.08) amounted to $1,781,164.20.
Disbursements from deposits by individuals for surveys or resurveys (now carried under the title Expenses, public survey work, special fund), $11,690.50, and from appropriations for surveying Indian reservations, $28,224.82, are not included in above figures, either as receipts or expenditures.
The act of June 16, 1880 (21 Stat. 287), and the act of March 26, 1908 (35 Stat. 48), as amended by the act of December 11, 1919 (41 Stat. 366), provide for the return of moneys received in connection with the disposal of public lands and covered into the United States Treasury.
Repayment may be made to the land applicant or his heirs or assigns, where lands have been erroneously sold; where payments have been made in excess of lawful requirement; and where applications, entries, and proofs have been rejected, in the absence of fraud or attempted fraud.
Under said laws there were stated 127 accounts, allowing repayment of $17,596.18, and 84 claims were denied.
The number of claims allowed includes 7 accounts granting repayment of $6,848.19 received in connection with sales of Indian reservation lands and repaid from Indian trust funds.
The investigation forces of the Department of the Interior were consolidated into a single unit under a director of investigations, Mr. Louis R. Glavis, on April 27, 1933.
This consolidation was to prevent duplication of work and to bring all investigational matters under the immediate supervision of the Secretary of the Interior both for economy and efficiency.
The appropriation for this service for the fiscal year 1933 was $400,000.
Of this sum $60,000 was to be used for prevention and suppression of forest and other fires on the public lands, and for no other purpose, leaving the net sum of $340,000, to which was added $60,000 transferred from National Parks appropriation (roads and trails), making $400,000 available for the prosecution of routine work.
Personnel.
The average number of active field investigators, exclusive of 6 special agents in charge of the divisional offices, was 69; average number of clerks in divisional offices, 20; total force employed, including special agents in charge, 95.
Collections and restorations.
Due to the activities of special agents, $31,497.85 was collected and turned into the Treasury and 177,291.74 acres were restored to the public domain, representing fraudulent entries, etc., canceled on proceedings based on their reports.
Investigations.
On July 1, 1932, there were pending field investigation 11,006 cases.
During the year 13,509 additional cases were received; 11,029 were investigated, reported and closed, leaving 11,552 pending investigation as against 11,006 the previous year.
Of the 11,029 reports submitted, 4,075 were adverse and 6,954 favorable; 1,934 cases were closed without field investigation.
Action in courts.
On the recommendation of this Department 28 civil suits were brought by the Department of Justice.
Cases tried numbered 35, of which 32 were won and 3 lost.
As a result of the suits, $13,678.90 were recovered and 6,644.28 acres were restored to the public domain.
Offenses against the public land laws were responsible for 19 indictments.
Of the criminal cases tried, three resulted in conviction and prison sentence was imposed in one case.
Fines were imposed to the amount of $2,775.
The number admitted to practice before the Department for the fiscal year was 25.
Forest fires.
The appropriation for protecting public lands, timber, etc., 1933, included $60,000 for prevention and suppression of forest and other fires on public lands, to be available for this and no other purpose, of which $42,661.33 was spent.
Organization.
In order to keep within our greatly reduced appropriation for surveying the public lands it was necessary to curtail our program for surveys and resurveys in the field.
The public survey offices at Phoenix, Ariz.
Reno, Nev.
The permanent force of the service was reduced during the year by 20 employees, leaving a total of 122 at the close of the year.
Appropriations.
The regular appropriation for surveying public lands was $500,000, to which was added $75,000 by transfer from the National Park Service under the provisions of the Economy Act of June 30, 1932.
Of the total amount, $41,646.14 was impounded in the Treasury in accordance with the requirements of the Economy Act.
Thus the total expenditure for surveying and associated work was $521,829.81, against $763,271.52 in the previous year.
Income (public moneys).
Summary of work.
Cadastral surveying projects were carried on in 21 States and the Territory of Alaska under 209 groups, of which 47 in 12 States were of resurveys.
On such of the work as is measurable on a quantity basis, 19,364 linear miles were surveyed at an average cost of $14.33 a mile, against $18.32 in the previous year.
In view of the reduced appropriation, the mileage accomplished is unusually large and the costs proportionately small, but increased mileage in the circumstances always means the curtailment of activities in that vast field of cadastral work where survey accomplishment cannot be gaged in terms of linear miles or area.
Many important projects of this type and in the work as a whole were necessarily postponed until funds are available for their completion.
During the year just closed approximately 1,907,000 acres of agricultural lands in addition to the projects not measurable in area were surveyed in the United States proper and Alaska, the larger volumes being in the States of Arizona, California, Nevada, Idaho, and New Mexico.
A total of 75,000 acres of nonagricultural and mineral lands were surveyed.
In addition cooperative surveys were executed on the national forests, in connection with the boundaries of national parks and monuments, on leased coal and oil lands, and water power sites.
Approximately 815,440 acres of lands were resurveyed in 14 States.
Indian surveys.
There was available $19,645 for surveying and allotting Indian reservations during the fiscal year 1933.
Consequently the work was confined to a limited number of important projects.
The work included extension of the surveys already initiated on the Leech Lake Reservation, Minn.
Among the minor undertakings were the lowland survey on the Gila River Reservation,.
Ariz.
A total of 131 tracts were surveyed on the Santa Clara Indian Pueblo, N.Mex.
Office work.
Surveys and resurveys in 271 townships were platted and approved, 400 supplemental and segregation plats were constructed, exclusive of 38 supplemental plats accompanying survey returns, and the work of examining, platting and approving 72 mineral surveys, embracing 190 locations, at an average office cost of $25.47 per location, was accomplished.
There were also prepared 75 plats to accommodate tracts to which Indian title had been extinguished on the San Juan, San Ildefonso, and San Felipe Pueblos in New Mexico, and 30 plats of isolated tract surveys in Alaska.
In addition the returns of 6 forest homestead entry and exchange surveys in the States were examined and approved and special maps of the Boulder Canyon Reservation were compiled.
Accepted surveys.
There were accepted and placed on file plats representing 1,222,777 acres of original surveys of public lands, and in addition 1,380,643 acres of lands resurveyed, comprising an aggregate area of 2,603,420 acres, against 2,366,313 acres in the previous year.
Map of the United States.
The copper plates for the map of the United States have been revised to show current changes and additions to the public-land surveys since the publication of the 1931 edition.
New maps of Idaho and Oregon have been issued.
The new maps of Arizona and Alaska are ready for printing.
Recompilation of the map of Colorado is in progress.
A large map, 11 by 14 feet, of the United States was made as part of the General Land Office exhibit at the Century of Progress Exposition at Chicago.
Various maps were prepared for committees of Congress and on subjects of departmental interest.
There were sold 7,574 photolithographic copies of township plats, for which $3,787 was received, and 4,379 were furnished other departments for official use.
There were mounted 1,857 maps and distributed 3,990 map publications and 228,411 circulars covering the various public-land laws and regulations.
Homestead and associated entries brought over from last year were 4,916.
There were received 36,246 cases, as against 38,088 in the previous year.
Pending at end of the year were 5,153 cases.
Patents approved included 4,488 homestead entries as against 5,639 the previous year.
There were also acted upon 1,079 applications to make second homestead entry as against 1,837; 858 applications to amend as against 802; 1,946 applications for leaves of absence and for extension of time to establish residence as against 1,008; 9,057 original entries as against 8,033; 15,466 appeals from action of district land officers and this office as against 14,875, making a total of 28,406 applications for second homestead entry, amendments, extension of time and leaves of absence, original homesteads, and appeals acted upon during the year as against 26,555 the previous year.
Public sale applications under section 2455, revised statutes as amended, receiving action were 1,153, against 1,089 the previous year, of which 103 public sales were approved for patenting as against 286 the previous year.
Timber and stone cases acted upon were 294 as against 324 the previous year, of which 58 were approved for patenting as against 90 the previous year.
There were 17,701 acres returned to the national forests by revocation of orders which had subjected the lands to homestead entry under the act of June 11, 1906, but upon the recommendation of the Department of Agriculture 618 acres in national forests were made subject to such homestead entry.
Under the practice of filing plats of survey and resurvey for lands in States having district land offices, this office issues instructions to the district officers concerning the filing of the plats, the opening of the lands to entry and disposal, the effect had thereon by any withdrawals and reservations, and the preference rights of former service men and others.
This office also prepares and later promulgates Executive orders revoking Executive orders of withdrawal.
During the past fiscal year letters of instructions have been issued involving 303 plats against 270 in the previous year.
In addition, 11 plats for lands in States having no district land office were directly filed in this office and 22 public notices were prepared in connection therewith.
Public lands opened to entry through release from withdrawals or through survey or resurvey aggregated 2,473,190 acres.
These openings were made subject to the preference rights of ex-service men under joint resolution approved June 12, 1930 (46 Stat. 580).
Oil and gas leases.
On July 1, 1932, there were 21 cases pending for action under sections 14, 17, 18, 18a, and 19 of the act of February 25, 1920 (41 Stat. 437).
During the year 1,401 cases were received under above sections, 1,293 were acted upon as compared with 1,209 in the previous year, and 129 remained awaiting action on June 30, 1933.
The leases issued during the year were 23 under section 14 for 11,083.19 acres, all resulting from discoveries of oil and gas on prospecting permits.
Eight leases were canceled in entirety and six in part.
At the end of the year 802 oil and gas leases embracing 258,063.36 acres were pending.
Oil and gas prospecting permits.
There were 1,149 permits granted, 35 of which were applications filed prior to March 13, 1929, when the Secretary of the Interior refused to permit the filing of further applications for oil and gas prospecting permits.
The remainder were granted under the regulations of April 4, 1932, under which permit applications were again received.
Nine permits which had been canceled were reinstated.
There were 127 assignments acted upon and 1,466 applications for extension of time were considered.
During the year 591 permits were held for cancelation and 436 permits were canceled, of which 47 were in Alaska; 568 applications werefinally rejected and 755 applications were finally rejected in part.
There were 10,369 other actions taken, leaving 2,001 cases pending and awaiting action at close of the year, including 1,634 applications filed under the regulations of April 4, 1932.
There are now outstanding 4,443 permits covering 7,382,506.52 acres.
Coal.
At the beginning of the year 100 cases were pending for coal permits, licenses, and leases, and 2,411 cases were received.
There were issued 84 coal prospecting permits covering 48,175.03 acres, 32 coal licenses for 1,360.25 acres, and 35 coal leases for 3,316.13 acres.
The total number of cases disposed of was 2,413 against 2,153 in the previous year, leaving 98 cases on hand.
There are now outstanding 327 leases covering 76,350.15 acres, 94 licenses for 3,733.07 acres, and 270 prospecting permits for 228,867.47 acres.
Potash, sodium, and phosphate.
There were 78 potash permits involving 161,724.78 acres and 3 potash leases covering 8,478.71 acres issued during the year under the acts of February 25, 1920, and December 11, 1928.
The total potash leases are now 13, embracing 30,745.24 acres, and the permits are 212 for 455,612.81 acres.
Fourteen sodium permits covering 15,665.34 acres and one sodium lease for 640 acres were issued.
There are now outstanding the 1 sodium lease and 25 permits for 34,013.85 acres.
Four phosphate leases covering 2,482.90 acres were granted, which bring the total outstanding up to eight leases embracing 5,382.90 acres.
Sixty cases involving the above three minerals were pending at the opening of the year and 828 were received; 880 cases were disposed of, leaving 8 cases awaiting action.
Receipts under mineral leasing act.
The receipts for the year under the mineral leasing act of February 25, 1920, were $2,969,201.72 from oil and gas, $259,907.79 from coal, $24,888.93 from potash, $1,998.55 from phosphate, and $443.20 from sodium, making the total receipts $3,256,440.19.
The disposition made of these receipts will be found under the title of Receipts and Expenditures.
Oil-shale claims under patent proceedings.
There were pending at beginning of the year 14 mineral applications for 124 oil-shale claims embracing 19,179 acres, and they are still awaiting final action.
There were also pending 28 mineral entries for 184 claims covering 24,175 acres and during the year 1 entry was received for 5 claims of approximately 808 acres.
There were approved for patenting 7 entries for 56 claims covering 4,997 acres, and 8 entries were canceled for 53 claims covering 8,076 acres.
There are still awaiting action 14 mineral entries for 80 claims covering 11,910 acres.
Oil-shale locations.
Forty-nine field reports on locations not included in patent proceedings were awaiting action on July 1, 1932, and 116 were received; all were acted upon.
Charges were directed against 873 locations embracing 113,490 acres.
Oil-shale contests.
There -were 120 contests against oil-shale locations pending at the beginning of the year, including locations under patent proceedings; 1,655 new cases were added and 1,615 were disposed of, leaving 160 pending.
Locations to the number of 11,146 for 1,448,980 acres were declared null and void.
Mineral entries and applications.
There were brought forward from last year 63 mineral entries; 469 were received and 481 adjudicated, leaving 51 awaiting action.
There were approved for patenting 201 entries.
On July 1, 1932, there were pending 6 mineral applications; 132 were received and 124 disposed of, leaving 14 on hand.
Miscellaneous mineral cases.
There were on hand at the beginning of the year 81 miscellaneous mineral cases; 676 were received and 682 disposed of, leaving 75 awaiting action.
These cases were of a highly miscellaneous nature, such as conflicts between mineral and nonmineral claimants, requests for segregation of mining claims, and adjudication of field reports.
Mineral contests.
Exclusive of oil shale, Boulder Dam and Reservoir project, and the San Gabriel Canyon claims, there were 54 mineral contests pending July 1, 1932; 208 were received and 229 disposed of, leaving 33 awaiting action.
Aviation fields.
During the year applications for the use of public lands as aviation fields were considered in 51 instances and 3 leases were issued, and the assignment of 1 lease was approved.
Two new applications were received, while 3 applications to erect beacon lights were rejected.
There are 13 leases outstanding and 5 permits for beacon lights, totaling 5,196.64 acres.
Fur farming.
5 applications were rejected, 8 leases were issued, 1 lease was reinstated, 2 leases were canceled, and the assignment of 1 lease was approved.
Four new applications for lease were received and await reports from the field for further action.
There are 41 leases which are still in full force and effect with an area of 143,712.92 acres.
Stock grazing, Alaska.
Leasing of public lands in Alaska for grazing purposes was considered during the year in 242 instances and 12 applications were rejected, 6 leases were issued, 4 leases were canceled, and the assignment of 1 lease was approved.
Ten new applications were received during the year and further action thereon awaits reports from the field.
There are 17 leases outstanding under the above act embracing 10,549,449 acres.
Six of these leases were granted to associations of natives for grazing of reindeer.
The other 11 were leases for grazing cattle, horses, or sheep.
Alaska.
During the year patents were issued to the town-site trustee for several Indian villages in Alaska, including Hydaburg, Seldovia, Kake, and Angoon.
On July 25, 1932, regulations were issued providing for the relinquishment by the State of Arizona and the city of Tempe, Ariz., of certain lands and the patenting of some of the lands to the Salt River Valley Water Users Association and another part of the lands to the town of Tempe, Ariz., for park purposes.
The survey of lots for the town site of Oro Fino, Calif., has been ordered.
The town-site reservations for the proposed town sites of Sprole, Mont., and Huberton, N.Dak.
On August 15, 1932, regulations for the sale of town lots in the town site of Wadsworth, Nev., were prescribed.
On July 28, 1932, regulations were issued under the act of July 8, 1932 (47 Stat. 649), which provided for the conveyance to the city of Fallon, Nev., of certain lands for a dumping ground.
The survey of the town site of Texhoma, Okla., has been approved and the disposition of the lots developed by the survey is now under consideration.
Parks and cemeteries.
Under the act of September 30, 1890 (26 Stat. 502), providing for cemeteries and parks for cities and towns, there were 13 cases considered during the year and patent was issued for 1 cemetery site.
Patents for parks and public reservations under individual acts were issued to the towns of Deaver and Powell, Wyo., and Plummer, Idaho.
The lease of Sibley Island in the Missouri River to the city of Bismarck, N. Dak., for park purposes, pursuant to the act of June 11, 1896 (29 Stat. 413–435), was held for cancelation for failure of the city to comply with the terms of said lease.
During the year the following number of trespass cases were considered: 651 timber, 965 coal, 2 fire, 9 gravel, 3 grazing, 2 cactus, and 1 turpentine.
Settlements totaling $9,963.86 were accepted in the timber cases while the sum of $5,329.75 was accepted for coal trespasses.
In four cases criminal prosecution was recommended.
There were also considered during the year 68 cases of unlawful enclosure of public lands, which resulted in the abatement of such unlawful enclosures and the release therefrom of several thousand acres of public land.
During the year the sum of $4,952.56 was realized from sales of lands of the abandoned military reservations of Fort Lowell, Ariz.
Vashon Island, Wash.
Point Campbell, Alaska; and Fort Assinniboine, Mont.
Cases of this type were considered in 146 instances, resulting in 23 patents being issued on sales of land and 15 patents on homesteads.
Under the act of May 2, 1932 (47 Stat. 141), a patent was issued to the State of Minnesota for a tract of land which was formerly a part of the Fort Ripley Military Reservation.
The present title of land, to which claims had attached while under the jurisdiction of former governments, continues to be a source of official correspondence and action.
Inquiries are received from 143 present owners of such land and from abstract companies or title examiners in behalf of such owners, seeking to ascertain the source and nature of the title and to procure patents as evidence of their title.
Inquiries are received from those whose ancestors were among the early inhabitants of the ceded territory, who seek to ascertain whether or not some right or title to such tracts still remains in the Government from which they could derive some benefit or to renew a claim that has been rejected.
Six patents were issued during the year in private claim cases.
Railroad rights-of-way.
Forty-eight railroad rights-of-way applications were received during the year, which added to the 14 pending, made a total of 62.
Twenty-two were approved, requirements made in 36, leaving 4 pending.
One hundred and eight reservoir declaratory statement applications were received, which, added to the 5 pending, made a total of 113.
Requirements were made in 40 cases, 71 were otherwise disposed of, leaving 2 pending.
Six hundred and thirty-five irrigation, telegraph, telephone, public road, pipe line, etc., applications were received, which, added to 13 on hand, made a total of 648.
One hundred and ninety-four were approved, 34 canceled, and requirements made in 404, leaving 16 not yet considered.
One hundred and forty maps of approved rights-of-way in forest and Indian reservations were received from the Forest Service and Indian Office and approvals promulgated.
The number of approved rights of way of all kinds which were awaiting office action July 1, 1932, was 15, those received 522.
Of these, there were canceled by relinquishment or default 30, requirements were made in 290 cases, and 196 were otherwise disposed.
Three suits were recommended and four decrees of forfeiture obtained as a result of previous recommendations.
Twenty-six suits are pending in the Department of Justice.
Indemnity.
At the beginning of year 145,286 acres of school-land indemnity selections were awaiting action and 1,361,841 acres of new selections were received during the year.
Of these, 115,191 acres were approved and certified to the States, 4,862 acres were canceled, 6,254 acres otherwise disposed of, and requirements made as to 902,609 acres, leaving 478,211 acres awaiting consideration at end of year.
New quantity selections under grants for specific purposes consisting of 75,017 acres, and selections in connection with which requirements had been made embracing 267,584 acres, together with 60,821 acres not theretofore considered, totaled 403,422 acres.
Of this amount, 86,653 acres were approved and certified to the States, selections embracing 3,399 acres were canceled and requirements were made as to 246,262 acres, leaving 67,108 acres not yet taken up for action.
Conveyances amounting to 9,090 acres were made to the States with reservation of certain mineral deposits to the United States, including coal, oil, gas, potash, and oil-shale.
Railroad and wagon-road listings and selections were received to the extent of 201,673.50 acres; 77,273.29 acres were certified or patented in satisfaction of such grants; 7,096.06 acres of selections were rejected; the total acreage adjudicated being 227,087.69.
Payments to 18 counties in the State of Oregon in lieu of 'taxes, involving approximately 2,300,000 acres of land, title to which revested in the Government are made by the United States.
The rates are fixed by lawful annual levies on these lands in the same manner as those held in private ownership in the several counties, and the valuations are those used by the Secretary of the Interior in computing the accrued taxes for the year 1915, as reduced by disposal made since 1915.
The counties present their claims annually and they are checked and audited by this office and certified to the Secretary of the Treasury for payment in the amounts found to be due.
It is necessary to determine from the records and the proofs submitted not only the State and county taxes, but also whether the land is subject to the school, high school, road, port, or other special district tax claimed.
A special set of records is kept where each disposal of revested land is noted.
The auditing and adjudication of the claims has resulted in net deduction on all claims, or savings to the Government of approximately $310,000.
Total.
NotE.
Nine claims for the year 1931 were certified during the fiscal year 1932 in the sum of $308,016.42, which was $1,808.73 less than the amount claimed.
Payments on the 1932 claims amounting to $491,936.02 have been withheld in accordance with the Comptroller General's decision of April 28, 1933, due to shortage of moneys in the fund from which payments have been heretofore made.
The cases decided in the previous year were: 129 mineral, 1,777 oil-shale, 428 Boulder Canyon project, 163 San Gabriel Canyon and 1,714 miscellaneous.
Withdrawals of public lands from settlement are made by acts of Congress, by presidential order, or by departmental order where authorized by specific act of Congress.
Seven new stock driveways were established during the year and 27 were modified, resulting in the withdrawal of 187,297 acres and the releasing of 60,346 acres from former withdrawals.
There were withdrawn from the unreserved public land 145,344 acres for forest purposes and 25,741 acres were restored.
The existing temporary withdrawals for forestry purposes on June 30, 1933, were 131,168 acres, including 17,898 acres withdrawn outside of forest boundaries for administrative sites.
During the year 86,256 acres were withdrawn from the unreserved public land for creation of parks and monuments and 778,570 acres were restored.
The outstanding withdrawals for the creation of further parks and monuments amount to 2,790,109 acres.
There were also 178,309 acres withdrawn for game and bird refuges while 860 were withdrawn for recreational areas.
Several small areas aggregating 3,184 in Arizona, California, Nevada, Oregon, and Washington for use of the Department of Commerce as beacon sites or intermediate landing fields in the maintenance of air navigation facilities.
At the same time, 2,321 acres were released from such withdrawals.
Public water reserves are created to insure that sources of water in the arid regions will remain open for the public and for livestock.
They are also made for the protection of municipal and other public water supplies and are practically net Government land.
During the year 33,784 acres were withdrawn and 3,612 acres therefore withdrawn were restored.
The outstanding reserves are 471,401 acres.
Under Executive order of April 17, 1926, all springs and waterholes providing enough water for general use for watering purposes were automatically withdrawn from entry by requiring with every entry an affidavit of the nonexistence of such a source of water.
Withdrawals for miscellaneous purposes amounting to 63,269 acres were made and 6,979 acres were restored.
The outstanding withdrawals for miscellaneous purposes are estimated at 500,000 acres.
The above withdrawals are estimated to contain 27,068,532 acres of Government land in the public-domain States.
Mineral withdrawals relate to subsurface rights as the surface is usually open to agricultural entries unless a reservation of the surface is also necessary to effect the purpose of the withdrawal.
During the year there were restored 1,421,250 acres from coal withdrawals and 2,019,369 acres from oil-shale withdrawals.
The above areas contain much land patented without mineral reservation.
In more definite reservations are the naval oil reserves of 77,730 acres, the naval oil-shale reserves of 156,024 acres, and 944,951 acres defined as within the known geologic structure of producing oil and gas fields; these are the gross areas before deducting the private lands.
The term "public domain" embraces all of the area that was once public land or in the control of the Federal Government, including Alaska.
In the United States proper it includes all the States north and west of the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers except Texas, and includes in addition the States of Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida.
200,320 acres.
The following is the disposition of this vast area as worked out from available records of disposals and with arbitrary adjustment for final entries and disposals that were later canceled and for exchanges, etc., that resulted in reissuance of patents, and with further adjustment due to purchases of patented lands by the Government for special purposes.
The subject, which involves the history of the growth and development of our country, is complex and changing and subject to numerous classifications and exceptions, but the following table pictures the situation in its simplest form.
Washington, D.C.
Sır: We submit herewith the annual report of the Office of Indian Affairs for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1933.
The Indian Service is confronting certain main problems and is moving on certain main lines of policy.
In part, these problems and these lines of policy are indicated in the narrative report for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1933.
1) Indian lands.
The allotment system has enormously cut down the Indian landholdings and has rendered many areas, still owned by Indians, practically unavailable for Indian use.
The system must be revised both as a matter of law and of practical effect.
Allotted lands must be consolidated into tribal or corporate ownership with individual tenure, and new lands must be acquired for the 90,000 Indians who are landless at the present time.
A modern system of financial credit must be instituted to enable the Indians to use their own natural resources.
And training in the modern techniques of land use must be supplied Indians.
The wastage of Indian lands through erosion must be checked.
2) Indian education.
The redistribution of educational opportunity for Indians, out of the concentrated boarding school, reaching the few, and into the day school, reaching the many, must be continued and accelerated.
The boarding schools which remain must be specialized on lines of occupational need for children of the older groups, or of the need of some Indian children for institutional care.
The day schools must be worked out on lines of community service, reaching the adult as well as the child, and influencing the health, the recreation, and the economic welfare of their local areas.
3) Indians in Indian Service.
The increasing use of Indians in their own official and unofficial service must be pressed without wearying.
To this end, adjustments of Civil Service arrangements to Indian need must be sought; but in order that standards may not be lowered, opportunities for professional training must be made genuinely accessible to Indians.
With respect to unofficial Indian selfservice, a steadily widening tribal and local participation by Indians in the management of their own properties and in the administration of their own services musț be pursued.
4) Reorganization of the Indian Service.
A decentralizing of administrative routine must be progressively attempted.
The special functions of Indian Service must be integrated with one another and with Indian life, in terms of local areas and of local groups of Indians.
An enlarged responsibility must be vested in the superintendents of reservations and beyond them, or concurrently, in the Indians themselves.
This reorganization is in part dependent on the revision of the land allotment system; and in part it is dependent on the steady development of cooperative relations between the Indian Service as a Federal agency, on the one hand, and the States, counties, school districts, and other local units of government on the other hand.
The above main purposes will have to be sought in those months ahead which probably will bring a crisis in the economic situation of many tribes.
Unemployment and distress are now widespread among the Indians, particularly, but not exclusively in the allotted areas.
The grant of $5,875,200 for Indian emergency conservation work, made available June 19, will be an important means toward the alleviation of Indian distress, the granting of employment to unemployed Indians, the salvaging and improvement of many areas of Indian land, and the bolder use of Indians in their own professional service.
Under the act of March 31, 1933, President Roosevelt created a Civilian Conservation Corps composed of some 1,400 camps, each of 200 men enrolled for 6 months'service.
Of the funds made available by that act, $5,875,200 were placed at the disposal of the Indian Office, subject to the Director of Emergency Conservation Work, by Executive order of May 12, as amended on May 26 and June 7.
Due to delays in perfecting accountancy arrangements, however, no part of that sum actually became available until June 20.
Because of the objections to locating quasi-military units on Indian lands, and because of the complexities of Indian affairs in general President Roosevelt was convinced that the Indian program should be placed on a separate basis.
The 200-men unit, particularly, was adjudged impracticable.
The "Indian country"is proverbially a land of great distances; many of the reservations have no important forests; and there could be but few urgently needed work projects, in those sparsely settled regions, large enough to employ 200 men for anything like a 6-months' stretch.
Many Indians would sacrifice needlessly in contracting for a half year's continuous residence in remote camps, where they would be unable to get away for a few days at a time to attend to the seasonal needs of their crops or livestock.
Most of the workers would be married and would be loath, for that reason, to sign up for so long an absence.
Again, tribal life, as distinguished from family life, might empty the large and expensive encampments on the rather numerous days of tribal or religious festivals—this in addition to much wastage of money and time on transportation.
The President therefore authorized that Indians be mobilized into small work groups and that, in most instances, they live at home or—as experienced campers—maintain their own camps near "the job."
In those cases the allowances to workers for"commutation of quarters and subsistence"would probably cost the Government less—in both cash and man-days—than the constructing and maintaining of large camps.
The Indian program was given still further individuality by Director Fechner, who authorized the Indian Office to appoint its own erosion experts, engineers, and foresters and to do its own disbursing.
And he liberalized the age limits of enrolled Indians.
Enrollment in the Indian branch was opened to "persons over 18 years of age who are able to perform ordinary labor without injury to themselves"and who are free from communicable disease.
The preliminary allotting of the $5,875,200—and the quotas of enrolled men by States—will necessarily be revised somewhat in the coming fiscal period.
They were the result, nevertheless, of many overtime conferences, at which two considerations ruled: the relative poverty of Indians on different reservations and the relative need' for constructive work that could be undertaken under the act of March 31.
That work was pretty well limited to forestry and erosion control.
Work projects of wide variety were approved before June 30.
Under prevention of forest fires, approved projects include: fire lanes, lookout towers, telephone lines, trails and bridges, roadside clearing and the removal of fire hazards elsewhere.
Other forestry projects include nursery work, seed collection, planting, insect pest control, stand improvement, and in some instances landscaping.
Under erosion control (largely through prevention of excessive grazing), work projects include erosion dams, range revegetation, boundary surveys, fences, driveways, corrals, springs and reservoirs, rodent control, eradication of poisonous plants, and elimination of useless range stock.
Minor flood-control work has been authorized, notably in New Mexico.
Improvement of public camp grounds will be a rather important item in most States.
Several of the earliest policies of the I.E.C.W.—as it has come to be known—will be rigorously administered.
Supervisory jobs will be limited.
Indians will be given preference in filling all such jobs, from the outset; and they will "take over" as rapidly as they can be trained.
Enrolled workers in general will be required to deposit a liberal portion of their earnings into the Individual Moneys, for use during the winter.
Purchases of expensive equipment will be kept at a minimum, to insure that a maximum of the Indian fund will go into pay rolls, where it will most promptly serve the destitute.
The appropriations for this year aggregated $22,140,098.35 from the Federal Treasury.
This is a decrease of nearly $5,000,000 under the amount allowed for the previous year.
To this latter class of funds are added certain amounts classed as permanent or indefinite appropriations.
With the approach of the new year the service will be required to operate on even less than the amounts actually appropriated in order to make its contributions to the general economy movement.
From last year, 1932, to the coming year, 1934, beginning July, the Federal expenditures for the Indian Service have been cut from $27,030,047 to $16,586,059.
The reduction is $10,443,988, or 39 percent.
The Indian tribal trust funds available for Indian Bureau costs have been reduced from $3,385,934 to a sum approximating $2,450,000—about a $930,000 diminution.
And the tribal trust funds available for payment in cash to the Indians have been reduced from $3,289,160 to about $2,000,000.
A grand total appropriation of $33,704,000 for 1932 is cut to approximately $21,246,000 for 1934, and the total reduction is approximately $12,458,000.