As in my first annual report, I will not attempt to interpret or give a resumé of the detailed reports of the various divisions, offices, and bureaus of the Department of the Interior contained herein.
Since my previous annual report there have been important changes in the organization of this Department.
Among these was the transfer to this Department of the administration of the affairs of Puerto Rico.
This was done by Executive order, the island having formerly been within the jurisdiction of the War Department.
This transfer was subsequent to the period covered by this report, and since it was effected there has been organized in the Department the Division of Territories and Island Possessions.
In this new Division are now grouped Alaska, Hawaii, the Virgin Islands, and Puerto Rico.
The reports of the governors of the first three named will appear in separate form.
Passage of the Taylor Grazing Act by the Congress necessitated setting up a new office in the Department, the Division of Grazing Control.
This office did not operate for a sufficient length of time during the period here covered to justify inclusion of its early activities in this report.
As the President designated the Department of the Interior as the Federal agency responsible for certain administrative duties under the petroleum code, and as the Secretary of the Interior is the administrator under that code, the annual report of the Petroleum Administrative Board appears in this report.
Detailed reports of the many activities of this Department have been materially cut down in volume in this report for reasons of economy.
Full particulars of the activities of any part of the Department are available in the files of the Department.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 1934, for the first time, all of the more than 60 attorneys in the Department of the Interior, both in Washington and in the field, have been under the administrative jurisdiction of the Solicitor.
Centralization of responsibility and control has not resulted in loss of identity or any important change in the function of the legal sections attached to the several bureaus of the Department.
It has seemed a requirement of organizational efficiency that so much of the business of each bureau as requires legal competency should be handled, in first instance, at least, by a legal staff assigned to that bureau and intimately and continuously associated with its work.
The central office of the Solicitor has continued to serve as the legal unit of the Office of the Secretary and as an agency for legal review of matters considered initially in the several bureaus of the Department.
The rendering of formal legal opinions for the Department is a growing and particularly important function of the Solicitor.
The enactment of new legislation and the expansion of the activities of the Department have increased the number, the difficulty, and the importance of questions of law which must be decided for the guidance of departmental action.
The extent of the police power of the Park Service with respect to private lands in national parks.
The more important opinions will appear in the forthcoming volume 54 of the Decisions of the Department.
More than 500 appeals from decisions of the General Land Office and related motions have been disposed of during the year.
While many of the contentions of homesteaders, lessees, and other persons claiming under the land laws are covered by earlier departmental decisions, an effort has been made in the adjudication of each appeal to make clear the rationale of decision.
Useful direction is thus furnished for future administrative action and individual claimants are better satisfied.
A significant innovation and one which has produced gratifying results, has been the establishment of a legislative section within the Office of the Solicitor.
Two specialists have devoted full time to legislative work with assistance from other attorneys in whose particular fields legislative problems have arisen.
In 884 instances report has been made upon bills introduced in Congress.
More than 50 appearances have been made before Congressional committees.
The preparation and successful promotion of the Taylor grazing bill and the Wheeler-Howard Indian bill have been major achievements.
The development and regulation of grazing districts on the public domain, as provided for in the Taylor bill, will be of great benefit to the livestock industry and through that industry to the entire Nation.
The Wheeler-Howard bill is an important first step toward building upon a sound economic and political basis Indian communities which themselves will provide a means for the justification of further emancipation from the status of wardship.
The members of Congress have already come to appreciate the service of our experts and to rely upon this staff for accurate and pertinent information both factual and legal.
Building upon the groundwork laid during the last session of Congress the legislative section of this office can and will be of increasing usefulness during future sessions.
While the legal officers of the Department, both in Washington and in the field, have cooperated with the Department of Justice in the prosecution and defense of suits filed outside of the District of Columbia, the responsibility of the Solicitor for the representation of the Department before the courts has been limited to some 20 suits in the District of Columbia, wherein officers of the Department have been parties litigant in their official capacity.
Individual cases have involved large money claims or large property interests, and occasional issues of general significance have been adjudicated.
Outside of the central office, the development of reclamation projects and Indian irrigation projects under Public Works allotments has involved the acquiring of land, rights-of-way and miscellaneous licenses for new projects, contracting for construction, organizing water users and obligating them under appropriate repayment contracts.
Moreover, it has been necessary to take cognizance of the water laws of the several Western States and the interrelation of Federal and State law in the planning and development of local and interstate projects.
The detail of contracting for expenditures on projects and for repayment by water users has been particularly important because of the large sums involved.
The legal safeguarding of the interests of the Government in transactions involving hundreds of millions of dollars has been a responsibility of this office.
In one of the six reclamation districts alone 1,133 contracts involving $24,944,966.68 have been executed.
The administration of estates of deceased Indians is an important legal service performed par tly in the field and partly in Washington.
The courts have no jurisdiction over Indian estates, except among the Five Civilized Tribes and the Osages in Oklahoma.
Substantive problems of marriage and adoption according to Indian customs are being made a subject of revised regulation; the procedure for filing and allowing claims against Indian estates is being improved; causee of delay in the administration of estates are being removed wherever possible and a proper basis for the allowance of fees to private attorneys is being determined.
No effort is being spared to make the Federal system of administration of Indian estates a model of efficiency for its intended purposes.
The organization and conduct of subsistence homestead enterprises authorized under section 208 of the National Industrial Recovery Act has presented iniportant and difficult legal problems.
The brief, general provisions of section 208 have required frequent interpretation.
The conduct of the enterprise under Federal statutes and administrative practice with reference to the acquisition of property, the letting of contracts and the conduct of operations generally, adopted in the light of traditional functions of the Government, has not been simple.
In fact, it is difficult to imagine a more thorough test of the adaptability of the machinery of Government under existing law than the subsistence-homestead venture has presented.
Moreover, the conduct of these federally sponsored and controlled projects in the several States has involved significant problems of Federal and State jurisdiction.
The appropriation for the General Land Office for the fiscal year 1934 was $400,000.
Of this sum $60,000 was to be used for prevention and suppression of forest and other fires on the public lands, and for no other purpose, leaving the net sum of $340,000 for the prosecution of routine work, but due to the President's limitation of cash withdrawals only $300,000 was available for this service.
The average number of active field investigators, exclusive of 4 special agents in charge, was 72; average number of clerks employed in divisional offices, 20; total force employed, including special agents in charge, 96, exclusive of the Washington office.
Due to the activities of field investigators, $70,794.28 was collected and turned into the Treasury and 216,757 acres were restored to the public domain,.
Investigations.
On July 1, 1933, there were pending field investigation 11,552 cases.
During the year 11,150 additional cases were received; 14,226 cases investigated, reported and closed, leaving 8,476 pending investigation, which is a material reduction in the number of routine cases.
Of the reports submitted, 3,133 were adverse and 10,195 favorable, and in addition reports submitted showing 898 cases closed without field investigation.
On the recommendation of this Department civil suits were brought by the Department of Justice.
Twenty-three cases were tried, of which 18 were won and 5 lost.
As a result of the suits $47,147.12 were recovered and 560 acres restored to the public domain.
Offences against the public land laws were responsible for seven indictments.
Of the criminal cases tried 6 resulted in conviction and prison sentence was imposed in 4 cases.
Fines were paid in the sum of $3,800.
Attorneys and agents.
The number admitted to practice before the Department for the year ending June 30, 1934, was 25.
The appropriation for Protecting public lands, timber, etc., 1934, included $60,000 for prevention and suppression of forest and other fires on public lands, to be available for this and no other purpose.
No expense was incurred under this appropriation.
There were also investigated and closed in this Division the following cases: Homestead entries, 1; coal trespass, 1; fire trespass, 2; timber trespass, 7; official conduct, 2; unlawful inclosure, 19; criminal, 17; conspiracy, 19; miscellaneous, 37.
The Division investigated and closed 1 miscellaneous case for the Office of Education, and 1 official conduct and 2 miscellaneous cases for the Geological Survey.
The cases investigated and closed for the Office of Indian Affairs were: Official conduct, 30; criminal, 11; miscellaneous, 56.
The cases investigated and closed for the National Park Service included: Official conduct, 3; miscellaneous, 2.
The cases investigated and closed for the Bureau of Reclamation involved: Appraisal of lands, 1; official conduct, 4; miscellaneous, 5.
There were also investigated and closed 13 miscellaneous cases.
Organization.
The investigational work for the Public Works Administration was assigned to the Director of Investigations for the purpose of having the benefit of the services of an enlarged trained personnel without the expense of setting up an entirely new additional office force.
Personnel.
The number of employees, including Washington office, was: 9 special agents in charge; 1 acting special agent in charge; 130 special agents and 74 other employees.
Nature of cases.
The cases investigated, relating to the expenditure of Public Works funds, consisted of collusive or fraudulent bidding, involving contractors and subcontractors; wage rates and disputes; labor and materials; code violations; underpayment of wages to employees; repayment to contractors of wages of employees; contracts relating to housing projects; and misconduct of officers and employees of the Public Works Administration, National Reemployment Service and other governmental agencies, allotted Public Works Administration funds.
The investigations concerned the expenditure of large sums of money and the disclosure of facts resulted in a substantial saving to the Government.
Investigations.
During the year 3,536 cases were investigated and reported.
Of this number, 2,389 cases were reported adversely and 1,747 cases were reported favorably.
Court action.
On recommendation of the administrator, 119 cases were criminal prosecutions, resulting in 34 cases receiving court action; 17 cases resulted in indictments; and prison sentences were imposed in 3 cases.
Organization.
Relief Administrator for civil relief, the investigations of irregularities: in expenditure of such funds were conducted temporarily by the Director of Investigations.
Investigations.
The cases investigated embraced a total of 417, of which 234 cases were favorably reported and 183 were adversely reported.
There were 38 cases pending with the United States Attorney for prosecution; 12 indictments were secured; 9 cases resulted in court action; 3 cases involved prison sentences and in 1 case sentence was suspended.
A number of important investigations relating to other emergency bureaus, were, by request, made by the Division of Investigations.
Organization.
The Secretary of the Interior, in his capacity of Oil Administrator, by virtue of authority of Executive orders of July 11 and 14, 1933, designated the Director of Investigations to conduct all investigations in the enforcement of the provisions of the regulations under 9c of the National Recovery Act, and the provisions of the Code of Fair Competition for the Petroleum Industry.
Hot-oil" cases.
The establishment of two offices of the Department in the vicinity of oil flush pools in Texas and Oklahoma, with a personnel of 1 acting special agent in charge, 36 special agents, and 4 clerks, was designed to prevent the transportation of oil produced in excess of proration orders of the States.
A large number of cases was investigated; 320 cases are now pending; 59 cases are also pending in office of United States Commissioner awaiting action; 3 cases are before the United States Supreme Court for decision; 17 cases were dismissed by court order; 5 cases were reviewed by the Supreme Court of the State of Texas and 1 case resulted in conviction.
Tax evasions.
The Director of Investigations, under the immediate supervision of the Secretary of the Interior, by means of a marine unit, consisting of eight employees, operates a number of picket boats to investigate incoming tanker cargoes of petroleum and petroleum products to determine their origin.
The information obtained forms an important aid in the enforcement of the regulations under 9c of the National Industrial Recovery Act, as well as being of valuable assistance to the States and the United States in the collection of taxes due and collectible on the petroleum products in transit to their actual destinations.
Reports received from tax officials of several States indicate their appreciation of the cooperation given by this Department.
Oil code.
The personnel of the Division of Investigations for the enforcement of the oil code consisted of 10 special agents in charge, 7 acting special agents in charge, 97 special agents, and 55 other employees, inclusive of the personnel at Washington.
The cases investigated include a total of 7,263, of which 5,686 cases were reported on and closed.
Of the total number of cases investigated, 252 were recommended for prosecution by the Secretary of the Interior; 133 cases of this number were authorized for prosecution by the Attorney General; and 21 cases are involved in court actions.
The War Minerals Relief Act, section 5 of the act of March 2, 1919 (40 Stat. 1292), as amended February 13, 1929 (45 Stat. 1166), authorized claimants to petition the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia for review of the decisions of the Secretary of the Interior upon questions of law, but provided that "the decision of the Secretary of the Interior on all questions of fact shall be conclusive and not subject to review by any court."
The Secretary of the Interior, acting under a decree of the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia in each instance, made 25 awards, 3 disallowances, 1 additional award under amendment, and 1 award on rehearing of a former denial, during the fiscal year ending June 30, 1934.
These awards were certified to the General Accounting Office and were paid through the Treasury Deficiency Appropriations bill (Public No. 412, 73d Cong., 2d sess.) in the amount of $589,231.13.
During the present fiscal year the Supreme Court of the United States sustained the opinion of the Secretary of the Interior that separate operations by a single claimant should be considered as one under the War Minerals Relief Act.
The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, in the Cuyuna Mining & Investment Co. case, sustained an opinion by the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia which held the benefits accruing under the War Minerals Relief Act were gratuities and not legal claims against the Government.
The motion for review of this decision is now pending in the Supreme Court of the United States.
The decision by the Supreme Court of the United States will have a direct bearing upon a great many of the pending cases.
The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia sustained the opinion of the Secretary of the Interior that expenses incident to incorporation, stock sales and commissions, and discount on securities were not, as matter of law, allowable items under the act.
Time limit for motion for review of this decision by the Supreme Court of the United States has not expired.
By Executive Order No. 6260-A the President further expanded the powers of the Secretary of the Interior with respect to the petroleum industry by designating him Administrator of the Code of Fair Competition for the Petroleum Industry.
He further empowered the Department of the Interior to act as Federal agency as provided for in the code.
The Petroleum Administrative Board is an agency created by the Administrator on behalf of the President to make effective provisions of the act so far as it applies to the petroleum industry.
Throughout the life of the code representatives of the petroleum industry have constantly urged upon the Administrator various actions designed to obtain for the industry benefits intended to be conferred upon it by the National Industrial Recovery Act.
Changes in the code have been proposed in order to make it a more effective instrument in the stabilization of the industry.
Agreements have been submitted pursuant to title I, section 4, subsection (a) of the act.
Studies have been commenced both by the industry and by the Board with a view to ascertaining the effect of the code and the act upon various units within the industry and with the further purpose of obtaining a picture of the economic processes of producing, refining, and distributing petroleum and its products, so that a basis may be laid for such further action as may seem advisable.
In dealing with any and all of these problems the Board has served a dual function.
Since the code includes within itself a broad sweep of the industrial and business processes surrounding the production and marketing of crude petroleum, it was inevitable that in the drafting there were some omissions of the essential provisions, inconsistent and conflicting provisions, and provisions which required modification and relaxation.
In the first year of the code, as the industry gained experience in its operation, it has been found necessary from time to time, after due investigation and hearing, to modify and to amend provisions of the code.
With a few possible exceptions, depending upon future course of events, this process is now over.
By this process of amendment, modification, interpretation, and regulation the code has taken on a well-rounded form, and with but slight changes hereafter should govern the industry for the duration of the National Industrial Recovery Act.
The Board has been requested to consider many plans directed toward stabilization of the petroleum industry.
These plans generally aim at the attainment of a normal price level for petroleum and its products either nationally or in local areas.
Their purpose has been to supplement the code so that the industry may be more readily able to bear the burdens imposed upon it by the act.
Proposals have been many and varied, and have ranged from outright price fixing by governmental fiat to local agreements providing for the shutting off of supplies from violators either of the code or of local price agreements.
Section 6, subsection (a) of article III of the code, as modified on September 13, 1933, provides for the establishment of minimum prices based on cost recovery.
Early in September 1933, the Planning and Coordination Committee submitted to the Administrator a comprehensive schedule of minimum prices for petroleum and its products from the well to the filling station.
The board, in a report to the Administrator, pointed out that this schedule presented numerous technical and legal difficulties, and that the evidence used in supporting it was'insufficient to justify the price levels proposed.
The Board further recommended that due notice be given and a public hearing be held at which protestants against the proposed schedule might make their objections known.
On November 20, the Planning and Coordination Committee requested the postponement of the effective date of the schedules until some later date so that due consideration might be paid to alternative proposals submitted by certain interests within the industry opposed to the schedules in principle, and to certain of its items in detail.
By an order dated January 31, 1934, the price-fixing program was indefinitely canceled.
On December 7, 1933, the Planning and Coordination Committee submitted on behalf of itself and of various companies among the industry two complementary agreements, the National Purchasing Agreement and the National Marketing Agreement.
They were designed to stabilize refinery, wholesale, and retail prices of gasoline, and assure protection to the small semi-integrated or nonintegrated refiners, and to the various types of distributors.
When these agreements were submitted to the Administrator they were released to the trade journals, trade associations, and to tho press.
Copies were sent to all parties who had recorded an opinion upon the price-fixing order for which the agreeinents were designed as a substitute.
In accordance with the provisions of the National Industrial Recovery Act that "Nothing * shall deprive such persons of the right to be heard", hearings, conferences, and discussions were held on behalf of and with each protestant and commentor who desired to be heard.
After a thorough investigation of the agreements and the protests made regarding them, the Board prepared a memorandum setting forth certain conditions which it believed necessary to protect the interests of independent refiners and distributors, and to enable the agreements to comply with the requirements of the act that the order should not tend toward monopoly or operate to discriminate against small enterprise.
These conditions were designed mainly toward strengthening the provisions concerning the elimination of lease and agency, lease and license agreements, and exclusive dealing contracts, toward providing for flexible administration of the provisions relating to margins and modification of the resale price-maintenance provisions, and to make possible the allowance of differentials to marketers who required such preferential treatment in order to remain in business.
The industry embodied the conditions to the Marketing Agreement within the redraft of the agreement and resubmitted it to the refiners for signature.
Meanwhile, in March the agreements were submitted to the Department of Justice for analysis and approval.
On June 27 the Attorney General notified the Administrator that the Department of Justice did not approve the agreements because they disagreed with the theory of notice and hearing under which they were promulgated.
Meanwhile, conditions in the petroleum industry have changed in many ways for the worse.
In many areas the price structure is more chaotic than it has been for several years.
Many companies, no longer willing to guarantee margins for retailers under such conditions, have withdrawn from participation in the agreements.
Consequently, in all probability the agreements are now, after the delay, a dead letter.
Because of peculiar competitive conditions on the Pacific coast, disastrous price wars have raged throughout that territory.
In an attempt to rationalize the industry by coping with the problem of over-capacity, the California industry proposed a cartel which assured all refiners an adequate supply of crude, a fair share of the gasoline market based upon their historical and current record of sales, and provided adequate margins and stabilized prices for the retail trade.
The Department of Justice, as a condition of the approval by the court of the agreement, insisted upon conditions which the industry found itself unable to assume.
Immediately negotiations by the industry were begun to draft a new agreement which would be satisfactory to the Department of Justice, spurred on by a complete collapse of the price structure on the Pacific coast, involving a loss of millions of dollars, and ascribed by the industry to the failure of the cartel.
As in other cases, this action was given wide publicity by the trade journals and newspapers and through trade associations.
All refiners in the territory involved were contacted and all but one signed a new marketing agreement, which was submitted to the Administrator for approval.
When the agreement was submitted to the Administrator and the Department of Justice for consideration, notice was given by widespread publicity in the trade journals and newspapers throughout the Pacific coast and through trade associations.
Such complaints and protests as were filed were duly considered.
The Department of Justice, after a prolonged consideration, was willing to permit the agreement to become operative under the consent decree, provided the participants entered into a supplemental agreement, agreeing to abide by the provisions of the code and not to engage in monopolistio practices.
The supplemental agreement was duly prepared and signed, and the Pacific Coast Petroleum Agency Agreement became effective June 23, 1934.
Under it an agency has been set up to take over distress supplies from small refiners.
Prices have been stabilized, refiners have been afforded adequate crude supplies and a fair share of the market calculated from their past sales records and their current performance.
Under the provisions of the agreement there is no price differential between the major and the affiliated companies and independent companies are selling their gasoline at the same price as the major and affiliated companies' third-grade gasoline.
The agreement provides for a representative of the Administrator; at present an attorney for this Board, to assist the executive committee of the refiners and the agency in the determination of problems arising under the agreement.
At the suggestion of the Department of Justice, there is also to be organized a public committee of three to hear such complaints as may arise in connection with its operation.
It is believed that the market in California will be stabilized through the operation of this agreement, and that adequate administrative safeguards have been provided to prevent discrimination against any small enterprise.
Following upon the virtual failure of the national-purchasing agreement and the national-marketing agreement, proposals were made for the purchase by individual buyers of distress gasoline to meet temporarily the problems of excess crude production, and to bring about some adjustment between the wholesale price of gasoline and the price of crude petroleum.
The disproportion existing between these prices has proven to be one of the major elements -of instability in the marketing structure, and has been caused in large part by the presence upon the market of gasoline manufactured by small refiners located in and around the East Texas field from illegally produced crude petroleum.
This gasoline has operated as a depressing factor upon an already abnormal market.
Certain companies within the industry desired to purchase such gasoline in order to permit of its orderly liquidation, but did not wish to do so until they could be assured first that no gasoline would be produced in the future from illegally produced crude oil, and secondly, that such gasoline as was purchased would be cleared from the taint of illegality in the interests of conservation and stabilization.
The Administrator on June.23, 1934, approvèd a form of contract to be used by such buyers, drafted after conferences between the Planning and Coordination Committee and the Petroleum Administrative Board.
It is expected that this form, when generally used, will afford at least partial relief to what is at present a very distressing situation.
For a number of years the Petroleum Economics Division of the Bureau of Mines has assembled, analyzed, and published statistics on crude-oil production and stocks, as well as the production stocks and indicated demand for motor fuel and other petroleum products.
The new reports which have been inaugurated under the administration of the Petroleum Code are a weekly report of crude petroleum stocks held by companies holding 100,000 barrels or more, a monthly report showing the interregional movements of crude petroleum, as well as the distribution of shipments by pipe lines, tankers, tank cars, and trucks, and a new natural-gasoline report showing interstate movements and classes of utilization.
The weekly crude-oil stocks report and the monthly report on interregional movements of crude petroleum are published separately by the Petroleum Administrative Board.
The basis of the Petroleum Code is article III, providing means for the control of production.
Section 3 of this article provides that the production of crude oil must be balanced by consumer demand for petroleum products.
Under the terms of the code and President's Executive Order No. 6260-A, the Petroleum Administrative Board, as Federal agency, estimates at intervals the required production of crude oil and allocates it equitably among the several States, due account being taken of expected withdrawals from storage and of anticipated imports.
The required production so estimated has been allocated equitably to the several States, and upon approval by the Administrator, has been certified to the several States as the net reasonable market demand for crude petroleum therefrom.
The subdivision into pool, lease, and/or well quotas is made within the State.
In the States of Texas, Oklahoma, and Kansas, each of which is provided by State law with a regulatory commission, the approved allocations have been certified with the Texas Railroad Commission, the Oklahoma Corporation Commission, and the Kansas Corporation Commission, as the net reasonable market demand for the crude petroleum in those States.
These estimates have afforded the basis upon which allocations have later been made to individual operators of the production which they are permitted to utilize pursuant to law.
The State of Montana, by an act of its legislature, approved on December 29, 1933, an oil-conservation board to be established to have general control, regulation, and supervision of the production, transportation, and storage of crude petroleum within that State.
Similar legislation is expected to be enacted in the State of Louisiana.
In the making of production allocations, a continuous effort has been made to provide a proper balance in refining operations and as nearly a uniform rate of operation throughout the seasons as possible.
The allocation among the several States has been based principally upon the customary and established channels of trade for the movement of crude petroleum and petroleum products between producing and consuming regions.
Special studies also have been made relative to the demand for crude petroleum from newly developed producing areas.
In general, the effect on crude-oil production of operations under the Petroleum Code during the 10 months ended with June 30, 1934, has been a more equitable distribution of output among the several States than was possible of achievement under conditions which existed prior to the effective date of the Petroleum Code.
The statistical position of the refining branch of the industry was essentially unbalanced, and it became evident that a lack of normal relationship between refinery gasoline prices and field prices for crude petroleum was rendering impossible the profitable operation of petroleum refineries, particularly the nonintegrated and semi-integrated refineries which buy all or a major portion of their crude petroleum supplies at the posted field prices.
The Board, therefore, recommended to the Administrator certain provisions designed to control the operations of refineries, both with respect to stocks on hand and production of gasoline.
An amendment to the code was thereupon submitted to the industry, a public hearing was held, and after conferences subsequent thereto, an amended article IV was submitted to the Petroleum Administrator, which amended article received the unaminous endorsement of all affected parties within the industry.
This amended article, approved on April 24, 1934, and actually effective June 1, 1934, provides for a joint governmental and industrial organization to determine the proper inventories of gasoline for each district and the production of gasoline in each district necessary to meet the demand therefor.
The provision relating to orderly development of new pools is in its implications one of the most far-reaching provisions in the code, since it establishes a basis upon which any petroleum product may be properly conserved and the wastage incident to development in recent years eliminated.
Plans for the orderly development of new petroleum pools, submitted in compliance with section 7 of article III of the Code of Fair Competition for the Petroleum Industry, totaled 336 as of June 30, 1934.
Of this number, 239, or approximately 71 percent, have been approved by the Petroleum Administrator.
Of the 336 plans submitted, 18 were determined to be not new pools as defined by the newpool regulations.
In approving the development plans, the problem of well spacing was given careful consideration.
Wider well spacing than has hitherto been customary was one of the principal objectives, as a most effective.
The Petroleum Administrator on December 20, 1933, authorized a study of the economic recovery cost of crude petroleum covering the 3 calendar years 1931, 1932, and 1933.
The Administrator's order directed operators producing in excess of 5,000 barrels per annum in the eastern and Rocky Mountain areas, and 10,000 barrels per annum in all other States, to furnish the Petroleum Administrative Board the necessary data from which summaries could be made showing costs and other related information by States and pools within each State.
Final analyses are now being made, and the report on the costs of production will be made public shortly.
The marketing division of the Board has worked constantly with the marketing subcommittee of the planning and coordination committee in an endeavor both to make article V, dealing with marketing, comprehensible and to adjust such of those provisions as appear to be working undue hardship.
Its activities in this regard are set forth in detail below.
The marketing division has also aided in the collection of certain statistical data essential to obtain a proper picture of the costs of marketing, and has cooperated in the consideration of the various stabilization plans which have been proposed.
A major problem was presented to the Board early in its existence in the necessity under rule 19 of taking some action with reference to lease and agency, lease and license agreements, and other forms of exclusive dealing contracts.
Agreements of this character provide the refiner or distributor of gasoline with a controlled outlet whereby he can maintain an assured portion of the market.
In consequence, they tend to discriminate against the products of independent marketers and possibly are in contravention of the fundamental provisions of the National Industrial Recovery Act.
The national marketing agreement, referred to elsewhere in this report, provided for the eventual liquidation of all such agreements.
With the failure of the national marketing agreement, the Board conducted an independent study of this matter, and requested the Planning and Coordination Committee to forward a recommendation for a modification of the code substantially similar to that contained in the national marketing agreement.
Action upon this recommendation is expected shortly.
Overproduction of crude oil, excessive refining capacity, and excessive production at refineries has produced surplus and distress stocks of gasoline which have had a serious, depressing effect upon the market.
The overexpansion of retail outlets by reducing the gallonage per station increases unit costs and leads to price cutting to obtain individual volumes.
With less gasoline consumed today than in 1929, but with perhaps twice as many stations, and with surplus stocks, the stabilization of markets to preserve small enterprises and to permit the paying of code wages and maintenance of code hours has proved essential.
The conflict between the distributors selling at the regular price and those selling with a cut-price policy has been the most frequent immediate causes for price wars.
Because of the complexities of the factors involved and the clash of policy, it has not been possible to determine a "right solution" for such conflicts.
Therefore, the Petroleum Administrative Board has encouraged negotiations and discussions between all the parties involved in a price war on an experimental basis in an attempt to work out a technic for stabilizing markets.
There is no question but that some action must be taken to curb overexpansion of retail outlets.
It is estimated that there are now approximately 350,000 service stations in the country.
This number is far in excess of the number required to serve the consuming public.
This total has been reached in recent years, and represents a large increase, due partly to the marketing policies of the large refiners and partly to the pressure for outlets for production from new pools.
The increase in stations has greatly diluted the gallonage throughout for each outlet with a twofold result: Overhead costs have greatly increased, and an oversensitive market structure has been created since the slightest decrease in volume in individual outlets induoes market breaks, which creates vicious price wars.
It is obvious that any program directed toward the solution of the evils with which the industry is faced must include an equitable solution of this problem.
It was early recognized that the success of the administration of the code depended upon vigorous enforcement of the production allocations and of the provisions regulating marketing practices.
The program for enforcement involves complex and fundamental questions in constitutional law, combined with problems of proof of the interstate character of the petroleum industry.
Members of the staff of the Board, trained in the legal problems involved, were designated as special assistants to the Attorney General, to cooperate with the United States attorneys in litigation involving the Petroleum Code and the regulations promulgated under section 9 (c) of the National Industrial Recovery Act.
Representatives of the Board were usually in charge of the cases and prepared the briefs and argued the cases.
In June, in accordance with the general policy established by the Department of Justice, the responsibility for litigation was undertaken by that Department.
Hereafter, cases will be conducted by the United States attorneys.
The legal staff of the Board stands ready to assist local United States attorneys upon call in preparing and prosecuting cases.
The first attempt to enjoin the enforcement of regulations promulgated under section 9 (c) was defeated in the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia in Southport Petroleum Co. v. Ickes.
In Panama Refining Co. v. Ryan an injunction was obtained from Judge Bryant in the eastern district of Texas, against the enforcement of the regulations promulgated under section 9 (c) of the National Industrial Recovery Act.
In Amazon Petroleum Co. v. Ryan a threejudge Federal court found that the orders of the Texas Railroad Commission limiting the production of oil in the exercise of its statutory power to prevent waste were not void on the theory that they were dictated by the Federal Oil Administrator.
The court held it had no jurisdiction over Federal questions involved and those aspects of the case were assigned to the Federal district judge, Judge Bryant, who promptly issued an injunction against the enforcement of the production provisions δf the code and the regulations under 9 (c).
Upon appeal of the Panama and Amazon cases to the circuit court of appeals, Judge Bryant was reversed by a unanimous court, which held the regulations under section 9 (c) valid and found it not necessary to pass upon the constitutionality of the production sections of the code in that case.
The cases have been appealed to the United States Supreme Court.
Altogether, 22 cases have been instituted to enforce the oil-administration program; 6 of them have dealt with the control of production, 4 also involving the validity of regulations issued under section 9 (c) of the Recovery Act.
Three cases involve labor provisions of the code; 14 involve various rules of the marketing section of the code.
Until settlement reached the borders of the arid region, public land.
But when the wave of settlement reached the arid zone pioneers had to deal with new conditions and were confronted with new problems.
Homes and civilization were limited not by land but by water.
To make that water available required a new type of engineering knowledge and experience, while to make homes permanent and secure, codes of water laws had to be formulated and put into operation.
Irrigable land became therefore the new frontier and is so today.
Private and district enterprises were able to build the simple channels which carry water to the valleys bordering streams, but when it became necessary to divert and control rivers and when storage of floods became a fundamental requirement, some agency with greater resources and with a continuity of policy which would reach beyond the limits of a single State was essential.
Out of this need the reclamation fund and the Bureau of Reclamation were established.
Recently the opinion has prevailed in some sections that further construction of irrigation works is uneconomic and injurious.
It arose out of an exaggerated conception of the area irrigated under Federal works, which is less than 1 percent of the total farmed area in the United States.
Critics of irrigation have not realized how necessary the works being built are to the prosperity of the cities and towns and the industries located in that region.
They do not understand the plight of valleys menaced with water shortages.
If they did they would join the West in energetically urging the building of storage reservoirs.
It required the great drought to show to the Nation the service which the reservoirs already completed is rendering and the need for early completion of those under way.
Already, early in midsummer, range stockmen are buying alfalfa as it is cut on the irrigated fields to save their flocks and herds from starvation.
What the country where this is happening would be like if the lands that are now green and productive were not being irrigated can be understood only by those who have seen it.
Although it is only June the bed of the Rio Grande is dry.
If the city of El Paso and the irrigated country around had to depend on the unregulated flow of that river this would be a year of calamity to 165,000 people.
Fortunately the Elephant Butte Dam and Reservoir were built by the Reclamation Bureau and the stored water is supplying the needs of those people.
It not only enables that project to help feed the people in the surrounding country but saves the city of El Paso from an enforced exodus.
Twice in the last 5 years the storage at American Falls on the Snake River has saved crops worth the cost of the reservoir, and this year the stored water will be worth the value of the farms and fields which it supplies with moisture.
The Federal reclamation projects in the valleys of the North Platte, Klamath, Pecos, Cheyenne, Yellowstone, and Big Horn rivers will be called upon to supply the local needs for both human and livestock consumption.
They will save towns and counties from depopulation and save livestock, which will be sorely needed next year.
The reservoirs that are furnishing water this year to the Yakima, Okanogan, Orland, and Boise projects have enabled fruits and vegetables to be grown that are being shipped to widely separated areas in the arid region and to the Central States which have no crops this year.
The Echo Reservoir in Utah, built against the protests of those who see in irrigation nothing but a contribution to the surplus, is saving the vegctable canning industry of Utah and will do much to feed the surrounding country this winter.
The beet sugar industry of the arid region is one of the most valuable features of its agriculture.
Millions of dollars are invested in factories.
Many thousands of workers are employed.
The beets required to supply these factories are being grown by water stored in the reservoirs on the North Platte, the Belle Fourche, Minidoka, Strawberry Valley, Shoshone, and Milk River projects.
The Salt River and Newlands projects are the financial mainstays of the States of Arizona and Nevada.
Both States need more irrigation to furnish winter feed for range livestock and to meet the local food requirements of their cities and towns.
It is no exaggeration to say that no greater contribution could be made to the stability of both States than to complete the reservoirs being constructed on the Colorado, Humboldt, and Truckee Rivers.
The importance of continuing the program of construction now under way is most strikingly shown by the situation on the Colorado River on which Boulder Dam is being built.
If it had been completed 2 years ago the irrigated Southwest would not have known there was a drought.
Because it is not conpleted and because water could not be stored this season 70,000 people in the Imperial Valley are faced with appalling disaster.
They lack water for irrigation, for watering livestock, and for domestic purposes.
It is too early to fix the limit of loss but it will be equivalent to a good part of the cost of the dam.
If Boulder Dam were not assured there would be a panic in the Southwest.
The drought is creating a demand for irrigated areas that has been absent for the past 10 years.
It gives a new significance and importance to the irrigated farms now available and to the few localities where additions can be made to the irrigated area.
Furthermore, where farmers are transferred from submarginal dry areas to farms under irrigation, for every acre of irrigated land that they cultivate two or more acres of dry land will go out of production and the net result will be the elimination of areas that are now adding to the troublesome agricultural surplus, especially wheat, and increase in the production of crops needed locally.
The time has come for an appraisal of the relation of irrigated agriculture to the civilization and future well-being of the western third of the country.
Each irrigated area brings tangible money benefits to many others besides those who live on the lands irrigated.
Cities are created and sustained.
Phoenix, Ariz., is as much a creation of irrigation as are the citrus groves and alfalfa fields that surround it.
These irrigated oases lessen the risk and increase the income of the stockmen of the range country for miles around.
They create taxable valuations and incomes that help support city, county, State, and Federal Governments.
Irrigation communities are a market for manufacturers and merchants in remote industrial centers.
No true economic balance sheet of any project can be made without including these indirect benefits which should be considered but have been overlooked in the past.
An economic survey of a few typical reclamation projects is recommended.
Such a survey should be taken to determine the economic condition of the irrigators who have entered into contracts with the United States to repay construction costs.
It should aim to appraise the agricultural opportunities and possibilities of the project and the extent to which they are being utilized.
It should collect data as to the extent to which contract payments are being made, and when not being made, the reasons therefor.
Consideration should be given as to whether the plan of repayment is fair to the irrigators and also to the agriculture outside of these projects and if there are objections they should be stated and modifications proposed.
This survey and appraisal of existing projects will help to inform the whole country regarding the achievements or defeats of our reclamation policy and as to what, if any, modification should be made in the present reclamation law.
It should include a study of the relations of irrigation and power as a part of the reclamation policy.
The past 15 years have shown the importance of power development as an adjunct to irrigation enterprises, but to the present time no definite policy has been inaugurated regarding the ownership of these power plants, the plan of operation, and the disposition of their profits.
The Bureau believes they should be built and operated as permanent Government works and that the profits after the works have been paid for, should go into the reclamation revolving fund to be used in building additional projects.
If this plan is to be followed legislation is needed.
With $103,535,000 allotted by the Public Works Administration for continuation of work on existing projects and starting work on new projects, construction activities took on a new impetus and the Bureau had more to do than at any time in its history.
It was necessary to increase the Denver office working force from 250 to 700 to handle this extensive program and make necessary studies and investigations, design the various structures, and prepare plans and specifications for bidding.
In addition our engineers did all the design and specification work for the Tennessee Valley Authority in connection with the Norris and Joe Wheeler Dans, and also the Caballo Dam on the Rio Grande for the International Boundary Commission.
On the Vale project in eastern Oregon, with $1,000,000 available, a contract was let in February 1933 to Hinman Brothers, Denver, Colo., for $496,286.10 to build the Agericy Valley Dam and Reservoir on North Fork of Malheur River near Beulah.
The dam is a moistened and rolled embankment of clay, sand, and gravel, with a maximum height of 90 feet.
The reservoir will supply needed additional storage for the project lands.
The first work undertaken on the $22,700,000 Casper-Alcova project, on the North Platte River near Casper, Wyo., was the diversion and outlet tunnel at the site of the Alcova diversion dam.
The Lawlor-Woodward Co. of Seattle, Wash., has the contract at a price of $269,905 and on June 30 the work was 60 percent completed.
In March of this year contracts were let for building the first 3½ miles of the Casper Canal extending northeasterly from the Alcova Dam site.
The contractors and contract prices are as follows: Utah Construction Co., Ogden, Utah, schedule 1, $225,990; J. A. Terteling & Sons,.
Spokane, Wash., schedule 2, $89,865; Edward Peterson, Omaha, Nebr., schedule 3, $293,465.
A service road on the west side of the North Platte River, 3 miles in length, was built from a point on the county road 36 miles northeast of Parco to the Seminoe dam site.
Government forces constructed a 66-mile transmission line from Casper to the Alcova and Seminoe Dam sites and two substations.
An allotment of $5,000,000 was made available for continuing construction on the Owyhee project in Oregon-Idaho, and in November 1933, J. A. Terteling & Sons, Spokane, Wash., received a contract for building 30 miles of the North Canal and also the Mitchell Butte lateral, all in the Mitchell Butte division, at a price of $492,075.75.
Structures were let under a separate contract to Barnard-Curtiss Co. of Minneapolis, Minn., for $154,290.
The Morrison-Knudsen Co., Boise, Idaho, was awarded a contract for $162,518.50 for constructing a 10-foot 6-inch diameter plate-steel siphon across Snivly Creek and a 9-foot diameter siphon across the Owyhee River on the North Canal.
The first of the four Salt Lake Basin projects in Utah, financed with P.W.A. funds, to be undertaken was the Hyrum project near Logan.
In January 1934 J. A. Terteling & Sons of Spokane, Wash., obtained a contract for building the Hyrum Dam and Reservoir on Little Bear River at a price of $337,211.
The reservoir will have a gross capacity of 18,000 acre-feet and net capacity of 14,000 acre-feet above the outlet for project canals.
The dam is an earth-fill structure with a maximum height of 90 feet.
The first work on the $63,000,000 Columbia Basin project in Washington, for which $15,000,000 was made available, was excavation of 2,040,000 cubic yards of overburden at the Grand Coulee Dam site.
David H. Ryan, of San Diego, Calif., was awarded the contract in December 1933 for $534,500 and completed it in June.
The Western Construction Co., of Seattle, Wash., began work in March on concrete piers for the Columbia River bridge, the contract price being $180,- 177.40.
On May 17 bids were opened for building the United States Construction Railroad from Odair on the Northern Pacific to the dam site, a distance of about 30 miles.
Contract was awarded July 18 to David H. Ryan, of San Diego, Calif., with a bid of $235,570.
The Crick & Kuney Co., of Spokane, was awarded a contract on June 4 for grading and structures for highway and construction railroad in the coulee at their bid of $220,676.50.
Bids were opened on June 18 for construction of the Grand Coulee Dam and power plant.
The low bid of $29,339,301.50 was submitted by Silas Mason Co., New York City; Walsh Construction Co., Davenport, Iowa; and Atkinson-Kier Co., San Francisco, Calif., acting jointly.
Contract was awarded July 13.
Street grading in the Government camp site was started and at the end of the year preparations were being made to advertise for construction of water and sewer systems and residences.
An allotment of $600,000 was made for the Sun River project in Montana to build additional laterals and drains.
The first contract was awarded in January 1934 for earthwork and structures for open drains in the Greenfields division to the Morrison-Knudsen Co., of Boise, Idaho, for $72,105.
Construction of open drains on the Yuma project in Arizona and laterals on the Milk River project in Montana was çontinued.
On the Elephant Butte division of the Rio Grande project, New Mexico-Texas, construction of drains and laterals was in progress.
With an allotment of $100,000 reconstruction of canals and structures was carried on in the Stanfield irrigation district in Oregon.
Similar work was also in progress in the Bitter Root irrigation district near Hamilton, Mont.
During the year just closed the Bureau in its construction activities built 89 miles of canals and drains; 37 tunnels with a total length of 6,926 feet; 1,029 canal structures, 70 bridges, and 265 culverts; and laid 2,723,165 feet, or 516 miles, of pipe.
There were excavated 7,958,165 cubic yards of earth and rock, making the total to date 326,962,284 cubic yards.
The Bureau used 2,666,972 barrels of cement and placed 2,403,346 cubic yards of concrete.
The area irrigated in 1933 with water from Government works was 2,828,787 acres,.
The area cropped was 2,797,815 acres, an increase of 22,535 acres.
The total value of crops was $84,191,733, an increase of $34,033,352 compared with 1932, and of $10,231,356 compared with 1931.
This increase in crop values was due largely to increased prices received for crops.
During the period 1906, when water was first available, to and including 1933, the cumulative value of crops grown on land irrigated from Government works amounted to $1,970,239,991.
Construction payments in cash and credits from power and other sources received during the fiscal year 1934 were $481,192.26, a decrease of $406,268.42 compared with the previous year.
Payments for operation and maintenance were $1,122,473.99, a decrease of $15,929.20 compared with the previous year.
Total payments amounted to $1,603,666.25 compared with $2,025,863.87 in 1932, a decrease of $422,197.62.
Income to the reclamation fund from all sources during the fiscal year was $4,424,- 862.69, or $263,392.88 less than for the previous year.
The operation expense for the year was $1,108,950.07, a decrease from the previous year of $18,444.33.
Excess of operation and maintenance receipts over expense for the period amounted to $13,523.92 compared with an excess of receipts over expense of $11,008.79 for the previous year.
Construction work was carried on with funds provided under the National Industrial Recovery Act.
A total of $103,535,000 was allotted to the Bureau.
Operation and maintenance of the irrigation, drainage, and power systems was carried with direct appropriatiqns from the reclamation fund, money advanced by the water users, organizations, and revenues from power operations.
The act of March 27, 1934, extended the provisions of previous acts granting temporary relief to water users on irrigation projects, and construction charges coming due for the year 1934 were not required to be paid.
This explains the reason for decreased payments as given under this heading.
On June 12, 1934, December 27, 1933, and January 11, 1934, respectively, adjustment contracts under the act of Congress of May 25, 1926 (44 Stat. 636), were made with the Grandview irrigation district, Yakima project; the Langell Valley irrigation district, Klamath project; and the Horsefly irrigation district, Klamath project.
During the fiscal year adjustment arrangements under the moratorium acts were made on all of the projects where construction charge installments would otherwise have been collectible.
In line with the policy of the Administration to limit the further development of productive areas, only one acreage of consequence was opened to entry during the past fiscal year.
On the Kittitas division of the Yakima project, Wash., 25 farm units were thrown open on May 1, 1934, involving a total irrigable area of 1,843 acres.
Owing to the prevailing drought conditions the demand for irrigated farms showed a marked increase and 87 formal filings were made for the small number of units included in the Kittitas opening.
Of the 78 who appeared before the examining board 62 were residents of the State of Washington, the remaining applicants coming from nearby States.
By July 5 all units, with the exception of three on which appeals were pending, had been awarded.
On the projects for the construction of which the Public Works Administration has allotted funds, irrigation development which would bring into cultivation appreciable additional areas is not included in the authorization.
An allotment of $4,000,000 was made by the Public Works Administration for this project, of which $500,000 was for making investigations and estimates of cost of a project comprising an area of land of about 85,000 acres, the feasibility of which depends upon the quantity of water that can be depended upon for irrigation.
Studies have been under way to determine this important matter as well as investigations to determine feasible dam sites for the storage of water on the Verde River.
All of this work was still in progress at the close of the fiscal year and a conclusion had not been reached as to the feasibility of the project.
Agricultural conditions showed some improvement over last year.
Crop returns showed a gain of $3,000,000 (approximately 30 percent) over the very low figure of 1931-32, which still left the crop receipts less than half the 1929 figure.
The increases were in the major acreage crops, such as alfalfa, cotton, and grain, which were $4,000,000 greater than in 1931–32, but a drop of $1,000,000, mainly in lettuce, reduced the net gain to approximately $3,000,000.
It is anticipated there will be a further improvement during 1934.
Restricted water supply, unfortunately, will prevent many farmers from taking advantage of the apparently favorable outlook for lettuce and other cash crops, which will be comparatively free from competition of large nearby areas whose crops cannot be depended on because of the drought.
The rapidly decreasing water stored in the four project reservoirs, owing to the entire failure of the winter and spring run-off and continued absence of rain, has necessitated drastic restriction in water apportionment and maximum operation of all pumps for utilizing underground water.
Unless increased by summer rains, the stored water at the end of the irrigation year, September 30, 1934, will be reduced to around 100,000 acre-feet.
The year 1933-34 is among the driest of record in 46 years.
In addition to the restricted irrigation supply the low head in the reservoirs on June 30 was at a point where the project hydroelectric plants were barely able to handle peak loads.
This condition exists in spite of the reduction in power load caused by the almost complete cessation of mining operations which consumed a large part of the system output of electric energy.
Economic conditions on the project improved during the year, to which the several relief acts passed by Congress, extending construction repayments, and a rigid curtailment of operation and maintenance expenses were the principal contributing factors.
The Yuma County Water Users' Association has paid in full all operation and maintenance charges due the Government during 1934 and advanced a substantial payment on the charges due in 1935.
The project has only one bank, making few, if any, farm loans, so that water users must rely mainly on Government loan agencies for financial assistance.
The Cotton Finance Corporation has made loans for financing both the 1933 and 1934 cotton crops.
Other cotton growers were aided through the Crop Production Credit Corporation.
The Farm Bureau Marketing Association, a cooperative handling mainly alfalfa hay and seed, completed a successful year by retiring all indebtedness with ban' credit established for financing 1934 operations.
Yuma Mesa.
There was no new development on the Mesa unit, and although prices for citrus products were the same, returns were less during 1933 than for the preceding year because of materially reduced yields.
Prevailing prices were $0.01 and $0.0125 per pound.
The Yuma Mesa Citrus Growers' Association marketed the crops.
The only construction work in progress was confined to extensions to the drainage system and the rebuilding of about 1,100 feet of levee which was lost in the 1921 flood.
Construction in Black Canyon was in progress on practically all the major features of Boulder Dam, power plant, and appurtenant works.
The contractor, Six Companies, Inc., continued to prosecute the work in an efficient and rapid manner.
The peak of employment occurred on June 30, when 5,218 employees were listed on the pay rolls of the Bureau of Reclamation and project contractors.
The average number of men employed in construction was highest in May, when 4,648 were working for the Government and contractors, and the gross pay roll was $743,581.77.
The Public Works Administration made an allotment of $38,000,000 for continuing construction on this project.
Excavations in the river channel for the dam foundation were completed and the first concrete placed in the dam on June 6, 1933.
Seven months after starting, a million yards had been placed; three and a half months later half of the concrete for the structure had been poured; and at the end of the fiscal year the volume of concrete im the dam amounted to 2,135,030 cubic yards, raising the structure to a height of 435 feet above bedrock.
The record concrete pour for 1 day occurred on March 20, when 8,904 cubic yards were deposited in the dam, and another 1,558 cubic yards placed in other structures.
Cooling was started on August 8 and was completed to elevation 745 on June 30, 1934.
Grouting of contraction joints was commenced on May 24 and finished to elevation 625.
The slot was poured to elevation 745.
The channels, weirs, and piers of the spillways were practically completed, and lining of the inclined tunnels was in progress at the end of the year.
The four drum gates were installed for the Arizona spillways and their erection was progressing for the Nevada structure.
Concrete was poured in all intake towers, the four lower gates were installed, and erection was started in May for the upper gates in the Nevada downstream tower.
At the end of the fiscal year the lowest tower was 130 feet above its base and the highest, 172 feet.
Excavations were practically completed for all of the 92 tunnels and 13 shafts that were driven for project construction.
The two 37-foot diameter penstock-header tunnels and the 18-foot inclined penstocks were lined with concrete, and lining was nearly finished for the horizontal penstocks.
The canyon wall valvehouses, construction adits, and connecting roads were excavated.
The outlet pipes of 8½-feet diameter were installed in the Arizona tunnels and were placed in position ready for erection in the Nevada tunnels.
The first concrete was poured for the powerhouse wings in January, and at the end of the fiscal year concreting was in progress for the entire lengths of both wings.
Six Companies, Inc., has made arrangements to haul the plate steel pipe from the fabrication plant of the Babcock & Wilcox Co. to the 150-ton Government cableway.
The Babcock & Wilcox Co. gradually increased production of fabricated pipe until in June, 1,582 tons of pipe were completed or at an average rate of 52.7 tons per day.
The penstock header and penstock tunnels were rapidly being made ready for pipe installation, and the first of the 30-foot sections are expected to be shipped to the tunnels in July 1934.
A great amount of interest was displayed in construction activities, the visitors checked at the reservation gate numbering 191,788 for the year.
A monthly peak of 30,371 occurred in March and a weekend peak of 5,461 on March 24-25.
The Boulder Dam Hotel was completed in Boulder City in December, and several hotels were available in Las Vegas, but on many week-ends the two towns were hard pressed to accommodate their guests.
The bureau of power and light of the city of Los Angeles commenced construction of the world's largest transmission line, to carry Boulder Dam power to Los Angeles, at line voltage of 275,000.
Items of interest are its length of 270 miles, the steel towers 109 and 144 feet in height, and the 1,626 miles of hollow core copper tube, 1.4 inches in outside diameter.
The construction of the All-American Canal was authorized by the Boulder Canyon Project Act of December 21, 1928.
An allotment of $6,000,000 for this project was made by the Public Works Administration in November 1933, but because of legal requirements connected with the execution of a repayment contract, the funds were not available until March 20, 1934.
Work was promptly started and drawings and specifications prepared and bids received June 7.
Contract for earthwork covering schedules 1 to 6, inclusive, was awarded to W. E. Callahan Construction Co., St. Louis, Mo., and Gunther & Shirley, Dallas, Tex., the amount of their bid being $4,859,587.
Schedule 7 covering rock excavation was awarded to Griffith & Co., Los Angeles, at a bid of $226,800.
These contracts cover 30.6 miles of earthwork on the All-American Canal from a point opposite Laguna Dam through the sand hills arca to the site of the proposed bifurcation works for the Coachella Canal.
The capacity of this portion of the canal varies from 15,155 to 10,155 cubic feet per second.
The contract dated December 1, 1932 with the Imperial Irrigation District for construction of the All-American Canal was contested by the Coachella County Water District which desired a separate contract with the United States instead of having to become part of the Imperial Irrigation District.
The Imperial District contract was validated by the court on July 3, 1933.
An appeal was carried to the Supreme Court, but was dismissed in February 1934, by the Coachella Valley County Water District after this district had settled its controversy with the Imperial Irrigation District.
A contract for construction of capacity for its use in the All-American Canal was negotiated with the Coachella District and submitted to the Department for approval.
A contract was also negotiated and approved as to form by the Department on May 16, 1934 with the city of San Diego for provision of capacity in the All-American Canal for use by the city.
A slight improvement was noticeable in the economic condition of the project owing to the general advance over prices received for farm products the preceding year.
Crop yields, with the exception of oranges, were uniformly satisfactory.
Because of the unprecedented cold temperatures of December 1932, there was practically no production of citrus fruits in 1933.
At the end of the fiscal year, however, the prospects for a good crop had materially brightened.
Actual collections of reclamation charges were, on account of the deferment of the payment of construction charges under the act of April 1, 1932, rather light, aggregating $32,330.77 as against $53,359.46 during the fiscal year 1933.
Loans obtained from the Federal Farm Loan Bank of Berkeley, Calif., were of a very decided assistance to the water users in enabling them to pay their operation and maintenance charges.
The crop value of $29.33 an acre for 1933, showed an increase of $5.50 over that of the preceding year.
Reduction in available funds prevented the carrying forward of the concrete lining program on laterals subject to exccssive loss of water and high maintenance cost.
During the 1933 season 470 farms were irrigated with an average crop value per acre of $21.75 as compared with $16.26 for the previous season.
Charges for water were reduced, by means of drastic economies and of lower material and labor costs, from $3.50 for 4 acre-feet in 1932 to $1.30.
The beet sugar factory at Grand Junction, which had been idle for several years, operated during the season of 1933–34.
The Colorado Potato & Bean Growers Associations operated successfully during the year and handled a large part of these crops for project farmers.
Crop financing was largely taken care of by Federal agencies and numerous land loans were made in the vicinity of the project by the Federal Land Bank.
Exclusive of a slight amount of work to complete the Grand Valley power plant no construction work was done on the project during the fiscal year.
In June 1934, preparations were being made to undertake a limited amount of work on drainage extensions from operation and maintenance funds.
During the 1933 irrigation season 1,589 farms were irrigated, 776 being farmed by owners and 813 by tenants.
The average crop value of $22.03 per acre was approximately double that of 1932.
The beet sugar factory at Delta, Colo., handled all beets raised on the project.
The Colorado Potato Growers Association, the principal marketing organization, handled potatoes and onions chiefly.
A number of poultry and hog associations, as well as cooperative oil and service stations, continued to do business as successfully as could be expected under existing econonic conditions.
The Uncompahgre Valley Water Users' Association assumed control of the operation and maintenance of the project on January 1, 1932.
No construction work was in progress.
Recent legislation granting a moratorium for the construction charges has postponed the starting of the drainage program.
The Public Works Administration allotted to the project $2,725,000, of which $2,400,000 was allocated to the building of the Taylor Park Dam and additional concrete lining in the Gunnison Tunnel and $325,000 to the rehabilitation of existing structures on the project.
Taylor Park Reservoir will provide a necessary supplemental water supply for the project.
Low prices for farm products prevailed in 1933.
The prospectsfor 1934 have improved, but with some reduction in yields because of a short water supply.
Cooperative buying and selling organizations are active and still growing in the dairy, poultry, and fruit business and numerous other lines.
No construction is in progress, although a small amount of drainage in the Black Canyon and Boise-Kuna districts is conteinplated.
An early beginning on repairs to the Arrowrock Dam is also planned.
Operation and maintenance of the reserved works (2 storage dams, 2 diversion dams, 2 power plants, and 1 pumping plant) is being continued by Government forces, while the maintenance of the canal system and distribution of water have been turned over to the water users.
Needs for the future consist mainly of a supplemental supply of water for the Arrowrock division, the year of 1934 being a season of 60 percent supply.
Public interest centers around the scheme to divert water to the Boise River from the Salmon River watershed.
The operation of the King Hill project has been continued by officials of the King Hill Irrigation District.
The cropped area for the season of 1933 was approximately 7,300 acres, with an average value per acre of $16.85, an increase of more than $6 from the season of 1932.
The project is making a slow recovery from the financial depression with prospects for increased revenues for 1934, resulting from better prices for farm products.
There were 1,528 farms irrigated on the gravity division last year, and 862 on the south side pumping division.
The total crop value the past year averaged $29.40 compared with $14.50 in 1932.
As a result there has been a general improvement in financial conditions on the project.
The snowfall on the Snake River drainage area during the winter of 1933-34 was extremely light, so that both Jackson Lake and American Falls Reservoirs failed to fill this year.
By the end of June, about 70 percent of the project's total stored supply had been exhausted.
At Jackson Lake clearing of timber around the reservoir was prosecuted by several Civilian Conservation Corps camps.
The enlargement program of the south side pumping division was continued throughout the year and additional pumps were installed.
About 3 miles of drains also were built on the pumping division.
On the Gooding division, some 89 small lateral structures were built by contract, and 3 main canal checks and 1 flume across the canal were constructed by Government forces.
Future needs of the project include provision for an additional water supply.
It appears advisable to complete the enlargement of canals and to increase pumping capacity on the south side pumping division.
A form of contract between the United States and the Idaho Power Co., providing a means of conserving winter water for storage at American Falls Reservoir, was under consideration.
The United States in 1930 assisted this project in refinancing its bonded and warrant indebtedness and in making some necessary improvements on the canal system.
The work was continued during the past fiscal year under the supervision of the Bureau of Reclamation and $90,000 was advanced to the project for this purpose.
There is a balance of $30,000 to be advanced early in the next fiscal year, which will complete the total of $250,000 authorized by Congress for the rehabilitation of the project.
The area under cultivation remains approximately 15,000 acres, with an average crop value of $15.70 for the season of 1933 and prospects for a greater improvement in 1934.
During the 1933 irrigation season 651 farms were irrigated, 310 operated by owners and 341 by tenants.
The average crop value per acre was $30.14.
Sugar beets remained the principal cash crop with an average yield of 14.86 tons per acre.
Practically all the lambs and wool grown on the project are marketed through the Wool Growers Association.
During the early part of 1933 improvements were made in the pumping plant from the main to the highline canal which resulted in an increased discharge of about 6 cubic feet per second.
The construction of a reservoir at Anita would materially reduce the cost of water delivery to the Fly Creek division as well as improve the service.
A low rock and brush dam in the Yellowstone River below the main canal headgates has been necessary for several years in order to operate the canal at full capacity during July and August.
Design of a permanent reinforced concrete structure to replace the present temporary structure has been made and construction work will be started in the near future.
The season of 1933 was unusually hot and dry, but crop yields were much above the average and the upward trend of prices increased the average value of crops from $12.80 in 1932 to $19.60.
Sugar beet acreage had increased to more than 10,000 acres which, for the first time in the history of the Chinook factory, provided for a full capacity campaign.
Some additional property sales were completed as a result of which dry land farmcrs took land under the canals.
Plans were formulated for the establishment of a subsistence homestead colony on the Malta division to comprise an area of about 2,500 acres of land.
There was an improvement in the payment of operation charges during the year and sufficient funds were available for the continued operation of all canal systems, with some curtailment necessary on the Glasgow division in order to balance costs and funds available.
An allotment of $65,000 was made for continuing construction work on the project, comprising principally the replacement of wood structures and improvements on the St. Mary Canal.
An allotment of $2,000,000 was made for the construction of a storage dam and reservoir on Milk River.
Investigations have been made and a feasible dam site selected.
At the close of the year a repayment contract was being negotiated.
Conditions on the project have continued to improve with a further reduction in the wheat acreage and an increase in crops bctter adapted to irrigated farming, particularly an area of about 4,000 acres of seed peas.
Interest in sugar-beet culture with prospects of a gradual increase in acreage is being shown.
Many inquiries have been received asking for information about farms that may be available for entry or for sale from farmers living on adjacent dry-land areas.
Opportunities will be very limited until lateral extension work now under way has been completed.
An allotment of $600,000 was made in 1933 which is being used for further extensions to the drainage system and the extension of the lateral system to bring under irrigation lands located in the easterly end of the Greenfields division and the Mill Coulee division.
Contract for the construction of drains was awarded to Morrison-Knudsen Co., of Boise, Idaho, and for canals and structures to Lease & Leigland, of Great Falls, Mont.
The canal systems have been operated by the officials on the Fort Shaw and Greenfields irrigation districts.
Conditions on tbe project continued to improve during 1933, with an average crop production of $30.40 per acre, which was $9 more than in 1932.
The irrigated area of 33,900 acres had also increased about 8 percent.
Notwithstanding improved conditions the farmers have found it difficult to meet their financial obligations and every effort is being made to reduce operation and maintenance costs.
The canal system is under the supervision of the joint board representing the irrigation districts in the two States.
The existing moratorium has relieved the farmers from the payment of construction charges.
Owing to depressed agricultural conditions very little settlement work has been carried on.
The irrigation districts have succeeded in getting buyers for all of the farms taken over for nonpayment of taxes which have been sold on contract for deed with small down payments.
Drought conditions have caused a demand for farms to rent, greatly in excess of the supply of those having suitable buildings.
The run-off of the North Platte River at Pathfinder for 1933 was below normal and, although the irrigation supply was ample, the balance remaining in storage was only 105,000 acre-feet.
The present water-year has been the driest of record in nearly 40 years, the run-off being less than 30 percent of normal, which is 1,400,000 acre-feet.
About one-half of the available supply had been used previous to June 30, 1934, and while crops were generally in satisfactory condition on that date rain will be necessary during the balance of the season to insure beet and late potato yields and to prevent extensive damage to alfalfa fields.
The economic condition of the project has shown substantial improvement during recent months.
Irrigation district organizations have made drastic reductions in wages and other expenditures.
The area reported cropped in 1933 was 182,500 acres with an average value per acre of $26.08.
Winter feeding of cattle was on a normal scale for 1933-34 but spring sales were unprofitable.
About 130,000 head of sheep were fed and showed a reasonable profit.
Cooperative marketing of turkeys was continued on an increasing scale and a cooperative dairy products association continued in operation.
Construction during the fiscal year 1934 comprised completion of a new transmission line on the north side of the river between the Lingle plant to the city of Mitchell via the towns of Torrington and Morrill.
The reserved works of the project, comprising Pathfinder and Guernsey Reservoirs, Whalen Diversion Dam, and the power system, were operated and maintained by the Bureau.
The project canal, lateral, and drainage systems were operated and maintained by the project irrigation districts.
Wholesale rates for electrical energy have been reduced approximately 15 percent, the base rate being $1.50 per kilowatt per month, demand charge and an energy charge ranging from $0.015 to $0.0055 per kilowatt-hour, based on quantity used.
An allotment of $2,000,000 was made by the Public Works Administration for the construction of a storage reservoir on the Lower Humboldt River to provide a supplemental water supply for the irrigable lands in the vicinity of Lovelock.
Surveys and investigations were promptly started, as well as negotiations with the landowners on the required repayment contract.
At the close of the year the contract had been prepared and approved by the electors of the district, plans and specifications covering the construction of the Rye Patch Dam were completed, and the work was ready to be advertised as soon as all legal matters had been adjusted.
The project experienced a serious water shortage in 1933 with even more serious conditions prevailing in 1934.
It was necessary to resort to pumping from Lahontan Reservoir and drainage ditches in order to supply some of the water required for irrigation.
Four thousand acre-feet of water in Donner Lake were purchased at a price of $2.50 per acre-foot.
Negotiations were finally completed in 1934 for pumping 36,000 acre-feet of water from Lake Tahoe, which will be divided between the irrigation interests on the Truckee Meadows and the Newlands project.
There was a slight increase in crop values but owing to continued low prices of farm products, the value of crops for 1933 reached only $12.23.
Federal assistance has been extended to the project by the Civil Works Administration and also the Federal Emergency Relief Administration.
Every effort has been made to reduce operation and maintenance expenses and the charges have beon fixed by the district at $1 per acre with the privilege of paying in three installments.
The Truckee-Carson irrigation district has continued the operation of the project.
No construction work is in progress but an application has been filed with the Public Works Administration for an allotment of $500,000 to cover numerous project bettermonts, enlargement of tho Truckee Canal, and increased capacity of Lahontan Reservoir.
This project was granted $1,500,000 for the construction of a storage reservoir on the headwaters of the Truckee River for the purpose of supplementing the water supply of the Truckee Meadows adjacent to the city of Reno.
Preliminary investigations have heretofore been conducted and a feasible dam and reservoir site located on the Little Truckee River.
In view of the complicated water situation existing on this river system and the necessity of reaching an agreement as to the extent and priority of existing rights, considerable time has been required to reach a satisfactory adjustment of these matters.
At the closo of the fiscal year good progress had been made and a repayment contract drafted and submitted to the Washoe County water conservation district, which will assume the obligation of repaying the cost of this storage reservoir.
There were 438 farms cultivated during the year by owners and managers and 159 by tenants.
The total acreage irrigated was 24,624 acres.
Crop yields for 1933 averaged $47.49 per acre or an increase over 1932 of $27.90 per acre, which was due to increased yields and better prices for products.
Finaneial conditions were much improved.
The land bank deposits were $540,000 on June 30, 1934.
Prices of farm lands range from $100 to $250 per acre.
The Federal land bank loaned about $650,000 on this project.
Loans for crop production were confined to Federal agencies.
Industrial development, which was confined to the potash and oil industries east of Carlsbad, has been substantial.
The water supply for the project was adequate except for alfalfa during the latter part of the fiscal year.
Drought conditions prevailed in the Carlsbad area in the spring and early summer of 1934.
Storage water was entirely gone at the close of the fiscal year, with the normal run-off lower than at any time in the history of the project.
No construction work was in progress but the irrigation district has submitted an application for funds to construct the Alamogordo Reservoir.
There was a marked improvement in conditions on the project with an increase in the number of farms and the area under irrigation.
The average crop value was $45 per acre, an increase of approximately $19 over the average value for 1932.
Cotton still remains the important cash crop on the project.
The Cotton Growers Association, a strong organization with a large membership, provides crop financing through intermediate credit banks as well as cooperative marketing.
The city of El Paso forms an important market for the sale of dairy products, livestock, vegetables, and truck, most of which are marketed through cooperative agencies.
Construction work during the fiscal year has been limited to extensions to the drainage system in the Elephant Butte district.
Further extensions will be required to relieve scattered areas of water-logged land throughout the project.
An allotment of $500,000 has been made for continuing construction of subsurface drains and extensions to the lateral system.
The financial interest of the United States in the Baker project is limited to the construction of a storage reservoir on the Powder River at a cost of $276,588, for which the irrigation district has contracted to make repayments under the provisions of the Reclamation Act.
The work was completed in June 1932.
The storage reservoir and canal system is operated by the irrigation district.
The area under cultivation for 1933 was approximately 6,300 acres, with an average crop value of $11.34 per acre.
The project is located in Umatilla County, eastern Oregon.
It was originally constructed in 1905 by the Furnish Ditch Co. for the irrigation of approximately 10,000 acres in the vicinity of Stanfield, Oreg.
The main canal diverts water from the Umatilla River.
The water supply in part is obtained from the McKay Reservoir under contract for 15,000 acre-feet with the Bureau of Reclamation.
An allotment of $100,000 has been made by the Public Works Administration for refinancing and rehabilitating this project, and a repayment contract with the Stanfield irrigation district was executed February 12, 1934.
A contract for the construction of three siphons and a tunnel on the Furnish Canal and a drain with structures was awarded to J. A. Terteling & Son of Spokane, Wash., in April 1934 at the bid price of $49,593 under Specifications No. 568.
Work is in progress on the Shaw and Hard siphons and tunnel.
The drainage ditch has been completed and the entire contract was 20 percent completed on June 30.
The operation of the east and west divisions of the Umatilla project has been continued under the respective irrigation district organizations, the combined irrigated area of the two projects being approximately 11,000 acres which in 1933 produced crops with an average value of approximately $16 per acre.
The farmers have experienced some difficulty owing to low prices of farm products and also to the fact that large areas of alfalfa were winter-killed, and as a result many of the farmers on the project have been on relief rolls.
The prospects for the season of 1934 are very much brighter as a result of the increase in the value of crops.
The canal system on this project has been completed to deliver water to about one-half of the 30,000 acres of irrigable land.
Good progress has been made in the settlement of this area and there are now more than 160 settlers engaged in clearing the land and planting crops.
Yields have been good but prices received for commodities have been low.
Alfalfa is the principal crop on the project and is either sold in the stack or fed on the farm.
With few exceptions farms are operated by the owners.
An allotment of $1,000,000 was made to the Vale project for constructing the Agency Valley Reservoir, for which contract was awarded in January to the Hinman Bros.
Construction Co. of Denver, Colo.
A second contract was awarded for the construction of about 4½ miles of highway to replace the present road which will be submerged.
The allotment was of sufficient size to permit an extension of the main canal, estimated to cost about $150,000.
Specifications for this work have been prepared and invitation for bids is to be issued early in the ensuing fiscal year.
The main division of the project contains 525 farms, of which 483 were farmed during the calendar year 1933.
The average value of crops was $32.25 per acre, which is an increase of 100 percent over the previous year.
On the Tule Lake division there were 334 farms, of which 290 were operated by owners and 44 by tenants.
Crop values on this division were $30 per acre.
This division has been opened to entry during the past few years, and the new settlers have had considerable difficulty in getting started on their farms because of the unusually low prices received for farm products.
The Langell Valley, Horsefly, and Shasta View districts have had but little success in carrying on settlement activities.
A supplemental contract has been signed by the Horsefly district which reduces its indebtedness to the United States by about $30,000.
The Langell Valley irrigation district has been trying for some time to obtain legislation authorizing the reclassification of the irrigable area and a reduction of its obligation to the United States.
They have already obtained a revision of their repayment contract which provides a more favorable schedule of payments.
Most of the farm products are sold through cooperative associations and with the prospect of increased prices in 1934 there is a more optimistic feeling on the project.
Construction work was limited to some minor extensions of the drainage system on the Tule Lake division and the Klamath irrigation district.
In August 1933 the Public Works Administration made an allotment of $5,000,000 for continuing construction work on the Owyhee project and at the close of the year the work was 68 percent completed.
During the fiscal year 1934 contracts were awarded which will complete the North Canal from the outlet of tunnel no. 1 to the inlet of the Malheur River siphon, a distance of 39 miles, and the Mitchell Butte lateral, 11½ miles in length.
Satisfactory progress was made on all of the construction contracts.
It is now expected that delivery of water to a portion of the new project lands can be made in the spring of 1935.
Production and general morale on the project continued to improve during the fiscal year, largely as a result of a prompt recovery of the sheep industry, with increased prices for fat lambs and wool.
The 1933 crops reached a value of $15.27 per acre, or an increase of about 20 percent over the previous year.
The yields from sugar beets were disappointing owing principally to unfavorable spring weather and thin stands, making the average production on the project just under 9 tons per acre.
The commissioners of the Federal Land Bank of Omaha commenced approval of loans on the project in 1933 and more than $100,000 had been advanced at the close of the fiscal year.
During 1933 there was not much change in settlement conditions, but the drought of 1934 has brought about a marked increase in the movement of settlers from marginal lands through the assistance of the South Dakota Rural Rehabilitation Corporation.
No construction work was in progress during the fiscal year.
This project will furnish a supplemental water supply to about 12,000 acres of land along the Little Bear River in the vicinity of Hyrum, Wellsville, and Mendon, which area now has an inadequate water supply.
The land is all in private ownership and with a few exceptions the holdings are small.
The principal industries include dairying and the production of sugar beets and vegetables.
The community is well organized for the sale of farm products and their utilization through canneries, creameries, and beet-sugar factories.
The Public Works Administration made an allotment of $930,000 for the construction of Hyrum Dam and Reservoir and about 20 miles of canals.
Contract for the construction of the dam was awarded to J. A. Terteling & Son of Spokane, Wash., and work has been in progress since the latter part of March.
The location of canals and laterals has been completed and drawings and specifications covering this work are being prepared so that bids can be called for early in the fiscal year 1935.
The sum of $1,500,000 wa allotted to this project by the Public Works Administration in November 1933.
The work contemplated involves the construction of an earth-fill dam at Moon Lake on one of the tributaries of the Colorado River.
This dam will raise the water level of the lake about 56 feet and create a reservoir with a capacity of 30,000 acre-feet.
A feeder canal about 6 miles long to the Uintah River is also contemplated.
The lands to be benefited comprise 26,000 acres under existing canals diverting from Lake Fork and 14,000 acres under canals on the Uintah River.
A draft of repayment contract has been prepared and is now under consideration.
An allotment of $3,000,000 for the Ogden River project was granted by the Public Works Administration for the construction of Pine View Dam and Reservoir, a 75-inch wood-stave pipe from the dam to the mouth of Ogden Canyon, about 25 miles of canal extending north to Brigham City, and south for about 8 miles from the mouth of the canyon, which systems will distribute the stored water to lands that have heretofore had only a partial supply of water.
Pine View Dam and appurtenant works had been completed and advertisement issued calling for bids to be opened September 5.
This project has been given an allotment of $2,700,000 for the construction of a storage dam and reservoir on the Provo River about 12 miles southwest of Heber.
An earth-fill dam will raise the water surface about 175 feet giving a reservoir capacity of 145,000 acrefeet, which water will serve as a supplemental supply for the irrigation of 36,000 acres in Salt Lake Valley.
An additional supply of water to fill this reservoir will be obtained by diverting a portion of the Weber River through the Weber-Provo Canal which is to be enlarged.
The project also comprises the construction of levees across Goshen and Provo Bays in Utah Lake which will reduce the surface area and thereby effect a saving in evaporation losses on the lake.
At the close of the fiscal year no construction work had been started but repayment contracts were being negotiated.
An allotment of $300,000 was made for this project in November 1933.
The work planned covers the construction of 2 tunnels, 1 on the Ephraim division about 7,200 feet long with a capacity of 100 cubic feet per second, with short feeder canals, and a second on the Spring City division.
The two divisions have an area of 8,000 acres of land now under irrigation but with an inadequate supply of water.
Repayment contracts were being negotiated and construction will begin early in the following fiscal year.
Economic conditions on the project are shaped by the 1934 general drought situation.
There was sufficient water in storage at the beginning of the year to deliver 20 percent of the contract rights.
With funds advanced by the Federal Emergency Relief Administration work was started on the excavation of the new outlet channel which will make it possible to recover an additional 18,000 acre-feet of storage in Strawberry Reservoir which added 10 percent to the contract rights.
Investigations were also under way to determine the feasibility of diverting some small streams of water into the Strawberry Reservoir as the limited quantity available for 1934 makes it absolutely necessary to resort to every means possible to increase the quantity that can be used to save valuable crops.
Crop values for 1933 showed an average of $19.18 per acre, which was an increase of only $2 over the previous year.
The project is feeling the benefits of the various Federal relief programs aimed at the general improvement of social and business conditions on the project.
Echo Reservoir, on tho Weber River, with a capacity of 74,000 acre-feet, was constructed in 1930.
A small quantity of water was stored in 1931, while in 1932 the reservoir was filled to nearly its capacity.
This stored water furnished the necessary supplemental supply of water for the irrigation of 60,000 acres of land in the lower Weber and Ogden Valleys.
The average value of crops for 1933 was approximately $40 per acre.
The dam and reservoir are operated by the Weber River Water Users Association.
In 1934, with its low run-off on all streams in the Salt Lake Basin, Echo Reservoir filled to nearly half capacity.
This quantity of water will be used with a maximum of efficiency to irrigate the valuable crops of fruits and vegetables that are produced on the lands of this project.
The Public Works Administration has made an allotment of $15,000,000 to carry on the construction of the Columbia Basin project, which comprises the Grand Coulee Dam and power plant located on the Columbia River about 75 miles west of Spokane, Wash.
The estimated cost of the initial development is: Dam, $42,000,000; power plant, $21,000,000.
The first development includes the construction of a concrete straight gravity dam about 300 feet in height with a crest length of 3,400 feet.
Tho initial power development provides for the installation of three hydroelectric generators with a capacity of 35,000 kilovolt-amperes under the low dam.
This initial development is for power purposes only.
Eventually the dam is to be increased 200 feet in height, which will permit the construction of the Columbia Basin irrigation project, and with the increased height of dam the capacity of the generators will be increased to 105,000 kilovolt-amperes each.
An effort was made to get construction work under way at the earliest possible date and in December 1933 contract was awarded for the removal of the earth overburden at the two ends of the dam.
Contract for construction of the dam was awarded to a combination of firms consisting of the Silas Mason Co., Walsh Construction Co., and Atkinson-Kier Co., these contractors having submitted a low bid of $29,339,301.
Other contracts have been awarded covering construction of railroad, highways, streets, and water and sewer systems for the construction camp, making a total of $30,500,000.
The project had the largest supply of gravity water during 1933 that it has had since 1921.
Indications are that the gravity supply of water for 1934 will not, however, be in excess of 2 feet per acre.
There was a slight increase in irrigated acreage during 1933.
The project apple crop for the 1934 season will run from avorage to excellent with the assumption that returns will be far better than for the past year.
Cherries for 1934 brought the growers a fairly good return.
Pear harvest will start about the first week in August.
With the exception of pears and cherries very little soft fruit is marketed.
A total of $3,859.95 was spent during the fiscal year in lining 2,040 linear feet of the Upper Main lateral.
Approximately 9,100 linear feet of 4- to 12-inch pipe was installed in replacement of worn-out lines.
Some half dozen old wooden weirs were replaced with concrete during the spring of 1934.
Sunnyside and Tieton divisions.
There was but little chango in the irrigated area of these two divisions, but increased prices of farm products showed a gratifying increase over the low year of 1932, the average per-acre value for the Sunnyside division being $39.15, and for the Tieton division, consisting principally of fruits, $87.10.
The water supply was ample for all requirements, and a very heavy flood which occurred in December 1933 insured a full supply of water for the season of 1934.
The operation and maintenance of these two divisions of the project has continued under the Bureau of Reclamation.
No construction work was in progress during the year.
Kittitas division.
Excellent progress was made during the year in the development of lands on this division.
The area irrigated in 1933 was 44,578 acres.
The principal crops are alfalfa hay, small grains, potatoes, and seed peas.
The average per-acre value of crops produced was $18.85.
On February 16, 1933, 47 farm units were opened to entry and 25 more wero opened under date of April 12, 1934.
The number of applications received was in excess of the farms available, and entries were allowed on all of the lands with the exception of a very few small tracts that were not particularly desirable.
The operation of the division was taken over by the Kittitas reclamation district at the beginning of the calendar year 1934.
Construction work was limited to placing concrete lining in about 1,200 feet ofthe South Branch Canal and an extension of the Badger Creek wasteway.
Kennewick division.
Settlement on this division is progressing slowly.
The area served by the pumping plant during 1934 included ábout 3,000 acres out of a total of about 4,000.
An adjustment contract covering reduction of power rates for a period of 3 years has been concluded, and these reduced rates have been extended to the Franklin County and Richland irrigation districts that also use power from the Prosser power plant.
Construction work was limited to some miscellaneous improvements at the intake of the Prosser power plant.
Storage division.
The construction of Cle Elum Dam was completed September 5, 1933, at a cost of $2,383,491.
There remains to be built the parapet wall on top of the dam which will be delayed a year or more to await any possible settlement of the earthen embankment.
Spillway gates will be installed when the need develops for full capacity of the reservoir.
The estimated cost of these additional features is $80,000.
Construction of this project was approved in October 1933, and an allotment of $12,000,000 mado by the Public Works Administration.
At the close of the fiscal year 3 of the 4½ miles of West Side Service Road to the Seminoe Dam site were completed.
Approximately 50 acres of the Seminoe Reservoir area were cleared.
All excavation on the Alcova diversion tunnel and outlet tower had been completed, and 1,467 cubic yards of concrete lining placed in the diversion tunnel.
One hundred and seventy-five linear feet of canal tunnel excavation had been completed and 63,780 cubic yards of open canal excavated.
The transmission line from Casper to the Seminoe Dam was approximately 50 percent complete, 32 miles of the line having been constructed to the Alcova Dam, and about 34½ miles of telephone line were constructed from the Pathfinder Dam, via Alcova, to a point approximately 4½ miles below the Seminoe Dam site.
Future plans provide for the construction of the Seminoe storage dam and power system, the Alcova diversion dam, the lateral system and appurtenant structures, and the continuation of construction of the Casper Canal and appurtenant structures and the transmission line.
Apppropriations are available for continuation of this work.
In the fall of 1933 there were 73 settlers on the projoct and the area in cultivation had increased 60 percent over the previousyear.
Crops in 1934 are in excellent condition when it is considered that 40 percent of theland is in cultivation for the first time.
Cash is still scarce but the settlers owe little and the general outlook is brighter.
All water users have paid the advance water rental charge for the current season.
A secondary highway was built into the project during the year and construction was begun on another.
There is still room for additional settlers but they are now coming about as fast as they can be assimilated.
No construction work was in progress during the fiscal year.
The water supply on this project has been more than sufficient to meet all requirements and some water was sold to relieve an acute shortage on private irrigation projects in Montana.
The average value of crops, $16 per acre, has increased, but is still considerably below the 10-year average.
Settlement activity on the Willwood division showed a decided incroase over the previous years and the drought conditions that existed in 1934 have brought in a large number of settlers to look over the vacant farms on the Willwood division.
The Associated Seed Growers have continued to operate a seed warehouse at Powell, which has given employment at cleaning seed peas and beans to about 25 during the winter months.
A large portion of the crops and livestock products are sold through cooperative marketing associations.
Construction work was limited to short extensions to the drainage system on the Willwood division and highway repairs.
Federal funds for work done during the past fiscal year, as hereinafter described, were available from the acts of July 3, 1930; February 14, 1931; April 22, 1932; February 17, 1933; March 4, 1933; and.
June 16, 1933.
Of $234,931.52 disbursed by the Bureau during the past fiscal year, including $35,233.97 for work under section 15 of the Boulder Canyon Project Act, and $120,824.12 for investigations with.
The projects investigated were Parker-Gila Valley in Arizona; All-American Canal and Sacramento and San Joaquin Valleys in California; Upper Snake River storage in Idaho; Frenchtown in Montana: Humboldt River in Nevada; Baker, Brogan, Deschutes, and Pendleton in Oregon; Moon Lake, Ouray Valley, Provo River, Sanpete, and Utah Lake in Utah; and North Platte River power in Wyoming.
Investigations under section 15 of the Boulder Canyon Project Act were carried on in the States of Colorado, New Mexico, Utah, and Wyoming.
Cash: Balance on hand: Reclamation fund... $4, 737,153.39 Yuma auxiliary fund.
148,253.80 Specíal funds.
119,156.25 National Industrial Recovery—Interlor-Reclamation... 56,425,099.69 $61,429,663.13 In special deposit and in transit.
28,489.83 $61, 458, 152.08 Total debits.
Total investments (schedule 2)...... .
Total Treasury cash (schedule 1)..........
Total current and aocrued assets......................
Total deferred and unadjusted debits....
Total assets and other debits................
Total current and accrued líabflities.............
The General Land Office was charged by Congress on April 25, 1812, with the survey and disposal of the public land.
Historically and actually, it is the legal, title, and record bureau for the lands of the Federal Government.
It collaborates closely with seven interdependent bureaus having to do with public land withdrawn for national forests, parks, mineral resources, reclamation, water power, wildlife, and the Indians.
It adjudicates all public land and mineral land questions within withdrawals, forests, and other reservations.
During the fiscal year there were noted on the public-land tract books 683 orders of a withdrawal or restoration nature varying in size from a single tract to more than a million acres.
The General Land Office maintains 25 district land offices in the western public land States and Alaska for the convenience of the public.
Entries in States without district land offices are made directly in this office.
The surveying and mapping is conducted by the Cadastral Engineering Service under a supervisor of surveys at Denver, Colo., an associate supervisor of surveys at Washington, and eight district Cadastral engineers.
Twelve public survey offices contain the local survey records for public use.
The General Land Office is a hall of records on the disposition of the public domain—76 percent of the United States proper.
Its 4,300 tract books contain the base title record and status of every 40-acre tract from the Ohio to the Golden Gate and from Canada to Texas, the Gulf, and Old Mexico.
They are the index to 8,772,793 original record files.
Additional are 7,392,345 files of letters, withdrawals, and miscellaneous actions and 11,880,780 index cards.
Copies of the 6,056,146 patents are bound in 9,400 volumes.
The base of the survey records is 6,099 volumes of field notes and approximately 100,000 township plats.
The photo-lithographic copies of the plats, and to a lesser extent the field notes, are in demand by private parties and the public authorities for areas up to counties and entire States.
During the fiscal year there were sold 7,060 plats for $3,530 and 5,761 were disposed of officially.
The public survey offices were paid $2,322.40 for copies of records.
The General Land Office received during the year 24,832 letters regarding old records and patents.
There were furnished 63,382 certified copies at a charge of $18,033.30, and 25,355 uncertified copies for official use.
A large part of this business was due to farm loans and transfers requiring a perfect chain of title on the county records.
Included were 14,228 pages of survey field notes.
The course of public land business during the past decade is shown by acres in the following table.
The following is a résumé of the public land entered and disposed of during the fiscal year 1934.
The Indian land is mainly the ceded Ute land in western Colorado, subject to entry upon payment of $1.25 per acre for the Indians.
The cash receipts were $4,035,441.08 as shown by accompanying table, an increase of $176,010.11 over the previous year.
The expenditures paid through this office and before final settlement in the General Accounting Office were $2,013,235.39.
The Cadastral Engineering Service of this office performs practically all surveys for title purposes within the original public land States for the various Federal bureaus and departments, and is thus one of the great governmental surveying services.
Its organization plan with 144 members remained unchanged, but was automatically expanded to meet two new situations.
First, the surveying operations under the Federal Emergency Administration of Public Works initiated September 30, 1933, added 54 transitmen, 28 clerks and draftsmen, and a monthly average of 341 temporary field assistants.
It gave a total of 770,945 man-hours of work.
Second, from December 12, 1933, to April 30, 1934, there was employed a weekly average of 460 transitmen, field assistants and clerks under Civil Works Administration directed by this service, and providing 254,680 manhours of work.
The relief funds were used on imnportant projects requiring a maximum number of workers and that had been long contemplated or had been requested by other bureaus.
Surveys and resurveys were made under 244 groups in 23 States and Alaska.
Such work as can be measured on a quantity basis equaled 35,970 linear miles or 6,290,089 acres surveyed, composed as follows.
Approximately 2,300,000 acres of public land were surveyed (sectionized) and 1,300,000 acres resurveyed.
Surveys for the Forest Service were 1,200,000 acres of original surveys and 916,000 acres of resurveys.
Resurveys amounting to 527,800 acres were made for the Reclamation Service.
Lesser areas were surveyed for the National Park Service, United States Geological Survey, War Department, Office of Indian Affairs, and Federal Power Commission.
Some of the work were the special determinations and the fragmentary and miscellaneous surveys, involving little acreage, which increase with time and require an undue amount of investigation and work for the results produced.
Such work was postponed as much as possible because of the relief situation, and this partly explains why the comparable figure for 1933 was 19,364 linear miles surveyed.
Surveying for Indian reservations was restricted to emergency work.
Nearly all of Alaska and 133,562,439 acres within the United States proper are yet unsurveyed.
The expenditures were $193,062.44 from the regular appropriation for surveying the public land, $735,527.43 from the Public Works fund, and $25,201.73 from miscellaneous sources, a total of $953,- 791.60.
In addition, approximately $219,600 was expended from the Civil Works funds.
This compared with a total expenditure in 1933 of $521,829.81 from the regular surveying funds.
The official map of the United States has been revised for a new edition.
The new state maps of Idaho and Oregon and more recently Arizona have arrived in stock, while the new maps of Alaska and Colorado have been sent to the printer.
Maps mounted were 1,927 and distributed were 5,293.
Public land circulars and regulations distributed were 165,366.
Allowed original homestead entries in acres reached their lowest level in December 1932, since 1869.
New homestead entries in the fiscal year 1934 were about 92½ percent of those in 1925 and 1926, and the new filings mounted rapidly in the last half.
The total pending and unperfected homestead entries on June 30, 1934, were 54,020 entries embracing 19,883,591 acres.
Seventy percent of this acreage is, in descending order, in the Rocky Mountain States of New Mexico, Wyoming, Montana, and Colorado.
The homestead division of this office during the year acted upon the following cases, exclusive of Indian land.
The above compares with 28,406 cases in 1933 and 26,555 in 1932.
There were received and disposed of 46,259 related and unrelated letters against 59,035 in 1933, and 65,667 in 1932.
The number of these letters has doubled since 1930.
Oil and gas leases.
During the year 1,226 cases received office action.
There were issued 36 leases embracing 38,555 acres under section 14 of the leasing act as a result of discoveries of oil and gas on prospecting permits.
One lease was granted under section 17 on a bonus bid of $11,000 at a sale of leases in the Rodessa Gas Field in Louisiana.
The defined geologic structures of the following six producing oil and gas fields were promulgated: Dry Creek, North Bowes and South Bowes in Montana; North Eunice (additional) in New Mexico; La Barge and Lake Creek in Wyoming.
A unit plan of development and operation of Middle Dome in the Kettleman Hills field of California was approved on September 30, 1933, and 10 leases covering 4,537 acres were issued.
The instructions of December 4, 1933, require leases thereafter to include an agreement to abide by the Code of Fair Competition for the Petroleum Industry.
The act of June 16, 1934, provides for the use of water from water wells drilled by permittees and lessees through reserving as a public watering place the land on which the well is situated.
The number and acres of outstanding leases and permits for all minerals are shown in the earlier table on disposals.
Oil and gas prospecting permits.
There were filed 1,583 new applications for oil and gas permits.
Permits granted were 907, of which 12 were in Alaska.
Permits canceled were 231.
Applications entirely rejected were 676 and in part were 807.
Nine canceled permits were reinstated, and 153 assignments and 1,443 applications for extension of time were considered.
The total cases examined for some office action were 14,087.
Coal.
A total of 2,784 cases were acted upon.
There were issued 52 coal prospecting permits for 30,207 acres, 26 licenses for 1,010 acres to mine coal, and 31 coal leases for 1,916 acres.
Potash, sodium, sulphur, and phosphate.
Cases acted upon were 803.
There were issued 14 potash permits involving 30,907 acres, 19 sodium permits for 25,755 acres, 1 sodium lease for 640 acres and 38 permits for 51,603 acres, and 22 sulphur permits for 12,857 acres.
Receipts under mineral leasing acts.
The receipts for the year under the act of February 25, 1920, were $2,892,498.47 from oil and gas, $234,497.34 from coal, $75,064.95 from potash, $4,460.61 from phosphate, and $103.26 from sodium, a total of $3,206,624.63.
The total receipts from date of act to June 30, 1934, are $90,181,- 750.52.
Each State receives 37½ percent of the receipts arising within its borders, the reclamation fund receives 52½ percent, and the remaining 10 percent is retained in the United States Treasury under miscellaneous receipts.
During the year there was received $20,319.93 in royalties in Wyoming under act of June 26, 1926, and $5,277.67 from coal royalties in Alaska, all of which was retained in the Treasury.
The royalties from oil lands in the bed of Red River in Oklahoma were divided 37½ percent or $12,007.23 to the State and balance, $20,012.03, to Kiowa, Comanche, and Apache Indians.
The potash royalties and rentals in California under act of October 2, 1917, were $11,945.71 and those in New Mexico under act of February 7, 1927, were $45,213.93, all of which went to the reclamation fund.
Contests against oil-shale locations.
Action has been suspended since April 1, 1933, awaiting court decision on jurisdiction of the Department to challenge the validity of oil-shale locations for failure to perform annual labor thereon.
There are pending 503 Government contests against such locations.
Oil-shale claims under patent proceedings.
Four oil-shale entries covering 3,648 acres were approved for patent, 2 entries for 1,919 acres were canceled and 8 entries for 6,343 acres are still pending.
Mineral entries other than oil-shale.
Mineral applications disposed of were 172.
Final mineral entries acted upon were 333, of which 115 were approved for patent.
There were disposed of 653 highly miscellaneous mineral cases not involving mineral entry.
San Gabriel and Boulder Dam locations.
The cities of Los Angeles and Pasadena were granted reservoir rights in San Gabriel Canyon in the Angeles National Forest of southern California.
Field investigation in recent years reported 429 recorded mining locations as invalid.
After hearings asked for on several claims, all were finally canceled except two locations still undisposed of.
Field investigation was made in the past of some 3,000 recorded mining locations in the area reserved for the Boulder Dam and Reservoir site.
Four locations were reported valid and together with some patented claims are under appraisal.
Thirty locations were declared to be null and void after hearing, 8 are still on appeal from adverse decision, and balance of the 3,000 locations have been canceled save 1 undisposed of.
Essentially, the two investigations cleared the record of long abandoned mining locations that might be made the basis of damage suits.
Coal-bed fires.
The work in controlling fires on the outcrop of coal beds on the public land near Gillette, Wyo., which was carried on by a Civilian Conservation Camp during the summer of 1933, has been continued this summer.
Various acts provide for relinquishing private land useful for governmental purposes in exchange for public land or timber.
The Santa Fe Pacific Railroad Co. (Atlantic and Pacific grant) exchanged 124,941 acres in northwestern New Mexico to benefit the Navajo Indians, and 3,833 acres to enlarge the Petrified Forest National Monument in Arizona.
Title to 67,919 acres of private land within national forests was so obtained, including 41,444 acres of the Mora Grant in the Lincoln National Forest in New Mexico.
There were likewise added 7,780 acres to various Indian reservations.
Forest lieu selection under act of June 4, 1897, has reduced to a few hundred acres annually.
One grazing lease of 1,408 acres was issued in Alaska, making 18 leases outstanding for 10,550,857 acres.
Six of these leases are to associations of natives for grazing reindeer.
The act of March 4, 1931, withdrew 334,765 acres for the protection of the water supply of Los Angeles and other cities.
Reserve, and about 70 free-use permits are outstanding.
Subsè- quent Executive orders added 266,600 acres for water supply protection, and during the fiscal year another 265,000 acres were so added.
The only other grazing district is the Mizpah-Pumpkin Creek Grazing Reserve in Custer County, southeastern Montana.
An association of local cattlemen was formed and on May 9, 1932, a lease was issued for approximately 25,124 acres at an annual rental of $785.
Two withdrawals for proposed grazing districts have existed since 1931 in Montana, the South Sunday Creek area in Rosebud and Custer Counties estimated at 192,320 acres, and the Crooked and Gilbert Creeks area in Garfield County estimated at 175,000 acres.
The departmental order of September 26, 1933, withdrew approximately 1,837,400 acres in Uintah County, Utah, for a proposed grazing district for the Uncompahgre Ute Indians and the white settlers within the area, of which about 1,280,312 acres is public land.
Public Grazing Withdrawal No. 4 of February 6, 1934, withdrew 1,221,120 acres 60 miles southwest of Salt Lake City, of which about 1,000,000 acres is public land.
Six leases were issued for public aviation fields.
There are now outstanding 19 such leases totaling 10,033 acres and 5 permits aggregating 5,197 acres for beacon lights.
Recreational area leases to States, counties, or municipalities number 14 for 14,065 acres.
One hot springs lease for 39 acres exists.
Five fur farming leases amounting to 6,600 acres were issued in Alaska, bringing total to 44 leases for 148,193 acres.
Thirteen railroad rights-of-way were approved and requirements made in 38 more, all as amendments or extensions of existing systems.
Rights-of-way approved for irrigation, pole lines, public roads, and pipe lines numbered 342 and requirements were made in 695 cases more.
There were promulgated 74 approved rights-of-way in Indian reservations.
There are 32 Federal reclamation projects in 14 western States and 5 Indian reclamation projects.
The gross area withdrawn during the year under the Reclamation Act was 850,880 acres and 850,815 acres heretofore withdrawn were restored.
Additionally there were withdrawn under the act of June 25, 1910, at the request of the War Department 204,720 acres for the Fort Peck project in Montana and 79,080 acres for the Bonneville Dam in Oregon and Washington, both Public Works Administration projects.
The Fort Peck project is in aid of the Missouri River Basin flood control, irrigation, navigation, and power development.
The new openings to entry under Reclamation Act were 1 farm unit of 115 acres in the Shoshone project (Wyoming) and 26 farm units totaling 1,700 acres in the Yakima project (Washington).
The average life of a reclamation homestead from entry to patent is upwards of 10 years.
The reclamation homestead patents in the decade of 1915-24 were 5,658 patents for 422,624 acres, while in the 1925-34 decade there were 1,966 patents for 162,398 acres.
During the 1925–34 period there were 865 original entries for 89,969 acres.
The number of entries and patents during 1934 is shown elsewhere.
Old and new entries under the Reclamation Act totaling 1,795 were examined in the office for some action.
Section 4 of the act of August 18, 1894, and its 23 supplemental acts are collectively known as the Carey Act.
The act grants to certain arid-land States one to three million acres each of desert land upon condition of large scale reclamation.
Land for this purpose is either segregated or is temporarily withdrawn for investigation.
Patents are issued only on proof that water has been made available for irrigation.
To June 30, 1934, there were segregated 3,897,860 acres, out of which 1,102,586 acres have been patented, 2,575,678 acres have been returned to the public land, and 219,596 acres remain segregated of which 42,322 acres are under proof of reclamation.
Construction work on Carey Act projects has been largely in abeyance for 4 years, mainly for economic reasons.
During the year 738,131 acres of Carey Act land received some necessary office action.
There were filed patent applications for 3,724 acres and segregation application was made for 2,242 acres.
Four applications under this act were made during the year by the State of Louisiana and four by California.
The State of Oregon received patent for 21,431 acres in the Warner Valley and 6,800 acres went to other States.
Among pending applications is one by the State of Wisconsin for approximately 43,737 acres within the Lac du Flambeau, Bad River, and Menominee Indian Reservations upon some of which allotments and patents have issued to Indians; various questions of fact, record, and law are involved.
These are composed of quantity or acreage grants forspecific purposes and of indemnity lands selected in lieu of school sectionslost to the State through mineral character or prior occupation or reservation.
Ninety percent of the selections during the past 5 years have been forindemnity lands.
The pending old and new selections examined in the office during the year anounted to 920,146 acres, of which 9,485 acres were canceled, 106,921 acres were certified to the States and further requirements were made on the remainder.
Nine out of the 72 unforfeited railroad grants remain to be closed: Atlantic and Pacific (western division), Southern Pacific (branch line), Southern Pacific (main line), Northern Pacific, Central Pacific, California and Oregon, Cairo and Fulton, Memphis and Little Rock, and St. Paul and Pacific.
Adjustment of the Northern Pacific grant has been suspended pending court decision on the company's rights.
There are outstanding approximately 3,000,000 acres of primary and indemnity lands unapplied for.
Most of this is within the Atlantic and Pacific grant in Arizona and New Mexico, and the Southern Pacific (branch line) grant in California.
Lack of surveys and inclusion within Indian reservations are largely responsible for this situation.
During the fiscal year the following new selections were filed: 16,547 acres in Arizona, 26,339 in New Mexico, 179 acres in California, and 40 acres each in Montana and Washington.
Office action during the year approved 63,671 acres to the companies, rejected 684 acres, and made further requirements on 194,099 acres.
California Railroad Co., with provisions for classification and disposition thereof and for disposal of the moneys received.
During the year 20,379 acres were homesteaded and 10,752 acres of former entries were canceled.
There were 70 timber sales involving 5,238 acres and aggregating $252,967.
These lands are situated in western Oregon and inventoried as follows on June 30, 1934: (1) 1,128,326 acres of unsold timberland containing 30,305,628,000 board-feet of timber; (2) 105,098 acres on which timber has been sold and included in which are 18,444 acres of cut-over land subject to entry and 10,951 acres of pending entries (and 2,280 acres patented); (3) 56,231 acres of power-site land containing 824,321,000 board-feet of timber; (4) 8,360 acres of recreational land; (5) 752,582 acres of agricultural classification subject to entry; (6) 84,197 acres of agricultural classification in pending entries, and (7) 528,004 acres within the indemnity limits of the grant and within the boundaries of national forests remain unclassified.
The area associated with (1) and (2) that is listed as unrestored timberland is 1,201,749 acres.
This land will be restored to entry as agricultural land of cut-over character as the timber is sold, cut, and removed.
Under the act of February 26, 1919, there were reconveyed to the United States approximately 90,000 acres of land formerly granted to the Coos Bay Wagon Road Co. in western Oregon.
The land was to be classified and disposed of in the manner prescribed by the act of June 9, 1916, and the resulting moneys as prescribed by the act of February 26, 1919.
During the year 2,100 acres were homesteaded and 520 acres of former entries were canceled.
There were two timber sales involving 120 acres and aggregating $4,700.
These lands inventoried as follows on June 30, 1934: (1) 40,735 acres unsold timberland containing 1,551,083,000 board-feet of timber; (2) 15,229 acres on which timber has been sold and included in which are 4,195 acres of cut-over land subject to entry and 2,462 acres of cut-over land in pending entries (and 200 acres patented); (3) 4,464 acres of power-site land containing 181,460,000 board-feet of timber; (4) 14,900 acres of agricultural classification subject to entry; and (5) 7,197 acres of agricultural classification in pending entries.
The unrestored timberland withdrawn from agricultural entry is 49,107 acres.
Some 4,712 highly miscellaneous cases were acted upon and 1,459 patents were approved, which involved Indians and Indian land (land subject to certain public land entries with proceeds to Indians), and Indian reservations, pueblos, allotments and exchanges.
Soldiers' additional homestead rights were granted in certain cases to Civil War veterans and their widows and minor children; 20 entries under these rights covering 419.13 acres were patented and it is believed that several thousand acres of these rights are still outstanding.
Action was taken on 1,271 trespass cases involving timber, coal, turpentine, and gravel.
Sales of land in abandoned military reservations amounted to $2,988.16 for 1,675.92 acres.
Patents were approved for 189 town lots in 25 town sites.
Desert-land cases receiving office action were 1,451, of which 76 were approved for patent and 110 were canceled.
Congress has directed that the Commissioner of the General Land Office and the Secretary of the Interior shall constitute a Board of Equitable Adjudication to adjudge if patents may issue in accordance with equity and justice where some obstacle has arisen through mistake, ignorance, or cause beyond control of the entryman.
During the fiscal year patents were so confirmed on 643 homesteads, 38 deserts, and 1 mineral entry.
There were decided 2,152 Government and private contests and at the end of the fiscal year there were pending unadjudicated 503 oilshale contests, 77 mineral contests, and 442 miscellaneous contests.
There were enacted 49 public and private acts of Congress affecting the activities of this office, and 328 such acts during the last 5 years.
Nine new stock driveways were established and 41 were modified during the year.
The net area of the national forests in the publicland States was increased 532,983 acres.
There were temporarily withdrawn 6,486 acres for forest purposes and 80 acres were restored.
The national forests in the public-land .
States have a gross area of 159,978,063 acres, of which 138,120,193 acres or 86.3 percent is net Government land.
Those in Alaska are 21,342,300 acres net after deducting 54,633 acres of private land.
Two national monument changes were made.
The Pinnacles in California was increased 5,002 acres and Cedar Breaks in Utah was created by exclusion of 5,821 acres from the Dixie National Forest.
Six recreational area withdrawals were made on petitions by States or cities.
Forty acres for this purpose were sold to Pima County and 538 acres leased to Mohave County, Ariz.
Additions to bird and game refuges amounted to 133,426 acres and 56,270 acres were withdrawn for creation of further refuges.
The existing refuges in the public-domain area aggregate 1,512,371 acres and 162,691 acres are withdrawn for further refuges, both mainly within other withdrawals and reservations.
Among the withdrawals during the year were 265,000 acres for the Los Angeles water supply, 1,162,286 acres for investigation with a view to creating a national monument perpetuating desert plant life and 80,000 acres for a bombing and gunnery range for the War Department, all in California.
In New Mexico, 441,000 acres were withdrawn to enable the State to select land in lieu of school sections and other State land within national forests.
In Oklahoma, 4,858 acres were withdrawn pending legislation for relief of bona fide claimants, and 6,360 acres in Nevada for flood and erosion control.
It is estimated that the 51,585,267 acres of withdrawals contain 30,442,832 acres net of Government land in the public-domain States.
Mineral withdrawals must be completely separated in idea from other withdrawals.
They relate to subsurface rights as the surface is usually open to agricultural entries unless a reservation of the surface is also necessary to effect the purpose of the withdrawal.
The changes during the year were 1,323 acres of helium land in Utah withdrawn, while the restorations were 936,433 acres of coal land withdrawals in New Mexico and 136 acres of other withdrawals.
The helium (Utah) and metalliferous (East Bisbee, Ariz.) withdrawals are closed to all location and entry.
There are 77,730 acres of naval oil reserves, 156,024 acres of naval oil-shale reserves, and 960,346 acres of defined geologic structures of producing oil and gas fields, all gross areas before deducting the private lands.
The acreage patented during the year under agricultural laws with mineral reservation is shown in the patent table.
The total acreage so patented to June 30, 1934, is 25,053,209 acres under the Stock Raising Homestead Act, 10,752,105 acres with coal reservation, and 2,022,916 acres with all or some specific minerals reserved, a total of 37,828,203 acres.