As in my two preceding reports, I shall not attempt here to interpret or give a résumé of the detailed reports of the various divisions, offices, and bureaus of the Department of the Interior which follow.
Since my last annual report there have been two important changes in the organization of this Department.
The Soil Erosion Service, originally set up by this Department, was transferred by Executive order to the Department of Agriculture.
Also, the Division of Subsistence Homesteads, likewise set up in this Department, was transferred by Executive order to the Rural Resettlement Administration.
Although the petroleum code no longer exists, certain legislation was enacted by Congress, designed to control petroleum production.
The Petroleum Administrative Board has continued to function and, therefore, its annual report is included herein.
As heretofore, in the interests of economy, every effort has been made to cut down the volume in this report without sacrificing any initial information.
Fuller particulars of the activities of any part of the Department are available in its files.
At the close of the fiscal year, as well as at its beginning, the legal staff of the Department consisted of 67 attorneys serving in Washington and in the field under the jurisdiction of the Solicitor.
During the vear three attorneys were added to the immediate staff in the central office of the Solicitor.
However, the aggregate membership of the legal sections attached to various bureaus in the Department was decreased by the same number.
Thus, the personnel remained nearly constant during the year.
Yet, the business of the Solicitor inereased greatly over the same period.
In the vear 1933–34, 84 formal opinions were rendered by the Solicitor.
During the year ended June 30, 1935, the number of opinions rendered was 237, an inerease of almost 300 percent.
About onethird of these opinions concerned accident claims, which have been very numerous in connection with emergency conservation work and other operations in areas under the jurisdiction of the National Park Service.
Some 50 title opinions have been required, the majority of them in connection with the land-purchase program of the National Park Service.
Less numerous, but individually more important, have been those opinions rendered in response to particular legal inquiries concerning the interpretation and administration of the Indian Reorganization Act, the Taylor grazing law and the general withdrawal of the publie domain under the Executive orders of November 26, 1934, and February 5, 1935.
Wages and hours of Park Service employees engaged in trades.
Appeals and related motions in public-land cases have increased about 100 percent.
Land cases received this year numbered 1,018, as contrasted with 520 similar cases received during the preceding year.
However, this increase has not been allowed to cause an accumulation of pending cases.
A year ago 407 cases were pending after 549 had been disposed of during the preceding 12 months.
But on June 30 of this year, despite the doubling of the number of appeals filed, only 315 land cases were pending.
This result has been accomplished by the disposition of 1,110 land cases during a single year, a tremendous undertaking under any circumstances and particularly in view of the unusual amount of other legal work which the business of the Department has involved.
One of these appeals, United States v. Oalifornia et al. (A–17366), is perhaps the most important single case considered by the legal officers of the Department in recent years.
This decision, commonly called the “ Section 36 Case ", asserts the validity of the title of the United States to lands within the Elk Hills oil field in California, one of the most valuable oil-producing areas in the United States.
Preparation of the opinion required the examination of some 10,000 pages of testimony and hundreds of exhibits in order that findings might be made upon controverted issues of fact concerning the mineral character of the area as it appeared 30 years ago.
During the fiscal year consent decrees have been entered in 18 war minerals relief cases.
Seventeen cases of this type were dismissed by the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia either after hearing upon petition and answer or upon motion of the Secretary of the Interior.
The Secretary of the Interior has been defendant in several suits for mandamus or for injunetion which have been in process of litigation in the courts of the Distriet of Columbia during the year.
In all of these cases the Solicitor has represented the Secretary.
The Solicitor has also assisted special counsel for the people of Puerto Rico in the representation of the interests of Puerto Rico in cases before the Cireuit Court of Appeals for the First Circuit on appeal from the courts in Puerto Rico.
In addition, attorneys attached to the several bureaus of the Department, particularly the Indian Office and the Reclamation Service, have assisted the Department of Justice in the conduct of litigation involving interests of this Department.
During the first session of the Seventy-fourth Congress the legislative section of the office of the Solicitor has prepared or assisted in the preparation of approximately 115 bills, has prepared or reviewed approximately 1,140 reports and letters dealing with legislation, and has represented the Department before congressional committees on some 70 oeeasions.
However, much of the basic work of preparing a departmental legislative program must be done when Congress is not in session.
As a condition precedent to the preparation of any important legislative measure and to the exposition of such a bill to congressional committees a thorough exploration of all pertinent factual and legal aspects of the proposal must be conducted.
This requires investigation and study in Washington and not infrequently in the field.
In anticipation of questions which may be raised, potential constitutional issues must be examined in many cases and opinions must be written for reference as occasion may arise.
Among the bills sponsored by the Department and enacted during the first session of the Seventy-fourth Congress, two are mentioned particularly.
Public, No. 292 is an act authorizing the Secretary of the Interior to acquire, restore, and preserve historic sites and properties.
No longer will it be necessary to rely upon public-spirited and wealthy individuals to preserve and restore historical landmarks of the United States.
Public, No. 297½ is an act abolishing the present unsatisfactory permit system of mining upon the public domain and substituting a more equitable system of leasing, under which the United States, the States, and the reclamation fund will receive the royalty benefits which have heretofore accrued in large measure to middlemen who eontributed little oř nothing toward the development of the oil resources of the Nation.
It is noteworthy that the legal business of the General Land Office has increased rather than decreased since the general public land withdrawals effected by the Executive orders of November 26, 1934, and February 5, 1935.
In fact, the promulgation of those orders has had the effect of stimulation of recourse by claimants to every equity or alleged equity and to every legal right of appeal possible in order to make their claims relate back to some time prior to the withdrawals.
The Solicitor has supplied requisite legal services to aid Indian tribes in drafting constitutions, bylaws and charters authorized by the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934.
At the same time members of the immediate staff of the Solicitor and attorneys in the Indian Office have devoted much time to a comprehensive revision of the complicated and uncoordinated departmental regulations governing the conduct of Indians.
New rules of May 31, 1935, represent a thorough revision of the entire body of regulations concerning Indian probate matters.
A similar revision of Indian law and order regulations has been completed.
Work continues on grazing, leasing, and other regulations.
In addition, Indian liquor laws and regulations are being accorded particular study with a view to recommending legislative and administrative action for the more effective control of liquor traffie upon Indian reservations.
In the initiation, organization, construction, and management of some 40 reclamation projects the condemnation and purchase of land and rights-of-way.
As was pointed out a year ago in the annual report of the Solicitor, the current program of the Bureau of Reclamation, financed principally by emergeney public-works allotments, is almost as extensive as the aggregate of operations heretofore undertaken by the Bureau during the first 30 years of its existenee.
This increase in reclamation work has caused the legal business of the Bureau to increase 5 or 6 fold during the last 2 years.
Yet, the legal staff attached to the Bureau has not been increased at all.
The present staff is carrying a burden greatly in excess of reasonable assignment.
The regular annual appropriation for this Division to conduct investigations for the Interior Department for the fiscal year 1935 was $362,560.
The average number of active field investigators, exclusive of special agents in charge, was 75; average number of clerks employed in divisional offices, 20; total force employed, includingspecial agents in charge, and the Washington office, 100.
Due to the activities of field investigators, $30,638.65 was collected and turned into the Treasury and 224,214.59 acres were restored to the public domain, representing fraudulent entries, etc., canceled on proceedings based on their reports.
On July 1, 1934, there were pending field investigation 8,476 cases, During the year 8.237 additional cases were received; 8,546 cases investigated, reported, and elosed, leaving 8,167 cases pending investigation.
Of the reports submitted, 2,512 were adverse and 6,034 favorable.
On the recommendation of this Department 27 civil suits were brought by the Department of Justice.
Twenty-one cases were tried.
As a result of the suits, $12,808.35 was recovered and 1,480 acres restored to the public domain.
The criminal cases handled in the Division consisted of: Conspiracy, 21; criminal, 11; intimidation, 2; and unlawful enclosure, 18.
Of the criminal cases tried 3 resulted in conviction and prison sentence was imposed in each case.
The cases investigated by the Division for the various bureaus of the Department, other than the General Land Office, were as follows: Office of Indian Affairs, 126; National Park Service, 25; Bureau of Reclamation, 7; miscellaneous, 7; Geological Survey, 4.
The Director of Investigations conducts all investigations for the Publie Works Administration.
His staff personnel on June 30, 1935, including the national office at Washington, consisted of 10 special agents in charge, 185 special agents, and 125 other employees.
Cases investigated by the Division of Investigations relate to expenditure of Publie Works’ funds, collusion and fraudulent bidding where contractors and subcontractors are involved, wages and disputes arising from rates of pay, irregularities in the employment of labor and use of materials, code violations, underpayment of employees, repayment to contractors of wages of employees, contracts relating to housing projects, governmental personnel, and misconduct of officers and employees of the Public Works Administration, activities of the National Reemployment Service and other governmental agencies, to which Public Works' funds are allotted.
These investigations, having to do with the allotment and expenditure of large sums of money, enabled the administrative officers to uncover numerous frauds and irregularities and prevent substantial losses to the Government.
It is notable that a saving of $64,449,- 927.74 was effected by the Public Works Administration through activities of the Division of Investigations since inception of the administration in 1933.
The administrative expense of the Division of Investigations from the beginning to June 30, 1935, amounted to $1,337,350.90, or a fraction slightly more than 2 percent of the total amount saved.
This saving was accomplished by and through investigations covering such items as cancelation or rescission of contract bids and awards where fraud or collusion was found to exist, rescission of allotments for loans and/or grants due to irregularities or fraudulent representation; lack of economic soundness in projects investigated, inadequate financial ability of the borrower or his inability to liquidate loans, and the use of insufficient or inferior material in construetion work.
There also was ineluded penalties imposed on contracts for violation of the 8-hour law on Federal projects, reduetion in allotments where it was found that the borrower had included exeessive amounts in estimates covering overhead and engineering fees, reduction of allotments due to fictitious estimates and excessive appraisals covering the purchase of lands for projects sites and savings effected by requiring a change in the method of construetion from force account to a contract basis.
The Division of Investigations also effected other savings not shown in this total.
One of the more important of these was reimbursement of wages to labor where such pay was wrongfully withheld by contractors through what has been designated as the “kickback racket.
It is estimated that this saving to labor by such reimbursements amounted to $258,331.14.
Thirteen thousand seven hundred and twenty-two cases were investigated and reported by special agents of the Division of Investigations; 10,520 cases were reported favorably and 3,202 cases were reported adversely.
Included in the foregoing were 85 criminal prosecutions, resulting in 14 cases receiving court action, 16 cases resulting in indictments, and prison sentences were imposed in six cases.
The Director of Investigations conducted 107 investigations for the National Reemployment Service, Department of Labor, and 400 investigations were made for the Director of the Contract Division of the Natīonal Industrial Recovery Administration, involving code violations on P. W. A. projects.
The Director of Investigations performed all investigations, under the supervision of the Secretary of the Interior in his capacity of administrator for the petroleum industry, in the enforcement of the provisions under the regulations pursuant to section 9c of the National Industrial Recovery Act, relating to the transportation in interstate commerce of oil produced in violation of State regulations, until the United States Supreme Court in the case of the Panama Refining Co., et al., dated January 7, 1935, held these regulations to be unconstitutional, and in the enforcement of the provisions of the Code of Fair Competition for the Petroleum Industry, until the decision in the case of A. L. Schecter Poultry Corporation and others, dated May 27, 1935, declared the code unconstitutional.
The personnel until June 15, 1935, the date the code work ceased, consisted of 13 special agents in charge, 2 acting special agents in charge, 78 special agents, and 85 employees, inclusive of the personnel in the Washington office.
The total number of eases investigated was 8,885, of which 3,065 were reported on and closed.
Of the total number of cases investigated, 420 were recommended for prosecution and in 341 cases prosecution was begun.
The investigations were carried on by the Director of Investigations by a personnel of 1 agent in eharge, 23 special agents, and 14 clerks.
The total number of cases investigated was 1,223, resulting in 25 cases prosecuted.
Under section 35 of the Criminal Code, as amended, 11 prosecutions.
Civil cases, resulting in court action, 2.
The Director of Investigations conducted investigations in all States other than Texas of violation of the Connally Act of February 22, 1935 (Publie. No. 14), relating to interstate and foreign commerce in petroleum and its products bv prohibiting the shipment in such commerce of petroleum and its products produced in violation of State law.
The existing personnel of the Division of Investigations engaged in this work comprises an office force in Washington and a field force of 74 emplovees.
The total number of cases investigated was 18.
The investigations of cases arising under the regulations under section 9c and the Connally Oil Act were made in conjunction with a marine section of 1 special agent in charge, 2 special agents, and 15 emplovees, operating a number of patrol boats, to inspect tanker cargoes of petroleum and petroleum products.
Reports are made by the masters of all vessels transporting petroleum or petroleum produets thereof, in the loading and discharging of cargoes, amounting to a total of 284,054,468 barrels, moved in interstate commerce from the State of Texas.
The reports, approximating 125 per day, constitute the first attempt in the history of coastwise commerce for a governmental agency to secure an accurate record of coastwise and intercoastal movements of these products.
The information is valuable to the Federal Government in the collection of taxes due on petroleum products.
Investigations of irregularities in expenditures of funds allotted to the Federal Relief Administrator for civil relief, by the Public Works Administration, were conducted by the Director of Investigations until February 14, 1934.
While there were no investigations of new cases during the past fiscal year, there were 23 cases pending with the United States attorneys for prosecution; 6 indictments secured: 5 cases resulted in court action; 4 cases involved prison sentences: 8 dismissed; and 9 are till pending action of the United States attorneys and the Department of Justice.
The act of June 28, 1934 (48 Stat. 1269), commonly known as the "Taylor Grazing Act ", is a new development in the national policy for conservation of natural resources in accord with the traditions of the Department of the Interior.
The purposes of the new law as set forth in its title are “To stop injury to the public grazing lands by preventing overgrazing and soil deterioration; to provide for their orderly use, improvement, and development; to stabilize the livestock industry dependent upon the public range; and for other purposes.
The first step in the administration of this law was taken July 9, 1934, when Secretary Ickes designated representatives of the Department of the Interior to hold a series of preliminary conferences in the West.
The delegation named was headed by Assistant Secretary Oscar L. Chapman and included Fred W. Johnson, Commissioner of the General Land Office; Rufus G. Poole, Assistant Solicitor; Hugh H. Bennett, Direetor Soil Studies; T. C. Havell, General Land Office; J. H. Favorite, Division of Investigations; John F. Deeds, Geological Survey; and Dr. Wendell Lund, acting in a secretarial capacity.
These representatives held public hearings as follows: July 23, Salt Lake City, Utah; July 26, Boise, Idaho; July 31, Billings, Mont.
August 2, Casper, Wyo.
August 6, Glenwood Springs, Colo.
September 14, Albuquerque, N. Mex.
September 19, Prescott, Ariz.
September 24, San Francisco, Calif.
September 26, Reno, Nev.
In his report on these conferences Assistant Secretary Chapman states that ranchmen throughout the West realize that the vast public ranges which are being overgrazed and depleted must be protected and restored or they will soon be replaced by acres of desert land.
They realize that it is to their own interest, as well as to the interests of their States and the Nation, that these lands be protected by a sane uniform policy.
Meanwhile, in order to handle the multitude of inquiries and other details incident to the administration of this law, the Secretary, on July 17, named Mr. N. F. Waddell, special agent, Division of Investigations, Acting Director in Charge of Grazing, pending the appointment of a director to handle the grazing program.
The new Director of Grazing was authorized, with the concurrence of the agencies concerned and the approval of the Secretary, to select such assistants as were required for the administration of the Taylor Grazing Act from the staffs of the Geological Survey, the General Land Office, and the Division of Investigations.
At the close of the year a total personnel of 35 people were thus assigned to the Division— 21 from the Geological Survev, 8 from the Division of Investigations, and 6 from the General Land Office.
The salaries and expenses of the Director and detailed employees up to June 30, 1935, amounted to approximately $110,000.
The salaries and expenses included in this figure cover only the period of detail, which for the most part was less than half of the fiscal vear.
It is estimated that an additional expense of not less than $100,000 was incurred by the cooperating agencies.
On December 13.
1934, the Secretary announced that a series of conferences would be held in Denver, Colo., February 11 to 16, to discuss questions of national policy in the exchange and use of public lands as they may be affected by the grazing regulations.
Officials from the States of Arizona, California, .
Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oregon, South Dakota, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming were asked to attend these conferences.
The first two days were devoted to State lands.
On February 12, 1935, Secretary Ickes spoke before a general assembly of all persons attending the conference.
The Secretary discussed the abuses inherent in unrestricted grazing on the open public domain and the benefits to be obtained from prudent use of the land under the terms of the Taylor Grazing Act.
He besought the intelligent and whole-hearted support of western stockmen to the end that depleted ranges might be restored to normaley.
The State land representatives adopted a series of resolutions concerning the administration of the public domain with particular reference to grants in aid of the public schools and for other purposes.
One of the primary requests from the State land agents concerned facilitation of exchanges.
To accomplish this purpose the President signed the Executive order of May 20, 1935, modifying Executive order of November 26, 1934.
The primary task in the administration of the public domain under the Taylor Grazing Act contemplates establishment of grazing districts where the area of public land is adequate to warrant such action for (1) conservation of natural resources, and (2) stabilization of the livestock industry dependent upon the range.
Over a long period of years grazing use in excess of carrying capacity has caused a progressive deterioration of that land through displacement of the more palatable forage plants by species of low palatability or of no worth for grazing.
In this transition natural erosion processes have been accelerated, causing loss of soil fertility, and in places even actual removal of soil cover, thus rendering the land incapable of producing a density of any vegetative growth equivalent to natural conditions.
This deterioration has been in progress over a period of 35 to 40 years.
Conservation of natural resources under these conditions requires not only prevention of further waste but restoration of the land resources.
By the halting of all land-use activities nature could accomplish this restoration unaided, but such drastic action would ereate an intolerable economic disturbance throughout the West.
Accordingly the Department is planning to accomplish restoration of the land by other means to the utmost practicable limit.
A wide variety of range restoration projects will be undertaken as part of the Emergeney Conservation Work Program of the Division now being performed by the Civilian Conservation Corps.
These projects will include an extensive program of water development to permit a more even distribution of the livestoek on the public range.
Eradieation of rodents will be undertaken to reduce their consumption of the feed resourees.
Drift fences will be constructed to permit more effective range management, and in some localities trails will be constructed to make present inaccessible feed supplies available for use.
Small sample plots will be enclosed with rodent-proof fences to furnish definite indication of the rate of restoration obtainable by natural processes and the character of the natural vegetation.
Erosion control will be included in the program where necessary, as well as the eradication of poison plants.
Such activities, with a limitation of the livestock population to aceord with the feed resources actually available, as well as to proper seasons of use will comprise the initial activities toward restoration of normal range conditions.
On November 26, 1934, the President signed an Executive order withdrawing for classification all publie lands in the States of Arizona, California, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oregon, South Dakota, Utah, and Wyoming.The order was limited to these States because they contained the only areas which were then regarded as properly subject to inclusion in grazing districts.
The withdrawal was made in furtherance of the organization of such districts, the exchange of State-owned and privately owned lands, the sale or lease of isolated diseonnected tracts, as well as the other purposes of the Taylor Grazing Act.
The order declares that classification of the lands involved is necessary for the effective accomplishment of its purposes and that the lands are being reserved pending completion of such classification work, unless sooner revoked by the President or the Congress.
By Executive order of February 5, 1935, the public lands in the States of Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Kansas, Louisiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Nebraska, Oklahoma, Washington, and Wisconsin were withdrawn for classification and pending determination of the most useful purpose to which said lands may be put in furtherance of the land program of the Federal Emergeney Relief Administration and for the conservation and development of natural resources.
Where that program is involved or can be aided by the organization of grazing districts it is anticipated that such districts will be organized under the Taylor Grazing Act.
By Executive order of May 20, 1935, the President so amended Executive order of November 26, 1934, as to make it applicable to all lands within the States involved therein“upon the cancelation or release of prior entries, selections, or claims, or upon the revocation of prior withdrawals, unless expressly otherwise provided in the order of revocation.
In the same order the Secretary of the Interior is authorized in his discretion and in harmony with the purposes of the Taylor Grazing Act of June 28, 1934, to accept title to base lands in exchange for other lands subject to exchange under the terms of that act.
The above-listed hearings involved relatively small grazing units sponsored by local interests with but little reference to broad regional plans.
Confliets in areas requested for inclusion in adjoining districts were inevitable as well as a multiplicity of hearings in which the problems, and often even the people involved, were substantially identical.
Notice of the December 4 hearing at Malta, Mont., included in the foregoing list, is a duplication of a notice previously published.
At the State-wide hearings, after an explanation of the terms of the Taylor Grazing Act as applicable to the conditions in each locality, the need for subdividing the State into grazing districts comprising public-domain areas convenient and proper for administration, was given special emphasis.
At these meetings State committees, composed of representative stockmen, were elected to recommend boundaries for such grazing districts.
Following the series of State-wide hearings the committees elected at such hearings considered the range problems of their respective States and recommended the establishment of 50 districts involving an aggregate area of approximately 142,000,000 acres of vacant, unreserved, unappropriated public land.
The action of these committees was taken without reference to the provision in the existing law limiting the creation of such districts to 80,000,000 acres of vacant, unappropriated, unreserved public land.
Accordingly, in the absence of further authority from the Congress, only 32 of the districts proposed could be established.
The districts selected for establishment included areas in which range administration was most urgently needed and the lands were conveniently located for administration.
Division of Grazing, circular no. 1, entitled “ Rules providing for special elections for district advisors to assist in the management of grazing districts ", was approved by the Secretary, April 23, 1935. Circular no. 2, entitled "Rules for the guidance of district advisors in recommending the issuance of grazing licenses", was approved by the Secretary, May 31, 1935.
These circulars contain the general regulations issued during the year for the administration of grazing distriets.
Under circular no. 1, the services of local persons familiar with the range problems will be secured by a special election of district advisors from among the local stockmen to serve until plans are completed which contemplate a regular annual election.
By this means the practical local viewpoint will be available at all times in the administration of the law.
These advisors will receive no regular salary but will be paid $5 a day for subsistence and necessary travel expenses.
They will take the regular oath of office of a Federal official and will be the local governing agency as to all matters of a range regulatory nature concerning their particular district.
The Interior Department will exercise necessary supervision and provide basic technical eriteria for conservation of natural resources.
Cireular no. 2 contains preliminary rules for allocating public range privileges and general rules governing the use of the land.
This circular provides that until such time as land classification studies can be completed and the commensurate value of properties dependent upon the public range determined, only temporary revocable licenses will be issued.
Furthermore, during this temporary period.
In the preparation of these regulations an effort has been made to take immediate steps for range regulation in a manner that would permit needed readjustments to be made gradually and on the hasis of thorough investigations.
Furthermore, some time must be allowed to permit all interested persons to file applications for grazing permits and for the examination and rating of such applications under the terms of the Taylor Aet.
The enactment of the Taylor grazing law released the Interior Department from a ban on the use of Civilian Conservation Corps enrollees for range-improvement activities.
This ban was placed by the Secretary because range improvement to facilitate grazing without regulation probably would inerease the burden of overgrazing and the resultant waste of natural resources.
In addition, therefore, to the organizing of grazing districts it has been necessary to inaugurate a program of range improvement.
The Division has been allotted the services of 60 camps with 12,000 enrollees for a comprehensive program of range work.
The activities of these enrollees will be directed by persons competent to direct such work projects as well drilling, construction of dams, trails, fences, ete.
During the fiscal year these activities were largely limited to selecting camp sites, purchasing equipment, and developing work plans.
A total of $905,392.43 was expended.
The 60 camp sites selected are distributed by States, as follows: Arizona, 8; California, 3; Colorado, 5; Idaho, 6; Nevada, 11; New Mexico, 8; Oregon, 6; Utah, 10; Wyoming, 3.
The plans for the foregoing camps contemplate some changes in locations where climatic conditions preclude work during winter months.
In order to keep such changes at a minimum, especially because only 7 camps were available at the beginning of the present summer season, very little work is being performed in the northern public-domain areas.
It is anticipated that during the 1936 season a large number of camps will be moved to these northern areas.
On March 21, 1935, Acting Seeretary Walters approved an order to establish in the administration of the Taylor Grazing Act a technical organization qualified to determine the surface utility of areas subject to the provisions of this law by transferring to the new organization the former Agricultural Division of the Conservation Branch, Geological Survey.
The functions and responsibility for the duties formerly vested in the Agricultural Division were also transferred to the Division of Grazing.
The transferred functions are assigned to the agricultural section of the Division of Grazing.
During the period April 1, 1935, to June 30, 1935, these functions were restricted largely to office phases necessary to appropriate action on applications for agricultural classification and for designations under the stock-raising and enlarged homestead laws.
Action was completed on 469 cases; 282 new cases were received, resulting in a reduction of 105 pending cases during this period.
Office activities not otherwise indicated comprised the designation of 160 acres in 1 State as subject to the enlarged homestead act, and to the inelusion of 1,640 acres in 7 States in public water reserves; the exclusion of 160 acres in 1 State from such reserves, and net increase of the gross public water-reserve areas in 7 States to 508,228 acres.
Recommendations for designations of lands under the enlarged and stock-raising homestead acts and the Nevada groundwater act were substantially terminated by the Executive orders of November 26, 1934, and February 5, 1935, withdrawing public lands for classification.
Such designations are now being made only where necessary for the purpose of permitting the adjudication of homestead entries having valid claims established prior to the withdrawal.
On June 30, 1935, the outstanding designated area under the enlarged homestead act included 268,467,745 acres; the stock-raising homestead act, 102,429,247 acres; and the Nevada ground-water act, 1,732,095 acres.
Areas classified as nonirrigable, nontimbered, chiefly valuable for grazing and raising forage crops, and of such charaeter that 640 acres are reasonably required for the support of a family.
The Division of Geographie Names was in process of organization on July 1, 1934.
From August 1, 1934, following the retirement, on July 31, 1934, of Mr. Frank Bond, who had been chairman of the former board, until an advisory committee was appointed on September 30, 1934, the work of the Division was in charge of Mr. John J. Cameron, who had been secretary of the former board, and who was appointed assistant to the executive officer, Division of Geographic Names, on June 16, 1934.
On September 30, 1934, an advisory committee on geographie names was appointed by the Secretary of the Interior, who directed that the advisory committee “will function relatively in the same capacity as the old United States Geographie Board"; that an executive committee, appointed October 17, 1934, and consisting of three members of the advisory committee, "will be charged with the duty of keeping the machinery running in an efficient manner"; and that “Mr. John J. Cameron will serve as acting executive secretary."
Under the foregoing arrangement, the work of the Division, in its broader aspects, was directed by the executive committee, while Mr. Cameron was responsible for the administrative routine and investigative activities of the office of the Division.
Decisions on geographic names, up to their final approval by the Secretary of the Interior, were made by the executive committee.
The advisory committee, as a whole, delegated most of the matters involving deeision on individual geographic names to the executive committee, and reserved for its own activity chiefly the broader problems of procedure and nomenclature.
The organization outlined above continued until June 24, 1935, when George C. Martin was appointed as executive secretary of the Division of Geographic Names, and when Mr. Cameron resumed his.
The.
The use of the possessive form in geographic names was also considered.
The executive committee held 21 meetings during the year at which 214 names were approved.
In addition to the names that were automatically rejected by the approval of the above, 15 other new names were rejected as unsuitable for one reason or another, with a request that unobjectionable names be submitted as substitutes.
Six of the rejected names were disapproved because they were proposed in honor of living persons.
In the case of all new names, evidence was required as to the fact that the persons after whom the features were to be named were no longer living.
In addition to the above, there was consideration, without final action, of 58 names, some of which were approved in subsequent meetings.
There was submitted for publication at the close of the fiseal year the manuscript of a report containing all decisions rendered between July 1, 1934, and June 30, 1935, and entitled “Decisions of the Advisory Committee on Geographic Names, No. 1."
This report includes the 214 decisions noted above and also 53 decisions that were rendered but not published by the former board, and that were reaffirmed by the advisory committee, making 267 names in all that were approved.
The successful accomplishment of the work of the Division of Geographic Names is dependent on close and cordial cooperation with all the map-making and map-using departments of the Federal Government, with the State geographic boards and with other State and municipal officers and organizations, and with a large number of private investigators of local geography, local history, and other subjects that concern geographic names.
Cordial cooperation has been maintained with all of these sources of help, and is gratefully acknowledged.
The Division of Territories and Island Possessions was ereated by Executive Order No. 6726, issued by the President on May 29, 1934, and effective 60 days thereafter.
This order provided for the transfer of all functions pertaining to Puerto Rico previously vested in the Bureau of Insular Affairs, War Department, to the Division of Territories and Island Possessions to be administered under the supervision of the Secretary of the Interior.
In accordance with the intention of the order to centralize and coordinate territorial affairs, the activities pertaining to Alaska, Hawaii, and the Virgin Islands, already under the jurisdiction of the Department of the Interior, were transferred to the new Division.
These activities ineluded not only the general supervision of the respective governors’ offices, but also The Alaska Railroad, The Alaska Road Commission, Alaska reindeer, Alaska insane, the Virgin Islands Co., the Government-owned Bluebeard Castle Hotel at St. Thomas, Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico Hurricane Loan Relief Section, and the Hawaiian Homes Commission.
During the year the Division functioned effectively in cooperation with the Federal Emergency Relief Administration in establishing a farming community at Palmer, Alaska.
This is generally referred to as the Matanuska Valley colonization project.
Two hundred families on relief rolls, including approximately 1,000 people, were selected from the States of Michigan, Minnesota, and Wiseonsin, and colonized in Alaska.
A fire in the early fall of 1934 practically wiped out the city of Nome, Alaska.
Through the efforts of the Division of Territories and Island Possessions, the Federal Emergency Relief Administration made $50,000 available for emergency-relief purposes; funds and the services of the American Red Cross were also promptly secured; and a representative of the Public Works Administration was sent from Washington by airplane to Nome, Alaska, to work out a reconstruetion program for the stricken city.
An interdepartmental committee on Alaska under the chairmanship of the director of the Division of Territories and Island Possessions was created by the President to work out a plan for the eoordination of Federal activities in the Territory.
This committee held several meetings dealing with the colonization project, road building, air-field construction, geological service, fisheries, etc., and it is believed that a constructive long-range program for colonization and development of Alaska's vast natural resources will result.
The Division has been active in supervising the administration of the Government of the Virgin Islands and in formulating a program for the economic and social rehabilitation of the people living in the islands.
This program, which was well under way, embraces subsistence homesteads, restoration of the sugar and rum industries to the position of importance which they occupied in previous years; establishment of a number of small industries; road building, etc.
The Government-owned Bluebeard Castle Hotel was completed during the year and opened to the public on January 1, 1935.
The first 6 months of its operation were encouraging, and a comprehensive program for tourist development is planned for the future.
The economic and social problems of Puerto Rico are extremely formidable.
The island is overpopulated and the masses of the people are prostrated.
The Division is giving close attention to the situation, and it is believed that a long-range program, financed by the Federal Government, for the economic and social rehabilitation of the people is the only practical solution.
Such a program is being formulated and it is hoped that it will be made effective in the near future.
Hawaii is a well-organized and comparatively prosperous Territory, and while it has many problems, the local government is functioning very effectively in their solution.
During the year the Division's activities in relation to Hawaii have been generally routine in character.
The activities of the office of the Adviser on Negro Affairs may be divided into two groups: Those matters which concern the Department of the Interior and the Public Works Administration; and those things which are outside the direct province of the Department of the Interior and the Public Works Administration.
Prior to the transfer of the Division of Subsistence Homesteads to the Rural Resettlement Administration, this office concerned itself with the participation of Negroes in the plans of the Subsistence Homesteads Division.
Much time was spent by this office in keeping itself apprized of developments and directing to the attention of the Secretary the inactivity of the Subsistence Homesteads Division as it affected Negroes.
This office has called to the attention of the Administration of Public Works the diserimination against Negro labor which has occurred in the Public Works Administration.
It has attempted to devise plans for the prevention of such diserimination and has succeeded in preparing a formula of prima facie evidence which has been accepted by the Administrator of Public Works.
The Adviser on Negro Affairs has consulted constantly with the Housing Division in the planning of housing projects in Negro slum areas.
He has supplied the Housing Division with pertinent data from Census reports for the Negro population in some 30 cities, and has offered any other information which he has deemed useful.
He also has made some suggestions as to policy insofar as it affected Negro participation in the program of the Housing Division.
The Adviser on Negro Affairs and his assistant have visited proposed sites for housing developments, have negotiated agreements for the employment of Negro workers on the projects, and have nurtured favorable opinion among colored people toward proposed housing developments.
In order to facilitate the latter, this office not only has explained the program to the local residents, but it also has insisted upon integration of Negroes into the program.
This has been accomplished through Negro representation on local sponsoring committees and the employment of colored arehitects on the projects.
The office of the Adviser on Negro Affairs has resubmitted the survey of Negro white-collar and skilled workers to the Works Progress Administration.
The project has been revised several times and is now being reviewed by the statistical coordinator of the Works Progress Administration.
The Adviser's office has been told that the proposed survey is receiving favorable consideration.
The office of the Adviser on Negro Affairs has concerned itself with relations between the Negro emplovees and the Department of the Interior and the Public Works Administration.
This office has been particularly interested in the classification of Negro employees and the promotion of competent colored workers from the status of messengers to clerical positions.
The Adviser on Negro Affairs has published several articles and delivered speeches concerning the work of the Publie Works Administration and the Department of the Interior as it affects Negroes.
These articles and speeches have been intended to give colored citizens a true statement of what is being done in their behalf by the Publie Works Administration and the Department of the Interior.
The Adviser on Negro Affairs has offered suggestions to other administrations concerning their relation with Negroes.
Memoranda have been prepared and conferences have been held with the following ageneies: (1) The Labor Department in relation to the proposed Security Act; (2) the Rural Resettlement Administration in relation to its general poliey and its labor relation; (3) the Youth Administration in relation to its general policy and labor relations.
This office also has furnished information to other agencies, including the N. R. A. and the F. E. R. A.
As a result of the precedent established by the Housing Division in the Publie Works Administration, we believe that the Rural Resettlement Administration is going to take steps to set up standards which will do much to assure equitable distribution of employment between white and Negro workers.
Acting under the War Minerals Relief Act (40 Stat. 1272) as amended February 13, 1929 (40 Stat. 1166), the Secretary of the Interior made 13 awards and 3 disallowances during the fiscal year ending June 30, 1935.
Three awards, totaling $49,649.71, carried over from the previous fiscal year, and six awards, totaling $15,428.96, were paid through the Treasury deficiency appropriations bill (Public, No. 21, 74th Cong., 1st sess.) in the total amount of $65,078.67.
Seven awards, totaling $10,455.88, were certified to the General Accounting Office to be paid through a future Treasury deficiency appropriation.
Eight cases were heard and dismissed by the court, which held: (1) Ore buying, independent milling operations, and manufacture of ferro-alloys were not admissible items of loss within the meaning of the War Minerals Relief Act; (2) elaims were not assignable by operation of law, and death of claimant and dissolution of corporation relieved the Government of liability under the act.
Nine cases were abated through failure to substitute Ickes for Wilbur as Secretary of the Interior.
One case was dismissed by court for failure of plaintiff to prosecute the case.
During the fiscal year 19 decrees were certified to the Secretary of the Interior.
Three bills to further amend the War Minerals Relief Act were filed in the Seventy-fourth Congress.
One bill, to permit claimants who did not file petitions under the 1929 amendment to submit claims for reconsideration by the Secretary of the Interior without recourse to the courts, and to permit claims to pass by operation of law to a legal successor; and two bills, to direct reimbursement for interest paid or accrued on borrowed money from March 2, 1919, to date.
These bills were not enacted within this fiscal year.
The Secretary of the Interior was appointed Administrator of the Petroleum Industry under the National Industrial Recovery Act by Executive order dated August 28, 1933.
The Petroleum Administrative Board funetions under an administrative order of the Administrator.
During the life of the Code of Fair Competition for the Petroleum Industry (Aug. 19, 1933, to May 27. 1935, on which lastnamed date all codes approved under the National Industrial Recovery Act were invalidated by the Supreme Court of the United States) the Board assisted and advised the Administrator in the administration and enforcement of the code.
The Board also assisted and advised the Secretary of the Interior in the administration and enforcement of section 9 (e) of the National Industrial Recovery Act, under which the President by Executive order of July 11, 1933, prohibited the shipment in interstate commerce of petroleum or the produets thereof produced in excess of the amount permitted by State law.
By Executive order of July 14, 1933, the President had delegated the administration and enforcement of this provision to the Secretary of the Interior.
Said section 9 (e) was invalidated by the Supreme Court of the United States on January 7, 1935.
On February 22, 1935, Congress reenacted the principles of section 9 (c) by prohibiting shipments in interstate or foreign commerce of petroleum produced in excess of the amount permitted by State law, and the products of sueh petroleum.
Under authority granted by the act the President again by Executive order, dated February 28, 1935, delegated to the Secretary of the Interior the administration of this act with the exception of its provision permitting the suspension under certain conditions of the prohibition of shipments.
The Board has assisted the Secretary in his duties under this act.
After the invalidation of the codes Congress on June 14, 1935, amended and extended the National Industrial Recovery Act, which now expires April 1, 1936.
By Executive order of June 15, 1935, the President extended existing agencies under the act, including the Administrator for the Petroleum Industry; and the Board in addition to its functions under the Connally Act is engaged in advising and assisting the Administrator in those funetions authorized by the amended act which relate to the petroleum industry.
At the end of the fiscal year the Board consisted of Charles Fahy, chairman; Norman L. Meyers, E. B. Swanson, and John W. Frey, members.
Mr. Nathan R. Margold had retired as ehairman November 22, 1934, to devote his full time to the duties of Solicitor of the Interior Department, and Mr. J. Howard Marshall had resigned as a member of the Board on June 21, 1935.
The labor provisions of the code were administered under the Administrator by the Petroleum Labor Policy Board with such assistance on the part of the Petroleum Administrative Board as the Administrator and the Labor Board desired.
In October 1934 a Federal Tender Board was created in east Texas to aid in the administration of section 9 (e) of the National Industrial Recovery Act, composed of Norman L. Meyers (chairman), J. Howard Marshall, and Ralph Horween, members.
Mr. McCorquodale was the attorney for the Tender Board in east Texas.
This Board ceased operations when the section was invalidated January 7, 1935.
Under the terms of the act of February 22, 1935, above referred to, Federal Tender Board No. 1 was created in east Texas on March 1, 1935, to administer the act in that area.
This Board was composed of Norman L. Meyers (chairman), M. S. MeCorquodale, and John F. Davis, members.
Mr. McCorquodale resigned at the close of the fiscal year.
Under the same act Federal Petroleum Agency No. 1, with Mr. George W. Van Fleet as Director, was established on April 25, 1935, to perform the investigational work incident to the operations of Federal Tender Board No. 1.
The Petroleum Administrative Board, the Petroleum Labor Policy Board, the original Tender Board, Federal Tender Board No. 1, and Federal Petroleum Agency No. 1 expended during the fiscal year approximately $560,000 out of a total of $739,345 available for expenditure.
With the invalidation of the code as a result of the Supreme Court decision of May 27, 1935, the activities of the Petroleum Administrative Board and of the Petroleum Labor Policy Board under the National Industrial Recovery Act, though not of the Petroleum Administrative Board under the Connally Act, have been restricted to a series of studies and to research work hereinafter referred to.
The Code of Fair Competition for the Petroleum Industry was in effect during the entire fiscal year except the last 33 days thereof.
Under the code, in conjunction with the success achieved beginning in October 1934 by the Federal Tender Board in sharply restricting movements in interstate commerce of illegal crude and gasoline, and particularly under the successful operations of the production and refinery provisions of the code, the petroleum industry as a whole achieved a balance between the production of crude oil and the manufacture of gasoline on the one hand and the requirements of the Nation for crude oil and gasoline on the other.
This was the purpose of the production and refining provisions of the code.
The theory of these provisions of the code, particularly the production provisions, and the amendments to the refinery provisions of April 24, 1934, was the balancing of supply with demand in the interest of conservation and of stability within the industry.
As a necessary concomitant were the provisions of the code designed to regulate the development of new fields through the approval of plans designed to permit greatest ultimate recovery and economical and scientific development.
Under the production provisions of the code the estimates of required production were prepared currently by the Bureau of Mines and the Petroleum Administrative Board upon the basis of statistical data received and tabulated by the Bureau of Mines and were recommended to the Petroleum Administrator by the Petroleum Administrative Board.
They were certified by the Petroleum Administrator to the regulatory commissions of States having such agencies, to industrial proration committees in States without regulatory commissions, and to the Governors of oil producing States which were without either regulatory commissions or industrial proration committees.
The method employed in making the estimates was based primarily upon calculation of gasoline production necessary to meet the demand therefor, with additions to or subtractions from storage, and the quantity of crude oil necessary to manufacture the required gasoline, together with such crude oil as was required for export and use directly in the field for fuel purposes.
Allowances also were made for crude-oil imports and withdrawals from or additions to crude oil storage.
During the fiscal year the produetion of crude petroleum in the United States exceeded by slightly less than 4 percent the amount determined by the Federal agency to be sufficient to provide for consumer demand for petroleum products after due account had been taken for probable withdrawals from storage and of anticipated imports.
Production in excess of the allowables was less during the latter portion of the fiscal year than in the earlier months, as shown by the table accompanying the complete report of which this is a summary.
The balancing of erude-oil production with consumer demand for petroleum products as provided for in the code did not necessitate the restrietion of output during the past fiscal year below that of the preceding year.
One of the objectives of the industry in connection with crude-oil production has been to establish as nearly a uniform rate of production throughout the year as possible, as such uniformity leads to efficiency in operation, stability of employment, and assists the State regulatory commissions and others in the control of produetion from the various wells and fields within a State.
During the calendar year 1933 erude-oil production varied from 2,102,000 barrels in January to 2,813,000 in June, or a range of 711,000 barrels between the lowest and highest daily rates of production.
During the calendar year 1934 crude-oil production ranged from a low of 2,323,000 barrels in January to a high of 2,655,000 barrels in June, or a difference of 332,000 barrels between the lowest and highest daily rates of production.
This range was identical with that recorded during the 1935 fiscal year when crude-oil production ranged from a low of 2,413,000 barrels daily in November and December 1934 to a high of 2,745,000 barrels daily during June 1935.
This comparison indicates a definite tendeney toward the attainment of the industry's objective of as nearly a uniform monthly rate of production as possible.
During the period of operations under the Petroleum Code, the smaller oil producing States produced a larger share of the national crude-oil output than they did immediately prior to the period of the Petroleum Code.
This change did not result through transfer by the Federal ageney (Department of the Interior) of production allowables from one State to another, but undoubtedly came about through the coordination of Federal and State activity whereby there was eliminated the localized excess production which characterized the petroleum industry immediately prior to the period of the code.
According to section 1, artiele III, of the Petroleum Code, imports of crude petroleum and petroleum products for domestic consumption were to be limited to volumes bearing such ratio to the estimated volume of domestic production as would effectuate the purposes of the Petroleum Code and the National Industrial Recovery Aet.
In the Administrator's order of September 2, 1933, such imports were directed to be limited to an amount not exceeding the average daily imports of petroleum and petroleum products during the last 6 months of 1932.
During that semester total imports of crude and refined products averaged 108,000 barrels daily, of which 10,000 barrels daily were bonded imports and 98,000 barrels were imports for domestic consumption.
During the 1935 fiscal year total receipts of crude petroleum and refined products from foreign countries aggregated 52,354,000 barrels, or a daily average of 143,435 barrels.
Receipts for domestic consumption totaled 34,578,000 barrels, a daily average of 94,734 barrels, or somewhat under the daily average of 98,000 barrels of imports for domestic consumption during the last 6 months of 1932.
Imports in bond, consisted of supplies for vessels and oil imported for refining and export, amounted to 17,776,000 barrels, or a daily average of 48,701 barrels.
Experience under the Petroleum Code demonstrated that the balaneing of erude oil supply with the consumer demand for petroleum products necessitated the control of withdrawals of crude oil from storage as well as the regulation of eurrent produetion and imports.
The general objective of the administration was to permit at all times such withdrawals of crude oil from storage as were necessary to prevent discrimination against refiníng plants which did not have an ample supply from sources of current production; to permit, during periods of high seasonal demand, such withdrawals as were consistent with the reduction of inventories toward economic levels without unreasonable limitation of current production; and, during periods of low seasonal demand, to avoid net withdrawals so that the crude oil required for refining and exporting would be supplied from current produetion.
It was felt that such procedure aided the State authorities and industry committees in the enforcement of production orders, contributed to the prevention of physical waste by lowering the amount of oil held above ground in storage, and avoided discrimination between operators.
In line with this procedure, crude-oil inventories were reduced during the period of high seasonal demand from 357,239,000 barrels on June 30, 1934, to 337,085,000 barrels on December 31, 1934.
The continuation of a high rate of demand during December 1934 and the demonstrated necessity to increase gasoline inventories brought about such a high level of refining operations, with concurrent large withdrawals from crude-oil storage, that production allowables were raised during the month to conform with the inereased demand for erude oil.
Beginning with a revísed inventory figure of 337,254,000 barrels on January 1, 1935, the amount of crude oil in storage was not reduced further during the period of low seasonal demand, but inereased to 338,559,000 on May 31, 1935.
During June 1935, with the beginning of the period of high seasonal demand and with the code invalidated, crude-oil inventories were reduced 3,802,000 barrels, to a level of 334,757,000 barrels on June 30, 1935.
The provision in the Petroleum Code whereby no petroleum produced from a newly discovered source of crude petroleum could be shipped in or affecting interstate commerce unless a plan for the development of the new pool had been approved by the Administrator is regarded quite generally as a particular accomplishment under the Petroleum Code leading to the conservation of petroleum resources and the prevention of waste.
Each new plan as submitted by operators in the new pool was reviewed by the technical staff of the Petroleum Administrative Board and the United States Geological Survey before submission to the Administrator.
Where divided views existed concerning the provisions contained in the plan as submitted, hearings either in Washington or in the field were held concerning the merits of respective development programs.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 1935, the Petroleum Administrator approved 122 plans for the orderly development of new oil pools.
The refining article of the Petroleum Code provided for a joint governmental and industrial organization in which the Federal ageney determined the total production of gasoline necessary to meet the current demand therefor and the proper total inventories of gasoline, and the planning and coordination committee divided the national total of production and inventory changes into district totals, and district allocators or allocating agencies divided the totals among plants within the district.
Provision also was made for the hearing of appeals from plant and district allocations, with the result that the original determinations were in several instances amended as the needs for additional gasoline production became evident.
Gasoline production in the United States exceeded the total determined as necessary by but approximately 1 percent, as shown by table accompanying the full report.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 1935, the accounting division was engaged with various and sundry investigations ordered by the Administrator or requested by members of the Board, all of which had a direct bearing upon code enforcement.
Preliminary figures on the study of the economic cost of recovery of crude petroleum ordered by the Administrator on December 20, 1933, were released September 19, 1934.
The survey coyered 3 calendar years, 1931, 1932, and 1933.
One thousand and nine schedules covering cost data on 1,133 companies were included in the tabulations.
A substantial percentage of the total production—75.72 for 1931, 76.71 for 1932, and 72.22 for 1933—uniformly spread over the various producing areas was covered.
The average per-barrel eost for the country as a whole, including interest on invested capital, was found to have been as follows: 1931, $0.894; 1932, $0.808; and 1933, $0.717.
In order that the effect of the code upon costs might be ascertained, the year 1933 was segregated into two periods.
The first was from January 1 to September 30, which included but 1 month (September) of code enforcement, and the second from October 1 to December 31, during which time the code was in full effect.
For the former period costs for the country as a whole deelined to the lowest on record to $0.669 per barrel, rising during the latter period to $0.772 per barrel.
Costs were also shown by States and for the more important pools and fields within the States.
In addition to the financial and investment data, information was gathered also on wells, proven acreage, and potential reserves.
A continuation of this study to cover the year 1934 was ordered by the Administrator on December 14, 1934.
At the close of the fiscal year considerable progress had been made in completing that study.
In all 891 schedules covering the operation of 1,021 companies and 55.5 percent of the 1934 production had reported.
These schedules have been carefully analyzed, audited, and tabulated.
The issuance of the results of this study await the outcome of a recent request made upon the larger companies, furnishing information for the previous study who by reason of the invalidation of the code have not reported, to submit their schedules for the 1934 period.
Through the summer and fall of 1934 there was a gradual increase in the amount of overproduction of erude oil, particularly in east Texas, where the State enforcement proved unequal to the task of obtaining compliance with State allocations which were within the Federal allocations.
The pressure of this overproduction on the market very nearly brought on the collapse of the price structure of crude and of the efforts to balance supply with demand.
The decision of the Circuit Court of Appeals for the Fifth District in the Panama and Amazon cases reversing the lower court and upholding the power of the Federal Government to require reports in the enforcement of section 9 (e) of the National Industrial Recovery Aet, and upholding the validity of the section itself, permitted the reestablishment of Federal enforcement in east Texas.
In July 1934 and again in August regulations requiring reports and affidavits were revised.
However, by filing fraudulent affidavits of the legality of oil shipped and by failing to make reports, hot-oil producers continued to operate in violation of the law and a new means of enforcement of the section was sought resulting in October of 1934 in the creation of the Federal Tender Board under the authority of section 9 (c) and the authority to make rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of the section.
In lieu of the affidavits of legality required with shipments, certificates of clearance, issued by the Federal Tender Board, were required as a condition precedent to the movement of petroleum and petroleum products in interstate commerce out of east Texas.
Conditions had become so serious that prices had begun to break the day the Tender Board was created.
The immediately successful operations of this Board stemmed the flow of hot oil into interstate commerce and averted a collapse.
The Federal Tender Board set up a staff of examiners to check applications for tenders, to examine the books and records of refiners and pipe lines, and to make physical checks of the petroleum and petroleum products leaving the feld.
It set up an accounting staff, which maintained an effective accounting check on all operations in the field.
Certificates of clearance, or tenders, were approved by the Federal Tender Board when the petroleum or petroleum products were shown on the basis of the applicant's reports, the accounting record, and the specifie examination of examiners to have been produced in accordance with the quotas established by the Railroad Commission of Texas.
The Federal Tender Board functioned effectively until January 7, 1935, when the Supreme Court overruled the Circuit Court of Appeals in the Panama and Amazon cases and declared section 9 (c) invalid on the grounds of improper delegation of legislative power.
The Board ceased functioning, and the litigation pending against it was dismissed.
Movements of hot oil increased immediately.
Additional State legislation authorizing the State to require certificates of clearance for petroleum products as well as for crude petroleum moving in intrastate and interstate commerce, had been passed.
However, State authority law alone still failed adequately to meet the situation and commerce in hot oil steadily increased.
On February 22, 1935, the Connally law was passed by the Congress, eliminating the defects found by the Court in section 9 (c) by specifically prohibiting interstate or foreign commerce in hot oil.
Federal Tender Board No. 1 was established under this law on March 1, 1935, and shortly thereafter Federal Petroleum Agency No. 1 was set up under the same law to perform the administrative and investigative functions in connection with the applications for approved tenders filed with Federal 'Tender Board No. 1.
The Federal tender system has functioned effectively since that timè and has prevented any substantial movement in interstate commerce of hot oil or gasoline out of east Texas.
This activity not only tended to check overproduction of crude petroleum but assisted in stabilizing the interstate refinery markets at a time when the intrastate Texas markets were thoroughly demoralized.
Several attempts to enjoin the activities of the Board have been attempted without success.
During the summer and fall of 1934 wholesale prices for petroleum products were below parity with the current prices for crude petroleum, which presented a particularly serious problem to the nonintegrated rèfiner.
Several plans were projected by the industry to solve the difficulty, which was aggravated considerably by the excessive amount of hot oil and interstate movements of hot gasoline in interstate commerce.
The planning and coordination committee proposed a form of contract designed to remove distress stocks in east Texas from the market.
The form of contract was approved on June 23, 1934, and during the months of July and August gasoline in east Texas was purchased under this form of contract, to which the Administrator was a party and which provided that the sellers would not process“hot oil.
This program proved insufficient, and a new form of contract for the purchase of current output was approved. But the production of gasoline from“hot oil" continued, stocks of gasoline mounted, wholesale prices for gasoline remained below parity with crude-oil prices, and in the early fall of 1934 the industry approached a serious collapse of the wholesale market.
The planning and coordination committee appointed a program committee, which proposed a broad plan for the purchase of surplus gasoline with the purpose of also preventing illegal production of crude oil and providing a method of orderly marketing.
The exeessive amount of overproduction in Texas made the initiation of this program futile, and it was never put into operation.
In October the Federal Tender Board was ereated in east Texas to enforce section 9 (e).
Conditions immediately improved as a result, and from then forward the improvement continued, except for the period between the invalidation of section 9 (e) on January 7, 1935, and the enactment into new legislation of the principle of the Tender Board in the Connally Aet on February 22, 1935.
The operations of the Tender Board, of the production provisions of the code and refinery amendment, and of the stabilization committee of the planning and coordination committee with the cooperation of the Petroleum Administrative Board, brought the desired parity between the wholesale price of gasoline and crude oil in the spring of 1935.
The work of the stabilization committee contributed very largely to the elimination of excessive marketing abuses which tended to keep the retail markets in an unsettled and unstable condition.
One of the difficult marketing problems of the year revolved around the question of price differentials as between different types of marketers.
The stabilization committee, authorized by the Administrator in July 1934, was suecessful in resolving many localized conflicts and in compromising issues which had brought on drastic price wars to the injury of many marketers caught in between the warring factions.
Before the end of the winter markets generally throughout the midcontinent and eastern areas were fairly stable, and at the time of the invalidation of the code at the beginning of the high-consuming season, the industry as a whole had reached stability in markets, an even balanee between production and demand in the case of both crude and gasoline, had achieved the best statistical position in many years, and entered upon a prosperous summer which has, in fact, proved to be the highest-consuming season in the history of the oil industry.
Production was under control throughout the Nation with some minor exceptions, the wholesale price of gasoline was in parity with the current price of crude, the refinery amendment had brought a balance between the manufacture of gasoline and the needs of the Nation therefor, the Connally Act had succeeded, as the original Tender Board had previously succeeded, in protecting interstate commerce from “hot oil" or gasoline, and markets were generally stable.
One of the important marketing decisions made by the Administrator under the code was that of March 4, 1935, under rule 19 of article V, known as the “lease and ageney decision.
The Administrator in this decision permitted the cancelation of all lease and agency agreements on 30 days’ notice and prohibited exclusive conditions in the sale of lubricating oil.
The question of whether or not exclusive dealing contracts violated the antitrust laws was referred to the Federal Trade Commission for determination.
To obtain compliance with the Petroleum Code and to guarantee the independent refiner a erude supply and market for his products and to prevent the dumping of gasoline and price cutting on the Pacific coast, the Pacific coast petroleum agency and refiners’ agreements were executed and approved by the Administrator on June 23, 1934, and subsequently were filed with the Federal court under a consent decree in California with the consent of the Department of Justice.
The agency agreement, to which all major companies and their subsidiaries and two smaller companies were parties, provided for a guaranteed supply of crude to independent refiners, parties to the refiners' agreement, and a market for such products as the refiners were unable to sell in the retail market.
The refiners agreed to limit runs to stills to a definite proportion of the business of the area as determined by their past sales records.
However, no limitation was placed upon sales.
All refiners agreed to resale price maintenance to prevent price cutting by subsidiary or dealer accounts.
There was no agreement as to prices, each refiner setting any price he desired.
Every refiner agreed not to handle oil produced in excess of the allowables established under the Petroleum Code.
In addition there were several provisions relating to marketing practices established at the request of independent refiners and provisions for general compliance with the terms of the Petroleum Code.
The Administrator reserved the right to cancel the agreement at any time and appointed a representative on the board of governors of the agency established under the agency agreement to make definitive interpretations, to check the administration of the agreements, and to report to the Administrator on any monopolistic trends or inequities in the operation of the agreements.
As a direct result of these agreements one of the most disastrous and protracted price wars ever to occur on the Pacific coast was brought to an end.
Furthermore, a simple and administratively effective device for securing compliance to production quotas was obtained; since signatory refiners were obligated not to deal with producers who violated the Petroleum Code, producers were compelled to comply with the code in order to find a market.
Illegal overproduetion of crude oil was reduced to less than 2 percent, and even this amount was eliminated by temporary injunctions in effect at the time of the invalidation of the codes.
Gasoline markets were stabilized and there were no serious price disturbances during the period of the agreement, with the exception of a price war in Arizona.
The benefits of these agreements were immediate.
The independent refiners obtained a fair volume of business at a fair price either through direct outlets to consumers or to the agency created by the ageney agreement.
By the elimination of price wars the retail dealers obtained a fair margin and a fair volume.
A group of dealers possessing a very large storage capacity lost gallonage; they were accustomed to fill up their storage during low-price periods and then to dump gasoline on the market during periods of comparative price stability, thereby causing price wars enabling them to refill at low prices.
The average prices for the period of the agreements were lower than any 6-month period prior to the operation of the agreements.
Over the period of the operation of the agreements constant reports were made by representatives of the Administrator in California and the far Northwest on operations under these agreements and of the inequities resulting therefrom.
Investigations diselosed that certain major companies were violating the letter and spirit of the agreements.
The resale price maintenance prevented major companies from marketing through subsidiaries at a differential.
This provision was specifically required by the Department of Justice as a condition of its consent to the modification of the consent decree.
The major companies consented to the elimination of this differential but also insisted upon meeting all competition, thus eliminating the price differential of the independent refiners.
Investigations of the operation of the agreements under these conditions resulted in a shifting of gallonage from the independent refiners to the major companies, necessitating the absorption through the agency of large quantities of gasoline processed by the independent refiners for which they had no other market.
This resulted in an increased burden on parties to the agency agreement, bearing most heavily upon members who either suffered actual losses of gallonage or gained least in the absorption of the normal markets of the independent refiners.
Furthermore, it decreased the flow of independent distributors and retail dealers who previously provided a market outlet for the gasoline processed by the independent refiners.
The Petroleum Administration furnished the oil industry in California a detailed analysis of the problem, and at the time of the cancelation of the agreements because of the Supreme Court's decision negotiations were under way for revision of the agreements to secure compliance with all provisions of the code by the major companies and to make provision against the shifts in gallonage which occurred largely as a result of the elimination of differentials.
Immediately after the Sehechter decision, and the consequent suspension of the Petroleum Code and the cancelation of the Pacific coast agreements.
Crude-oil production control ceased with the code.
Voluntary curtailment efforts failed to balance production with demand; enforcement of the State gas-oil ratio statute likewise failed to achieve a balance: production mounted; and as this summary is concluded the price of crude oil in California has broken sharply, August 29, 1935, 5 davs after the adjournment of Congress, which was until the last considering Federal regulatory legislation designed, among other things, to achieve a balance between production and demand.
On January 7, 1935, the Supreme Court held section 9 (e) of the National Industrial Recovery Act, commonly known as the“hot-oil section ", invalid for the reason that it constituted an unlawful delegation of legislative power to the President.
On February 22, 1935, the President approved the act of Congress known as the Connally Act, under which Congress itself prohibited the shipment in interstate and foreign commerce of hot oil or-its products, framing the statute so as to meet the objections pointed out by the Supreme Court to section 9 (e).
The decision of January 7, 1935, was in the cases known as the Panama Reining Co. and the Amazon Petroleum Corporation cases.
Although it was hoped that these cases would also bring about a decision on the power of the Federal Government to control production as distinguished from interstate movements of illegal oil or its products, the Court found that the produetion-control question was not properly before it.
When these cases were in the Circuit Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit that court held that the District Court of the United States for the Eastern District of Texas had erred in enjoining the enforcement of the production provisions of the code, that court assuming that the question was properly before it.
In the case of United States v. Wilshire Oil Co. et al. the District Court of the United States for the Southern District of California upheld the Federal power to control production under the commerce clause of the Constitution; but while this case was on appeal the Supreme Court decided the Schechter Poultry case, holding that the code-making machinery of the National Industrial Recovery Act also constituted an unlawful delegation of legislative power to the President.
As a result of this decision the Petroleum Code, along with all other codes, was invalidated.
In the case of United States v. Eason Oil Co. the United States District Court for the Western District of Oklahoma held that the provisions of the code relating to plans for the development of new fields were invalid as not within the power of the Federal Government under the commerce clause.
It was not possible to raise either in produetion or new pool cases the question of the Federal power under the war powers to prevent waste due to the fact that the National Industrial Recovery Act was not based on this power.
There were a number of marketing cases pending at the time of the Schechter decision.
The lower courts had divided on the question of the effect on interstate commerce of such marketing provisions as the prohibition against special inducements in connection with the sale of gasoline.
Since the invalidation of the codes by the Schechter decision, the Petroleum Administrative Board has worked on a curtailed program and with a reduced staff.
It has continued its duties in connection with the administration of the Connally law and is engaged in' research along the lines laid down by the President under the National Industrial Recovery Act, as amended.
1) Completion of the study of the cost of production of crude petroleum.
2) A study of the marketing structure of the representative area of Allen County, Ind.
3) A study of the effect of the abandonment of the code upon production, refining, and trade practices.
4) A study of the benefits of the new pool section of the code and the results of the abandonment of the code on new pool plans.
5) Appraisal of the operations of the Pacific coast petroleum ageney agreement and the effects of its abandonment.
In addition to these specific studies, the Petroleum Administrative Board is preparing a complete final report on the operations of the code which will, in fact, be a history of the petroleum industry during the 2 years in which the code was operative, supplemented by studies subsequently made.
During the year and in cooperation with other divisions and bureaus of the Department of the Interior the Board furnished a considerable volume of statistical and technical data to the subcommittee of the Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce of the House of Representatives, which made a very thorough investigation of the petroleum industry with a view to recommending legislation.
This data was published in volumes I and II of the Hearings Before a Subcommittee of the Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce, House of Representatives, Seventy-third Congress, House Resolution 441.
The acute drought of 1934 in the West brought into bold relief the benefits that accrue from irrigation and especially from operation of the Federal peclamation policy.
In a year when all through the arid region farmers and ranchers who were dependent upon the natural rainfall were suffering losses aggregating hundreds of millions of dollars, Federal reclamation projects were green and flourishing.
On these projects no crops were lost, no stock died.
Indeed, these projects mitigated the effects of the drought in their surrounding areas, supplying feed for range stock and provisions for the cities.
There never has been a clearer illustration of the stabilizing effect of stored water on the agriculture of the West.
There has been no better demonstration of what Federal reclamation contributes to the economy and welfare of the arid States.
The fact that normal crops were harvested on these fields, when in large areas no other green thing was left, enabled western communities in many instances to avoid what otherwise would have been complete disaster.
Irrigated crops provided traffic for railroads, saved important industries, bolstered county and State finances, and buoyed the morale of the entire section.
An experience such as the drought, however, was bound to point out ways by which Federal reclamation might be strengthened.
It served to emphasize the need for closer contact between the Bureau and the water users on Federal projects in order that maximum usefulness of the land and water might be obtained.
To bring this about the projects were divided into five divisions for supervision so that the problems of water users might have more immediate and intimate attention.
The direction of operation and maintenance projects was centered in Washington.
Preliminary reports of division superintendents have sketched a rough outline of work to be done in this regard.
Some of the problems the supervisors encountered were the need for introduction of better and more economical irrigation methods in areas where wasteful methods are practiced; control of noxious weeds; prevention of soil erosion on steep lands of some projects; and the need for planning on the part of water users' organizations to meet maintenance and repair expenditures.
Problems individual to each distriet were found by the supervisors.
Progress is being made toward their solution.
This is a major step forward and will result in permanent improvement in the relationship between the Bureau and the water users.
It will solidify the Federal program by providing a better means of presenting needs for their immediate consideration, and by improving the condition of the farmers under the canals.
Little definite information was available generally concerning the place of the Federal reclamation projects in the national economy, and concerning the condition of the projects.
These subjects were in controversy, and widely differing assertions had been made.
The Secretary selected John W. Haw, director of the agrieultural development department of the Northern Pacific Railway Co., St. Paul, Minn., and F. E. Schmitt, editor of the Engineering News-Record, New York City, to make an independent study of typical Federal projects for the purpose of ascertaining the true conditions.
Reclamation by irrigation of lands in the arid and semiarid western half of the United States is shown by its results to be a sound and desirable national undertaking.
It represents a constructive policy of social development.
Reclamation should be continued by the Federal Government as available means may permit.
It has little relation to the problems of surplus agricultural produetion, while, on the other hand, by reason of its high degree of stability, it aids in making the country's food supply more regular, which in turn tends to reduce the fluctuations of the agricultural price level.
Except for the influence of the present depressed farming conditions throughout the United States, the operating projects are in the main excellently developed and represent strong, prosperous communities.
As a result of construction begun several years ago, about 100,000 acres of land on three projects will be available for irrigation for the first time this year.
These projects are Riverton, in Wyoming, and Owyhee and Vale, in Oregon and Idaho.
The proper settlement of these new areas assumes a grave importance to the communities that will be created, the States in which they are located, and the Federal Government.
Agriculture by irrigation is a skilled industry.
Intelligence, resourcefulness, and technical skill are required of the successful pioneer under a canal.
To protect the investment of the Federal Government in these projects the Bureau must select its settlers.
Since the Bureau has no means of financing settlers and subjugation of new land requires some capital, the selection problem becomes even more important.
There is no doubt that qualified settlers, anxious to relocate in more promising neighborhoods, can be found in number.
The Bureau proposes to offer this national opportunity in such a way as to attraet them.
This will be done through public announcements, through cooperation with the colonization agents of the railroads and Government agencies, and through State authorities.
While these methods have been used in the past, a more intensive campaign seems to be indicated.
The Bureau now is engaged in the largest construetion program in its history.
The program makes up the greatest conservation eampaign as yet undertaken by a single agency of the United States Government.
Experience gained in the past places the Bureau in a good position, and although the Bureau will have to expand its technical staff it is well equipped otherwise to carry out the work.
A total of $175,000,000 is available for the Bureau's construction work during the vear.
Of this $100,000,000 was set aside by the Works Progress Administration and $75,000,000 remained from allocations made by the Public Works Administration.
As in the past, the majority of the projects now under construction are designed to supplement the water supplies of established irrigation communities.
Eleven storage dams were under construction at the close of the fiscal year on projeets that will bring in no new land.
They will provide a stable supply to irrigators who had felt the pinch of drought.
This protection was being supplied for some of the oldest settlements in the West, notably in Utah, where the Mormons initiated irrigation by whites on the continent.
These improvements will provide a balance wheel for the stabilization of whole communities and even whole States.
On the other hand, some new projects have been undertaken.
These have been planned carefully so as to give a well-integrated development in areas where the demand is present.
The Casper-Alcova project in Wyoming, now under construetion, is a case in point.
Ultimately this development will provide water for about 35,000 acres of land now unirrigated.
This area is intended to assist in the stabilization of the livestock industry of that section of Wyoming, and to provide hay for the herds and produce for the urban centers.
A revealing commentary on the work of the Bureau is to be found in the fact that despite the launching of a great construction program, only a small percentage of the requests for new projects received from States and communities could be considered.
During the year Boulder Dam, the principal structure authorized in the Boulder Canyon Project Act, was completed.
The last bucket of concrete was poured in the dam May 29, 1935.
On that date this great Colorado River barrier already had stored enough water to supply for a year the irrigation needs of the Yuma Federal reclamation project and the Palo Verde and Imperial Valley developments in California, which lie below it.
The fine agricultural area in Imperial Valley experienced its most severe drought last vear.
Damages approximating $10,000,000 resulted when the Colorado ran virtually dry.
When the gates were closed at Boulder Dam in February of 1935 recurrence of this drought was made impossible, as was repetition of the floods that in the past have wrought equal havoc along the lower Colorado River.
During the spring a flood of 105,000 second-feet was recorded in the Colorado River above Boulder Dam.
Had this flood passed the dam, there would have been grave danger to the Imperial Valley.
The protective levees were eracked as a result of the extended drought, and the considerable cost of repairing them was saved.
Completion of Boulder Dam provided another example of the Bureau's contribution to types of conservation other than reclamation.
The great reservoir, 115 miles long, was set aside immediately as a bird refuge.
It is being stocked with game fish.
In its first few months of existence it attracted many thousands of tourists.
Hundreds found pleasure in bathing in and boating on its clear, cold waters.
Boulder Dam Reservoir is destined to become one of the most important recreational centers of the Southwest, and the Bureau is making plans to develop it.
Its importance in this respect exceeds that of others of the 68 reservoirs controlled by the Bureau only because of its great size and location.
The snowfall on the western watersheds during the winter was sufficient to provide an adequate water supply for all Federal projects.
With most reservoirs completely filled and none critically low, the projects entered the cropping season with good prospects for a prosperous year.
The Bureau during the year continued construction work with funds allotted by the Public Works Administration and accomplished more than in any other year of its history.
There were constructed 65.7 miles of roads, 34.4 miles of railroad, 44.5 miles of transmission lines, 313.1 miles of canals and drains, 16 tunnels with a total length of 18,645 feet, 2,671 canal structures, 69 bridges, and 474 culverts.
There were excavated 29,247,403 cubic yards of earth and rock, making the total to date 356,209,687 cubic yards.
The Bureau used 1,524,302 barrels of cement and placed 1,740,673 cubic yards of concrete.
Work on five storage dams was begun.
In the Denver office the increased activities gave employment to 700, and design and specification work for the Tennessee Valley Authority was continued.
At Boulder Dam the labor contracts with Six Companies Inc., and Babcock & Wilcox were in progress.
Storage in the reservoir commenced in February, and in June of this year the last yard of concrete was placed in the dam.
The power house was practically completed, and installation of electrical machinery and equipment was started.
On the Columbia Basin project, Washington, the Mason-Walsh-Atkinson-Kier organization, contractors for the Grand Coulee Dam, installed a belt-conveyor system to move excavated materials from the dam site, constructed a steel sheet-piling cofferdam on the west side of the river, and at the end of the year had excavated 8,120,000 cubic yards in the dam abutments.
The town of Mason City, to house their 3,000 workmen, was completed.
A connecting branch railroad from the dam site to Odair on the Northern Pacific was finished and placed in operation.
T'he Secretary on June 5 approved a change order which calls for construction of a 177-foot dam with a foundation which will support the ultimate high dam, in place of the low dam originally planned.
J. H. Pomeroy & Co., Inc., San Francisco, Calif., on November 5 was awarded a contract for furnishing materials and erecting the Columbia River highway bridge for $241,- 868.
Other construction work in progress ineluded construction of school building, residences, administration building, and dormitories in the Government camp site, officially designated Coulee Dam.
Additional contracts for earthwork on the all-Ameriean canal were awarded on May 22 to Lewis Chambers Co., New Orleans, La., for 16.6 miles of canal excavation at their bid of $505,506.10, and to Mittry Bros.
Construction Co., Los Angeles, Calif., for 6.6 miles at a bid of $260,400.
Near Calexico, Calif., 1,487,000 eubic yards of canal excavation were accomplished by force-account methods.
Bids were opened on August 23 for construction of the Parker Dam and appurtenant works, a 340-foot concrete arch structure in the Colorado River 12 miles above Parker, Ariz., which will be the diversion dam for the aqueduct of the metropolitan water distriet.
The low bid of $4,239,- 834 was submitted by Six Companies, Inc., San Francisco, Calif., to whom contract was awarded on September 10.
The Bureau is eonstructing this dam for the district.
Work was in progress on the Ageney Valley Dam and storage reservoir on the Vale project, Oregon, and the contraet was 66 percent completed at the end of the year.
On August 31 a contract for building 27 miles of the Vale Main Canal was awarded to Haas, Doughty & Jones, Marshall & Stacy, of San Francisco, Calif., for $65,204.20.
On the Owyhee project the construction work ineluded the North and South main canals, laterals, canal structures, and siphons.
On December 27 the Consolidated Steel Corporation, Ltd., Los Angeles, Calif., at its bid of $536,057, was awarded a contract for furnishing and erecting 80-inch diameter plate-steel pipes for the Malheur River siphon, 4.2 miles in length, and 70-inch diameter pipe for the Dead Ox siphon, 1,700 feet in length.
Parker-Schram Co., Portland, Oreg.
J. A. Terteling & Sons, Boise, Idaho, on December 21 was given the contract for 27 miles of earthwork and struetures on the North Canal at their bid of $123,894.
A contract for 14 miles of the South Canal was awarded on January 21 to Morrison-Knudsen Co., Boise, Idaho, for $232,991.50.
This contractor on April 12 obtained a second contract for building structures on the South Canal, the price being $92,388; and on May 21 was awarded a third contract for an additional 11.5 miles of South Canal earthwork and structures, their bid being $127,485.
Several small contracts for laterals and lateral structures were given to local contractors.
Work on the Ogden River project near Ogden, Utah, was started, and on September 12 the Utah Construetion Co. and Morrison-Knudsen Co., with a low bid of $677,898.10, were awarded a contract to build the Pine View Dam in the Ogden River near Huntsville.
Relocation of the Huntsville highway around the reservoir was necessary, and the same companies were given the contract on October 6 for $100,196.35.
On April 18 the Union Construction Co. of Ogden was the successful bidder for constructing the Ogden-Brigham tunnel on the Ogden-Brigham Canal and was awarded a contract for $77,- 737.50 on May 25.
The Barnard-Curtiss Co., Minneapolis, Minn., on May 25 was given a contract for building the Ogden Canyon conduit, comprising 4.7 miles of 75-inch diameter wood-stave pipe.
Another Utah project, on which construction was commenced, was the Moon Lake project near Duchesne, for which a P. W. A. allotment of $1,200,000 was available.
Bids were opened on February 4 for building the Moon Lake storage dam.
T. E. Connolly, San Franciseo, Calif., was the successful bidder, and on April 2 was awarded the contract for $547,221.
The Hyrum storage dam in Little Bear River, on the Hyrum project, was 96 percent completed at the end of the vear.
On October 31, J. A. Terteling & Sons, Boise, Idaho, was awarded a contract for $27,316 to build the Hyrum-Mendon, Hyrum Feeder, and Wellsville Canals.
A $2,000,000 allotment was available for the Humboldt project near Lovelock, Nev., and a contract for construction of the Rye Patch Dam in the Humboldt River was awarded on November 28 to J. A. Terteling & Sons, Boise, Idaho, at their bid of $256,322.50.
Construction of the Taylor Park Dam and storage reservoir on Taylor River on the Uncompahgre project in Colorado was started.
Bids were opened on February 18, the low bid of $798,078.50 being submitted by the Utah Construction Co., Ogden, Utah; W. A. Bechtel Co., and Henry J. Kaiser Co., San Francisco, Calif., and Morrison-Knudsen Co., Salt Lake City, Utah.
Contract was awarded on April 19.
On the project distribution system repairs to canals and structures were in progress.
The diversion and outlet tunnel at the Alcova damsite on the Casper-Aleova project, Wyoming, was completed in October, Lawlor-Woodward Co., of Seattle, Wash., having the contraet for $269,905.
Work on the first 3.6-mile section of the Casper Canal was in progress during the year.
J. A. Terteling & Sons, Boise, Idaho, completed schedule 2 in January.
The Utah Construction Co., Ogden, Utah, had schedule 1 approximately 89 percent completed at the end of the year, and schedule 3, being constructed by Edward Peterson, Omaha, Nebr., was 83 percent completed.
The value of these three contracts is $609,310.
Preliminary work prior to advertising for bids on the Seminoe and Alcova Dams was in progress.
Other work in progress during the year comprised the construetion of canals and drains on the Sun River project, Montana: drains and laterals on the Rio Grande project, New Mexico; drains and drain structures on the Yuma project, Arizona; Milk River project, Montana; Boise project, Idaho; and Shoshone project, Wyoming; canals and structures on the Bitter Root project, Montana; and Stanfield project, Oregon; and drains and dike construction on the Klamath project, Oregon-California.
At the end of the fiscal year work was in progress on 18 projects in 12 States, and 9 dams were under construction.
The area irrigated in 1934 with water from Government works was 2,837,205 acres, an increase of 8,418 acres over that for 1933.
The area cropped was 2,756,698 acres, a decrease of 41,117 acres.
The total value of crops was $100,943,714, an increase of $16,- 751,981 compared with 1933, and of $50,751,981 compared with 1932.
This increase in crop values was due largely to increased prices received for crops.
During the period 1906, when water was first available, to and including 1934, the cumulative value of crops grown on land irrigated from Government works amounted to $2,071,183,715.
Construetion payments in cash and credits from power and other sources received during the fiscal year 1935 were $674,572.09, an increase of $193,379.83 compared with the previous year.
Payments for operation and maintenance were $1,078,896.04, a decrease from the previous year of $43,577.95.
Total payments amounted to $1,753,468.13 compared with $1,603,- 666.25 in 1934, an inerease of $149,801.88.
Income to the reclamation fund from all sourees during the fiscal year was $4,516,011.35, or $91,148.66 more than for the previous year.
The operation and maintenance expense for the year was $1,132, 047.66, an increase over the previous year of $23,097.59.
Excess of operation and maintenance cost over receipts for the year amounted to $53,151.62, compared with an excess of receipts over expense of $13,523.92 for the previous year.
Construction work was carried on with funds provided under the National Industrial Recovery Aet.
Operation and maintenance of the irrigation, drainage, and power systems was carried on with direct appropriations from the reclamation fund, money advanced by the water users' organizations, and revenues from power operations.
The act of March 27, 1934, extended the provisions of previous acts granting temporary relief to water users on irrigation projects and construction charges coming due for the year 1934 were not required to be paid.
This explains the reason for the small payments as given under this heading.
On the lower Yellowstone project, in Montana and North Dakota, a tract of 500 acres of public land was opened to entry on June 17.
The customary 90-day prior right of entry was granted to ex-service men.
There was a steady demand for irrigated land on the several projects.
On the Riverton project, Wyoming, a total of 230 farms were actually occupied this spring.
Water was available for 32,000 acres, of which 19,200 acres were irrigated.
From January 1 to July 1, 1935, 59 homestead entries were made, 37 farm applications were received, 2,076 irrigable acres were taken up, and 12 privately owned farms, with a total area of 1,129 acres, were purchased by new settlers.
On the Shoshone projeet, Wyoming, there was a decided increase in settlement activities owing to the drought in the Middle West.
Forty-eight homestead entries were made on the Willwood division, involving an irrigable area of more than 3,000 acres, and at the end of the fiscal year there were only 14 farm units available for homestead entry.
1 Contract with the Utah Power & Light Co. for the construction of 75-inch wood-stave pipe and repayment to the United States of 125/280 of the cost therefor ($690,000).
Contract with Ogden City for construction of artesian wells water works at a cost of $225,000 and repayment to the United States of $350,000.
Estimated in part.
Agricultural results showed better returns than last year, improving the economic situation materially.
Gross crop values on the project increased from $9,660,000 in 1932 to $16,500,000 in 1934, and bank deposits from $18,212,000 to $36,091,350.
There has been a small increase in building activity locally, almost entirely, however, being confined to projects under P. W. A. or other Federal relief agencies.
The water-supply situation was temporarily relieved by spring rains in 1935.
Storage, which had been depleted to 100,000 acre-feet in November 1934, was brought up to 800,000 acre-feet in May 1935.
Lands with inferior water rights (about two-thirds of the project) which in some dry years have had their allotment cut to 21/2 acrefeet per acre, could get 4 acre-feet.
Outlook for next season is fair, 740,000 acre-feet being in storage June 30.
A change has been made in the project irrigation and fiscal year to correspond with the calendar year which is expected to effect a saving in water as the old year ending September 30, resulted in a high-peak use in that month to get water paid for but not theretofore used.
Redesign of spillways at Roosevelt, Horse Mesa, Mormon Flat, and Stewart Mountain Dams, of the diversion dam at the intake of the Roosevelt power canal and of a dam on the Verde River at the Bartlett site was in progress by the Denver office of the Reclamation Bureau and the construction, estimated at $6,800,000 will be done by the Bureau.
The Indian Office is to have an $800,000 interest in the Bartlett Dam for the development of a water supply for 610 Indian allottees.
This project is expected to make available a large percentagé of Verde River flood water now wasted and greatly needed for project lands.
Crop values on the Yuma project during 1934 were nearly double those for 1933.
On the Auxiliary project the returns also showed improvement.
The total value of crops, amounting to $2,500,000, as compared with $1,335,000 for the previous year, showed a similar trend in improvement in economic conditions, responsible factors for which were better prices in general for farm commodities, favorable weather conditions, an ample water supply, and low operation and maintenance costs.
An increase in bank deposits from $390,000 to $618,000 during 1934 also reflects a change for the better in local economic conditions.
The rise in erop values was effected by the severe drought which prevailed during the summer of 1934 over the greater part of the arid West and the Mississippi Valley.
The Yuma County Farm Bureau Marketing Association handled alfalfa hay and seed, and made individual loans to its constituent members for financing growing operations.
The Yuma County Water Users' Association has complied with the terms of its contract of February 5, 1931, relative to advance payment of operation and maintenance charges, and at the close of June 30, 1935, its payments were about $30,000 in excess of the amount then due.
The exeavation of 9½/2 miles of drainage canals in the valley division was finished in June and completes the division's drainage system to the extent of present requirements.
Low flow in the Colorado River made extensive repair work unnecessary, either at Laguna Dam or on the levee system in California and Arizona.
Construction continued in progress for praetically all the major features of the projeet, and on June 30, 1935, many of these were nearing completion.
The forces of the Bureau of Reclamation and contractors were reduced gradually from 5,218 employees to 3,334 at the end of the current fiscal year.
Six Companies, Ine.
Practically all concrete was placed for the dam and superstructure, except in the galleries.
The first block (K–3) reached crest elevation, 726 feet above bedrock, on February 6, all blocks on March 23, and the slot May 29.
Concrete placed amounted to 3,249,773 cubie yards, of which 3,000,000 had been poured on December 5, 1934, only 18 months after the first bucket was dumped in the structure.
Cooling was finished on May 20, 21 months after it was started, and grouting of contraction joints was completed on June 7, 13 months after this work was initiated.
Drilling of grout holes grouting abutments progressed from the base upward to approximately 60 feet from the crest and drilling of alternate drainage holes to 280 feet from the crest.
With the exception of a small amount of miscellaneous work, both spillways were completed, the gates installed, and the bridge built across the Arizona Channel.
All concrete was placed for the intake towers up to the roof shingles, the four bridges were erected, all gates installed, and trash racks placed.
Work was in progress at the end of the year for the installation of hoists and stems.
Lining was finished for all the tunnels of the penstock and outlet systems and their related shafts, passageways, and adits.
The canyon wall valve houses were raised to the lower roof slab, excavations were completed for the downstram plugs in inner diversion tunnels, and the upstream plugs were poured, cooled, and grouted.
Remote-control equipment was installed for the 50-by-50-foot steel bulkhead gate at the inlet of no. 1 diversion tunnel, and the upstream section of the plug in this tunnel was poured, in which were installed four sets of 6-by-7½-foot slide gates.
The 50-by-50 foot steel bulkhead was lowered at the inlet of no. 4 diversion tunnel on February 1, turning the entire flow of the river through tunnel no. 1, under control of the slide gates, and commencing storage in the reservoir.
At the end of the fiscal year the reservoir was approximately 78 miles long, contained 3,875,000 acre-feet of water, covered an area of approximately 37,700 acres, and its water surface elevation was at 910.0, 15 feet above the lower gate sills of the intake towers.
The flow at Bright Angel gaging station (Grand Canyon) was 50,300 cubic feet per second on June 30, and the outflow through the plug gates 14,900 cubie feet per second.
Construetion of the powerhouse building drew gradually toward its elose.
The walls had been raised nearly to their full heights and most of the structural steel for the roof had been placed.
The control circuit tunnel was lined, the eut and cover conduit was poured, and excavation commenced for the switchyard.
Installation of power plant machinery by Government forces was started in February 1935, and the draft tube liners for the first four of the 115,000 horsepower units were installed ready for the turbines.
The Babcock & Wilcox Co. continued its efficient fabrication of steel penstock and outlet pipe and at the end of the year had produced 30,957.7 tons of pipe sections.
Erection of 30-foot penstock header sections was started in the upper Nevada tunnel on July 10, and of 13-foot diameter penstocks in the upper Nevada penstocks on September 5.
At the end of the fiscal year, erection of pipe was approximately 69 percent completed for the upper Nevada system, 17 percent for the lower Nevada, 40 percent for the upper Arizona, and 15 percent for the lower Arizona.
Visitors to the project inereased from 191,788 for the previous fiscal year to 328,429 for the period of this report.
A monthly peak of 39,884 occurred in February and a week-end record of 9,296 on November 9 and 10.
The Bureau of Power and Light of the eity of Los Angeles had erected all towers for its two 287,500 and 275,000 volt lines from the switehyard to Cajon Pass near San Bernardino, and was engaged in stringing the 1.4 inch diameter hollow copper conductors from the switchyard to Victorville.
Actual construetion work on the all-American canal began on August 8, 1934, when the Griffith Co. commenced excavation on rock cuts.
At the end of the fiscal year this company had excavated approximately 497,000 cubic yards and their contract was nearly completed.
The W. E. Callahan Construction Co. and Gunther & Shirley, whose contract covers the exeavation of approximately 30 miles of the main canal involving about 39,400,000 cubic yards of excavation, began work on December 8, 1934.
By the end of the fiscal year this company had completed 9 miles of the canal, involving the removal of about 9,200,000 cubic yards.
As a relief measure for the farmers of Imperial Valley, who suffered severely from the unprecedented drought during 1934 when the Colorado River was at its lowest point in history, team excavation by Government forces was authorized for several miles of canal in the vicinity of Calexico.
Farmers and farmer stock were employed insofar as possible.
At its peak nearly 1,000 head of stock were engaged on this work.
By the end of the fiscal year 9 miles of canal excavation, involving the removal of approximately 1,487,000 cubic yards, had been completed by these methods.
Bids were opened on April 25, 1935, for the excavation of about 25 miles of the all-American canal across the East Mesa, involving the excavation of about 11,300,000 cubie yards, and contracts were awarded to Lewis-Chambers Construction Co., of New Orleans, La., and Mittry Bros., of Los Angeles.
Although preparatory work was under way actual excavation had not commenced under either of these contraets by the end of the fiscal year.
Designs and specifications for Imperial Dam and desilting works and other major struetures along the canal were in course of preparation on June 30 and call for bids will be issued on these features as rapidly as they can be made ready.
Economic conditions showed an improvement over the previous vear.
A slight increase in prices afforded some relief.
Butterfat, one of the project's major commodities, advanced in price to 37 cents a pound in the fall and winter months but declined again in the spring.
Crop yields were fairly satisfactory and in one case quite surprising.
The citrus-fruit yield was the greatest in the history of the project.
For the first time in some years a market existed for low-grade figs and a large tonnage of fruit, which had formerly gone to waste, was marketed.
The olive crop was very satisfactory both from the standpoint of yield and prices received.
Actual collections of reclamation charges showed a gain over those of the previous year, but were still rather light on account of the deferment of the payment of construction charges under the acts of April 1, 1932, and later acts.
Relief under these acts has been of great aid to the water users.
For the fiscal year 1935 the collections totaled $36.858.67 as against $32,330.77 for the previous year.
Loans from the Federal land bank were of material assistance to the water users in enabling them to pay their operation and maintenance charges.
The crop value per acre was $33.64.
Values of project farm and motor equipment showed a slight increase over 1934, but there was no general replacement of obsolete equipment.
Livestock values showed a small net increase, although the value for sheep and hogs declined slightly.
Population on the farms remained practically the same and bank deposits increased $97,128.
Oranges, almonds, olives, prunes, apricots, and turkeys were marketed largely through local cooperative marketing organizations.
Reduetion in funds available prevented the carrying forward of the conerete lining program on laterals subject to excessive loss of water and high maintenance cost.
Contract for construetion of Parker Dam was let to Six Companies, Inc., September 4, 1934, on their bid of $4,239,834.
The entire cost of this construction will be repaid by the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California under a contract with the Bureau.
Work was started October 11, but was interrupted November 13 by the declaration of martial law by the Governor of Arizona in the area adjacent to the Arizona abutment of the dam.
Work was resumed after the United States Supreme Court on February 11, 1935, issued a restraining order preventing interference by Arizona, but was again halted on April 29, when the Court rendered a decision holding that construction had not been authorized by Congress, No additional work was done on the dam itself to July 1, 1935.
The contractor, however, completed his construction camp and the Bureau built a camp nearby for its employees.
Crop values increased to $37.35 per acre during 1934 from the 1933 average of $21.75 on this project.
Local showers prevented a water shortage that might have developed in the late summer owing to acute drought conditions on the watershed.
There were 512 farms irrigated during the season, an increase of 42 over 1933 due principally to subdivision.
The acreage planted to beans increased, and good prices for this crop were received.
Water charges during the season were $1.40 for 4 acre-feet, a reduction in 2 years of $2.10 for this unit.
The reduction resulted from economy in operation and lower labor and material costs on maintenance work.
The Federal land bank made commissioner's loans on lands within the project for the first time in 1934.
About 30 farms received such loans.
All project banks were operating, except one at Fruita, Colo., which was merged with a Grand .
Junction, Colo., bank.
They were operating in a more normal manner than during the previous year although a large part of the farm credit still was being provided by Government loan agencies.
The beet-sugar factory at Grand Junction did not operate owing to reduced acreage.
Cooperatives handled a large part of the project's potatoes and beans.
During the 1934 irrigation season 1,578 farms were irrigated, 714 by owners, and the average crop value was $21.94 an acre.
This comparatively low per-acre crop value resulted from a shortage of water, recurrence of which will be prevented with completion of Taylor Park Dam.
The price paid to farmers for their produce was up sharply over 1933, reaching a peak of 130 percent in some cases.
Project sugar beets were handled by the sugar factory at Delta, while most of the potatoes and onions, poultry and dairy products were marketed through cooperatives.
Three cooperative gasoline stations did a thriving business throughout the year.
Construction of Taylor Park Dam, an earth-and-rock fill structure, which will supply supplemental water for the project, began on May 1, 1935, after the Uncompahgre Valley Water Users' Association entered a contract to repay its cost.
The Water Users' Association also entered repayment contracts for rehabilitation of the South Canal and for drainage works.
The Arrowroek division is completely settled with a less percentage of uncultivated land than for many years.
The proportion of tenantry is about stationary.
The agricultural industries, such as creameries, condensaries, packing and canning plants, etc., continue as usual.
Most of the agricultural industries are operated by cooperative organizations of water users.
Associations of dairymen, poultry and egg producers, ete.
There is a gradual expansion of associations of users to deal in gas and oil, coal, groceries, etc.
No work has been under way on the Boise project except the enlargement of the Mora High Line culvert under the Oregon Short Line near Mora and certain small drain extensions, all of which has been done by the water users.
Supplemental storage, repairs on the Arrowroek dam and Deer Flat embankments and cleaning of drain ditches are needed.
A power plant and the Deadwood reservoir have been construeted but are being used for the Owyhee projeet.
The Hillerest division has contracted for Arrowroek storage and the diversion power plant.
The total value of crops grown in 1934 was $1,649,000.
Less than 85,000 acres were cropped as compared with nearly 99,000 acres in 1933.
There were 1,533 farms irrigated on the Gravity division and 843 on the South Side pumping division.
About 60 percent of the farms of the pumping division were operated by owners, and 40 percent by tenants.
Operation and maintenance charges, on both Gravity and Pumping divisions were well paid up.
There was a heavy snowfall over the Upper Snake River drainage area during the winter of 1934–35, and the run-off in the spring was well maintained.
In Jackson Lake, the maximum storage in 1935 was 713,460 acre-feet, and some 95,000 acre-feet of stored normal flow, including a small amount of holdover, were impounded.
The supply of normal flow water was sufficient for all project demands, practically to the end of the fiscal year.
The season of 1934, however, was the driest ever known, and all crops suffered severely.
The Civilian Conservation Corps cleared the timber around Jackson Lake.
There is need for a more adequate water supply for the project, especially in years of low stream-flow.
One plan under consideration is to increase the height of the dam at American Falls to permit the storage of water in years of high run-off for use in years of shortage.
Conservation in the use of winter water heretofore demanded for power and irrigation purposes is needed to increase the available supply for irrigation.
A number of transfers of real estate were made.
No new industries were established during the year, but a sugar factory, flour mills, and potato meal mill, two alfalfa meal mills, and a casein manufacturing plant were operated.
A contract completed with the Idaho Power Co. provided a means of conserving winter water for storage at American Falls reservoir.
A contract with the Minidoka Irrigation District provided that all power used in the district should be obtained from the Government plant at Black Canyon through exchange with the Idaho Power Co., the district agreeing to pay $40,000 to $50,000 yearly toward the construction cost of the plant, and in return to be credited with all receipts for power sold in the district.
Island Park dam site was selected as the most feasible location to be found on Henrys Fork, and after extensive investigation of foundations plans were prepared and the work advertised for bids at the close of the fiscal year.
In connection with this reservoir it is proposed to carry water through a crosscut canal from Henrys Fork to the Teton River to make stored water available to lands in that district, which canal will head at a low diversion dam about 6 miles above St. Anthony.
Investigations were continued at Ashton reservoir site on Henrys Fork near Ashton, but were abandoned in favor of cheaper storage at Island Park.
A satisfactory reservoir site of about 50,000 acrefeet capacity was found on the Teton River, about 4 miles west of Driggs.
Topographic surveys were completed and the dam site tested by diamond drilling and wash borings.
Topographic surveys were made of Lake of the Woods and Grassy Lake reservoir sites just south of Yellowstone National Park, where it is hoped a combined storage capacity of 25,000 acre-feet may be obtained.
Further diamond drilling is necessary to determine the feasibility of these sites.
The Spring Creek reservoir site is located on a small creek near Tetonia.
Surveys and investigations of a foundation were made, but the probability of excessive leakage and excessive costs indicates further consideration of the site to be unwarranted.
The Fremont-Madison Irrigation District, embracing about 116,- 000 acres, was formed and an election held, at which a repayment contract with the United States was authorized.
This contract covers the cost of Island Park dam, crosscut canal, and one or more small reservoirs on Falls River, and a reservoir on the Teton River.
The Bitter Root project has 18,240 acres irrigable, of which 16,000 is being farmed.
There are 285 families, making a project population of 1,200 people.
As a result of the Government loan, tax delinquent acreage has decreased from 6,000 acres in 1930 to 700 in 1935.
Farmers are more hopeful.
The original Government construction appropriation did not fully complete rehabilitation of the project.
The greatest needs at present include the replacement of one-half mile of wooden flumes and 5 wood stave siphons aggregating 1 mile in length, and a supplemental water supply by building 7 miles of ditch to adjoining watershed.
The district lands are being dry farmed.
Grain, the principal crop, is about 30 percent below normal.
Some livestock is raised on the project and nearby range.
Officials of the Amalgamated Sugar Co., which has a factory at Missoula, are convinced that sugar beets will quickly develop on the project lands as soon as irrigation water is available.
Missoula has a population of 17,000 and 150 persons live in Frenchtown and Huson.
At the end of the fiscal year the final location of the main canal, 17 miles long, was completed and topographic surveys were made of more than 2,000 of the 7,500 acres of project lands.
A complete topographic survey is being made, after which the laterals will be located.
A small diversion dam will be constructed across a small side channel of the Missoula River.
A total of 655 farms were in cultivation during the year, of which 338 were operated by owners and 317 by tenants.
The value of crops was $4 per acre higher than for the previous year.
Sugar beets only showed a decrease, amounting to $10.55 per acre.
Wool Growers Association is active and markets practically all the lambs and wool grown on the project.
A permanent low-water dam, a reinforced concrete structure with rock and gravel core.
The dam has a crest length of 250 feet and a length over all of 324 feet, the height from foundation to crest is 10.5 feet, the width of the main structure 18 feet, and the width of the footings, 21 feet.
A jetty, extending 101 feet into the river from the north bank, was completed.
Its purpose is to divert the main current of the river toward the south bank and the dam, preventing any tendency to change the main channel of the river.
Construction is of cribbing filled with rock.
Excellent crops were produced on the project and the price level, especially for feed erops, exceeded that of many previous years.
For the first time in the history of the project the gross crop revenue exceeded $1.000,000.
The financial condition of water users generally was consequently improved and there was a considerable liquidation of indebtedness incurred during the previous 3 years.
Sugar-beet yields were good and provided a maximum-capacity campaign for the Chinook factory.
The acreage farmed and irrigated during 1935 will exceed that of any previous year.
One tract of 600 acres was purchased by the rural rehabilitation section of the A. A. A. and the 6 families from adjacent submarginal lands established thereon will be provided with suitable farm buildings and otherwise assisted in the development of their farms.
Plans are being formulated for the colonization of several hundred farms during the year.
Operation and maintenance advances for the calendar year 1935 have been paid in full by all but two of the irrigation districts.
These delinquencies, however, are slight and will be met before there is requirement for the funds.
Work under the N. I. R. A. allotment of $65,000 for the continuation of project construction was carried on throughout the fiseal vear.
Two major and 157 minor structures were construeted, involving 441 cubic yards of reinforced concrete, and replacing 147 deteriorated timber structures.
The program followed since 1929 of changing the large grain acreage to alfalfa, sweet clover, forage, and cultivated crops was continued during 1934 and early 1935.
Good progress was made with 7,500 acres of seed peas and a general increase in soil-building crops.
The water supply for 1935 continued excellent, although the season on the project was one of the driest of record.
Prospects for crops in 1935 were good.
The Utah-Idaho Sugar Co. was making a detail survey regarding possibilities for a sugar factory.
Concerted action developed among farmers for control of noxíous weeds.
Planting of shelter belts continued and community pastures were operating suecessfully.
The Fort Shaw and Greenfields irrigation distriets continued to operate the completed works successfully.
Good progress on extensions to lateral system and drainage works was made under N. I. R. A. funds.
Twenty-six miles of drain and some 14 miles of laterals and eanal extension were completed.
Contract was awarded to Tomlinson-Arkwright Construction Co. for construction of about 26 miles of laterals and structures in vicinity of Ashuelot and to T. G. Rowland for some 18 miles of drains and struetures.
Plans and estimates were completed for improving some 25 miles of Pishkun and Sun River Slope canals.
Gibson Reservoir should be enlarged and lateral system built on the Sun River Slope division.
There were 524 irrigated farms on the project.
Where there was no irrigation there was no crop.
The irrigated area was 36,348 acres.
During the year 57 percent of the irrigated farms were operated by owners or managers and 43 percent by tenants.
The demand for irrigated land was greater in the past year than for any year of the project's history.
A great number of sales were made during the past year and all lands taken for nonpayment of taxes were sold.
One traet of about 1,200 acres was sold at a cash sale and brought a return of $17 an acre.
Most of this was land that has not been farmed or developed for a number of years.
Both irrigation districts raised sufficient funds to keep the operation and maintenance work, as well as the purehase of new equipment, on a eash basis.
The deficient water supply on the project, which was only one-third of normal, resulted in reduced yields of nearly all crops.
12.5 tons per acre the previous year.
The yield of alfalfa was 1.õ tons, as compared with 2 tons per aere under normal conditions.
The autumn and winter months continued extremely dry.
Early in May 1935 the drought was broken by extensive rains over project lands and the storage watershed.
These rains put the land in good condition for spring planting and inereased the storage water supply.
Diversion of water for irrigation was not started until after June 15, and Pathfinder Reservoir was filled to 50 percent of its capacity.
Guernsey Reservoir was filled, and Minatare Reservoir was about two-thirds filled.
This is not a normal supply, but it was thought to be ample for the season's needs.
The general economic condition of project farmers showed improvement during the past year in spite of the 1934 water shortage.
Prices received for crops were good, and benefit payments for corn, hog, and sugar-beet farmers helped materially.
The area reported cropped was 176,000 acres, as compared with 182,500 acres in 1933.
Land sales showed increased activity, although good farms were at a premium.
A new contract was executed with the Northport district which provides for smaller construction payments during the next few vears and also for payment from the distriet's share of power revenues of $6,000 annually to the farmers’ irrigation distriet for the Northport district's water-carriage charges.
Construction was confined to completion of 10 miles of additional power-transmission line between Gering and Mitchell, Nebr., completing a loop circuit serving a total of nine project towns and making duplicate line service available to each town, thus reducing powerservice interruption caused by line outages and resulting in improved service.
The cost of the work was financed from power revenues.
The irrigation districts were forced to expend unusually large sums in cleaning canals and laterals in the spring of 1935 as a result of sand storms during the winter of 1934–35.
Lovelock Valley received only 3,000 acre-feet of water to meet its requirement of approximately 84,000 acre-feet during the 1934 season, accentuating the economic difficulties of previous water shortages and universal depression.
Returning confidence among the farmers of the district, inspired by the construction of Rye Patch Dam and the purchase of water rights in the Battle Mountain area for transfer to this project is evidenced by a marked improvement in business and banking conditions locally.
Award of contract was made on December 1, 1934, for the construction of Rye Patch Dam, J. A. Terteling & Sons being the lowest and successful bidder.
Subsequently plans were changed so as to provide for an additional 10 feet in height of the dam.
Active construction work was commenced in February 1935, and was 16.9 percent complete on June 30, 1935.
In the Battle Mountain area property was purchased aggregating approximately 60,000 acres.
Surveys of this property and plans for river channel improvement, removal of old dams, and blocking of sloughs to prevent river' overflow in these properties were in progress.
The project water supply for the 1934 season was seriously short, necessitating a rigid plan for allotting all available water.
The water supply for lands under Lahontan reservoir was adequate during the winter 1934–35.
The First National Bank in Reno, Fallon branch, was opened on May 1, 1935.
The irrigated area totalled 41,070 acres, in addition to 7,600 acres in outside community pastures receiving some drainage waters.
Farms operated by owners numbered 606 and by tenants 179.
The total estimated value of all crops was $737,164.
In 1934 crop values increased $116,674 above the 1933 totals.
Two E. C. W. camps were under construction near Fallon.
The plan included such work as grubbing willows, cleaning ditches, building and repairing structures, riprapping around new structures, and replacing riprap around old structures where necessary.
During the winter of 1933–34 C. W. A. funds were made available for a limited amount of work on project drains, all of the work being done by hand labor.
Improvement of roads now existing is proposed to facilitate operation of the distribution system, eliminate fence gates across such roads and substituting cattle guards therefor, providing bridges and culverts for ditch erossings and draining or grading operating roads upon the ditch rights-of-way.
Other maintenance work during the fiscal year included the installation of 21 concrete structures, 64 pipe or timber structures in the lateral system, and 13 pipe or timber structures in the drainage system.
Crop production, as a consequence of an inadequate water supply, was much below normal.
Grass and fall alfalfa pasture, which were scarce and of poor quality, produced small revenue from feeder cattle.
Hay in excess of farm demands was insufficient to provide the usual volume of cattle feeding during the winter.
River.
Topographie surveys of dam site and reservoir and diamond drill explorations of the Boca site at the junction of the Little Truckee River with the Truckee River were in progress at the close of the fiscal year.
Form of agreement necessary to be executed by the Sierra Pacific Power Co., the Washoe County water-conservation distriet, and the Truckee-Carson irrigation district, and the United States was approvéd as to form.
There were 438 farms cultivated during the year, 290 by owners and managers and 148 by tenants.
The total area cropped was 18,714 acres.
Two farms were reported sold to local residents.
Prices of farm land ranged from $75 to $250 per acre.
No new farm loans were made by the Federal land bank.
Payments on loans amounting to $650,000, made by the loan agency, were resumed.
Crop returns for 1934 averaged $44 per acre, a decrease of $3.39 per acre.
Financial conditions of the project continued to improve.
The local bank deposits were $690,215 on June 30, 1934.Industrial developments were confined to the potash and oil industries.
The U. S. Potash Co. mining and refinery operation was on a three-shift basis.
Both reservoirs of the project were entirely empty on July 1, and there was insufficient water for crops during the remainder of the year.
Sufficient water accumulated during the winter to permit a full supply for planting the 1935 crops, and there was sufficient water for all crops at the close of the fiscal year 1935.
Extension of the east embankment at Lake MeMillan was started July 23 by F. E. R. A. forces and continued until September 22, when C. Č.
C. forces took over the work.
On June 30 the job was 90 percent completed.
There were 4,956 irrigated farms in 1934, of which 3,018 were operated by owners or managers and 1,938 by tenants.
The total area cropped in 1934 was 123,800 acres, as compared with 137,400 acres in 1931.
A number of cold-storage, wholesale, and commission produce establishments serve El Paso's trade territory.
Weather conditions in 1934 were favorable and exceptional yields were obtained.
The average gross return was $76 per acre for the total area cropped of 124,000 acres, as compared with $27.50 per acre in 1932.
Crop financing was easily obtained.
The mortgage indebtedness of the water users decreased.
The total bank deposits increased from $17,550,000 in 1931 to $23,000,000 in June 1935.
Colleetions for 1934 were unusually good and the classified area contracted for water service in 1935 is the largest during the history of the project.
The most urgent engineering work is the extension or improvement of the drainage facilities for the remainder of the irrigable area of about 4,500 acres seattered throughout the projeet.
The project is located in Umatilla County, eastern Oregon.
It was originally eonstructed in 1905 by the Furnish Ditch Co. for the irrigation of approximately 10,000 acres in the vicinity of Stanfield, Oreg.
The main eanal diverts water from the Umatilla River.