Washington.
Mr Dear Mr. PresıpEnT: I have the honor to transmit the annual report of the Department of the Interior for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1936.
The work of the Department of the Interior is concerned predominantly with the custodianship of a vast national estate.
More than 95 percent of the annual and permanent appropriations made for the work of the Department during the fiscal year 1936 are for taking an inventory of the natural physical resources of the United States, for undertaking the wise development and use of such resources, and for the education, health, and recreation of the people of the nation.
It is a department of conservation—conservation of those physical and human resources on which depend the future of America.
Water, land, and minerals——these three comprise the base for a program of conservation of natural resources.
Knowledge of their existence in quality, quantity, and location, followed by wise development of water resources, prudent use of land and its products, and orderly exploitation of mineral deposits, without waste, will insure a sound and permanent foundation for the material welfare of the eitizens of the United States.
The adyancement made during the year in the conservation of the waters of the arid West through the construction program of the Bureau of Reclamation by far outdistanced that recorded in any previous year.
With the expenditure in the fiscal year of $52,336,- 329.32, operating projects were improved, new projects were completed for the protection and the creation of agricultural communities in the arid States, and several worthy, self-liquidating projects were launched.
The employment provided in this undertaking was an important factor in advancing recovery throughout the West.
Boulder Dam was completed.
The treacherous Colorado River was permanently harnessed for the benefit of the people of the Pacific Southwest.
The threat of flood and drought was forever removed from the Imperial Valley of California.
In addition, three other dams, smaller, but in their districts not less important than Boulder Dam, were completed and put in service.
Work progressed satisfactorily on nearly a score of dams designed by the Bureau of Reclamation to regulate and make useful the waters of as many streams from Washington to Texas.
But new and additional construction does not tell the whole story of reclamation for the year.
It was a profitable and successful period for the operating projects.
Reservõirs in use caught ample waters for irrigation.
Crops were good and crop prices were satisfactory.
Even with a new and severe drought developing as the fiscal year drew to a close, the prospects for the summer of 1936 on Federal reclamation projects were most encouraging.
With two exceptions, reclamation reservoirs filled as the spring thaws ran off the mountainous watersheds.
However, the shortages in prospect for these two projects apparently would leave them in no danger of disastrous crop losses.
Proration of water would be necessary, but the areas to be served still would be in a position incomparably better than the unprotected dry regions that surrounded them.
The fiscal yéar of 1936, by its actual results, gave a new demonstration of the benefit to the West and the nation of our national reclamation policy.
Among the achievements of this department during this administration was the successful organization and operation of the Grazing Division.
Set up to curb overgrazing on publie lands, this Division has opèrated differently than most Government bureaus.
A system of self-regulation by stockmen under Federal supervision is working out to the benefit of some 142 million acres of public land as well as to the satisfaction of the users of the public domain.
After a series of public hearings throughout the western grazing country, with the General Land Office, the Geological Survey and local stockmen cooperating, grazing distriets were set up with local directors, and the program of conserving grazing land is now well under way.
The long period of exploitation of the American Indian has ended.
The' Wheeler-Howard Act made mandatory a complete change in Indian policy.
Until this reform, two-thirds of the 139 million acres owned by Indian tribes in 1887 had been lost, tribal bonds had been disrupted and an increasing number of Indians had been rendered landless.
The Wheeler-Howard Act prohibits the sale of Indian lands except to the tribes.
It provides for consolidation of Indian lands.
It sets up a process which enables Indians voluntarily to return their individual landholdings to a tribal status.
There is no compulsion upon any Indian tribe or reservation to accept the benefits of the Wheeler-Howard Act.
Each tribe is given the privilege of deciding by an election whether it wants to accept or reject the advantages offered.
Thus far, the great majority of tribes have enthusiastically voted for the new policy.
Since the death of the petroleum code, the Connally Act has made it possible to check overproduction of this valuable and irreplaceable resource.
The Petroleum Conservation Division now is carrying on this work.
This administration is the first to undertake any Federal regulation of petroleum.
Consolidation of all Federal park activities under the National Park Service by Executive order has brought about, for the first time, a unified administration of the various national parks and monuments.
The Congress has empowered the Secretary of the Interior to designate outstanding historie sites for preservation by the Nation.
A Branch of Historie Sites and Buildings has been set up in the National Park Service under an assistant director.
Surveying and platting, examination and elassification of the public and Índían lands; geologic and topographic surveying and mapping of the country; examination of the geologic strueture, the minéral resources and products of the national domain; gaging streams and determining the water supply of the Nation and reporting on the best methods of utilizing water resources; and making statistical reports on the mineral resources of the United States and of the world have long been functions of the Department.
An inventory of the natural resources of America is being made.
The task is great, appropriations are relatively small, and the work proceeds slowly.
Since we must know what and where our resources are before a comprehensive plan for their utilization can be made and, since intelligent planning must precede wise development and prudent use in the interest of conservation, there should be a speeding up of stock taking so that it will be completed within a short span of years.
Segments of an accelerated program of inventory taking have been authorized by the Congress, but so far no appropriation has been made.
Selection of sites for reservoirs and other hydraulic works necessary for the storage and utilization of water for irrigation and the prevention of floods and overflows; the development of water-supply systems for domestic use, power, irrigation, and other beneficial uses on Indian lands or for the Indian people; and the construction of irrigation systems and regulating reservoirs, often with incidental development of water-power in the public-land States constitute a major function of the Department and have played an important part in the upbuilding of the West by the pioneers and their descendants.
Private development of water resources affecting the public lands for irrigation, domestic purposes, power, mining, and other beneficial uses, under the auspices of the Department, has paralleled the development through public funds, although since 1920 the Federal Power Commission has had jurisdiction over the major portion of the new developments of water powers, in cooperation with this and other interested departments.
The most spectacular of the accomplishments of the year was the completion of Boulder Dam, an unprecedented event in the annals of engineering.
No longer can floods from above Grand Canyon threaten devastation to the fertile lands and costly improvements of the Yuma and Imperial Valleys.
The turbulent waters of the Colorado will be stored in a peaceful reservoir, Lake Mead, whence, as needed, they will be discharged to develop hydroelectric power, to irrigate hundreds of thousands of acres of arid lands and to augment the domestic water supply of the metropolitan district about Los Angeles.
West.
The foundation abutments of Grand Coulee Dam, key structure of the Columbia Basin project in the State of Washington, have been built, and survevs and plans for the Kennett and Friant Reservoirs of the long-dreamed-of Central Valley project of California are well under way.
Many other surveys, investigations and construction projects for the further conservation and use of the water resources of the publie lands have been completed or are in progress.
Proof of the soundness of the policy of reclaiming the arid lands of the West lies in the results obtained from Interior Department projects.
In 1936 about 2,900,000 acres of land raised irrigated crops of a value of nearly $107,000,000.
Water supplies of the public domain have been supplemented by the addition of 2,240 acres to the public water reserves; by the acquí- sition of 100 wells drilled by the Utah Drought Relief Commission; by the drilling of 26 wells and the construeting of 152 water holes and small stock reservoirs and the laying of 27,000 feet of pipe line as part of an emergency conservation work program; and by the conditioning as water wells of 3 wells drilled for oil or gas.
Supervision was exercised over 172 power projects under permit or grant by the Secretary of the Interior and 145 projects of the Federal Power Commission.
Until recent vears the national policy for mineral resources of the public lands involyed only exploitation by private interests.
The leasing of restricted Indian lands for minerals has long been the practice, and within the last two decades Congress adopted a policy of leasing public lands for the production of coal, oil and gas, oil shale, phosphate, potash, sodium, and, within limited areas, of sulphur, gold, silver, and quicksilver.
This has brought to a practical end private acquisition of lands containing these important minerals.
The act of Áugust 21, 1935, constitutes an important forward step in the leasing policy for oil and gas that will reduce materially speculative operations using the public reserves as a base.
It will also provide for a more business-like development of the oil and gas resources of the public lands, and will result in a return to the Government of a proper share of the value of the mineral production.
Under this act, the proceeds of public-land mineral development will be returned to the States from which they are produced, in part, direetly, for the support of schools and roads and in part, indirectly, through Federal construetion of irrigation systems.
Helium, alone, is reserved for exclusive exploitation by Federal agencies for governmental purposes.
Mineral production under the supervision of the Department in 1936 had a value of about $70,000,000.
Supervision of the exploitation of publicly owned mineral resources to assure an orderly development and the maximum practicable ultimate production without waste and with due regard to the safety and welfare of miners and others is an important conservation activity of the Department.
On March 31, 1936, there was established in the Department a Petroleum Conservation Division to assist in coordinating all oil and gas conservation activities of the Department as well as to supervise operations for the control of interstate and foreign commerce in oîl and oil products under the act of February 22, 1935 (49 Stat, 30).
Research in production and in processing methods, dissemination of information with respect thereto, and education in mine-safety rescue and first-aid methods conducted by the Department is an allied activity of great importance and value to the mineral industries.
One hundred and ten patents to mining claims were issued ir.
1936 under the lode and placer laws and 270 contests regarding such elaims were disposed of, showing that interest still persists in prospecting for and developing the metalliferous minerals of the public domain.
Under the mining laws a claim may be taken up and all the minerals therein mined and disposed of without notice to the Department.
Only when an application for a patent is made is the claim made of record in the United States Land Office and then, if discovery has been made, title to the land passes from the United States on payment of a nominal fee.
Particularly now that most of the land of the publie domain is dedicated to some public purpose or is under some system of administration, is such a method of handling mining claims unbusiness-like and contrary to the public interest.
Some simple system of permitting the discovery and development of minerals under a prospecting permit and lease subject to supervision that would protect the publie interest without hampering the operations of the permittee or lessee would mean a forward step in mineral-land administration.
Minerals still on Indian lands are subject only to a lease under a system that works well.
Its extension to the reservations of the public domain is recommended.
The mineral-lease activity on the public domain, which normally grows at the rate of about 10 percent a year, showed an increase of about double that amount both in production and revenue in 1936.
Receipts for the year from mineral leases aggregated about $4,444,000 of which 371 percent were payable to the States in which the produeing areas were located and 521 percent were covered into the reclamation fund.
It is believed that values fully as great were saved through the activities of the supervisory forces cooperating with the operators.
This is practical conservation.
Of unusual importance are oil and gas.
About 15 percent of the Nation's petroleum reserves are believed to be on the public domain, but production has been held down to about 3.8 percent of the total for the United States during a year of continued surplus of producible oil.
Noteworthy progress has been made during the year in the promotion of unit operation for fields in which lands of the United States are an important factor.
By the end of the year no less than 800 such plans had been filed for consideration.
Twenty of these were approved and are now in force, and 186 were withdrawn or rejected.
The remainder were in various stages of consideration or revision.
The object of unitization is that of more properly conserving the oil and gas resources involved, and it is the éonsensus of opinion in the industry that greater ultimate production at less cost will be the result of changing from individual operation of the several holdings in a unit field to operation under a čooperative or unit agreement.
State control of the quantity of production has been materially strengthened during the vear by a denial under Federal law of interstate or foreign commerce in oil produced contrary to State laws and regulations.
Production of oil and gas from Indian lands amounts to between three and four percent of the nation's total, while production from naval petroleum reserves, also under supervision of the Department of the Interior.
Though retention of oil in the ground is the national policy with respect to the naval reserves, some production is forced by operations on interspersed private lands.
Suêh production is diminishing year by year.
Production of coal on the publie domain inereased about 12 percent during the fiscal year 1936 and constituted about 1.1 percent of the output for the United States.
Much effort is put forth to secure the adoption of plans and methods that will assure the maximum ultimate production.
Successful efforts of the Department in behalf of safety are attested by the fact that the death rate from explosives in mines has been redučed 90 percent in the last 30 years; that during the last 5 vears mines in the United States have had the lowest accident rate in their history; that the accident rate in mines under the supervision of the Department is materially lower than in mines not on Government lands; and that of 51 awards to bituminous coal mines or operators by the Joseph H. Holmes Safety Association for the calendar year 1935 two-were to departmental lessees.
Cooperation of operators in accomplishing these results is gratefully aēknowledged.
Further development of potash mines on lands of the United States until they are capable of supplying the entire needs of the country is worthy of special mention.
Production on Indian lands of lead to the extent of 3.1 percent and of zine to the extent of 10.4 percent of the Nation's total is also an item of importance.
Research on mining and refining methods and practices in the fiseal vear resulted in the approval of 18 devices for use in mines and the addition of 25 new explosives and 3 new models of a blasting device to the permissible list; the development of a new methane indicator; the perfecting of a new method of extracting manganese electrolytically: the demonstration of several methods of treating domestic chromite ores; the development of a method of gaging capacity of gas wells with minimized waste; the improvement of methods of purifying clay, feldspar, and other low-grade nonmetallies by froth flotation; the perfection of a method of determining minute quantities of benzol in blood and urine; and the discovery that silica is an important factor in caustie embrittlement in steam boilers.
Eight thousand samples of coal and coke were analyzed.
Bearing strength and plasticity of potash salt, applieable particularly to mines now operating on Federal land, was determined; various substances for use in rock-dusting mines were tested; studies of Diesel locomotives were concluded; and helium was produced and furnished for the spectacular stratosphere flight conducted by the National Geographie Society and the Ařmy Air Corps.
The Federal landed estate outside of Alaska has dwindled from a billion and a half to a little more than 400 million acres, or about a fifth of the total area of the 48 States and the District of Columbia.
Thirty-five pereent of this remainder is or will be included in grazing districts, 34 percent is within the existing boundaries of national forests, more than 14 percent is in Indian reservations, over 2 percent, together with about an equal area donated by States and private eitizens, is in national parks and monuments, over 7 percent is in military, naval, and miscellaneous reservations or in areas withdrawn for public purposes, and nearly 7 pereent is unappropriated public land withdrawn from entry but available to satisfy outstanding grants and for other purposes.
Further grants of public lands under existing legislation are virtually at an end, although there remain for settlement outstanding grants and unperfected public-land entries aggregating between 15 and 20 million acres.
The final disposal of lands in these eategories and the exchange of other lands and the consolidation of holdings will present problems for solution for a number of years.
Administration of the remaining national estate under enactments by Congress constitutes the principal public-land activity now in prospect.
The four main questions of administration of nonmineral lands are concerned with forage cover, forest cover, parks, and Indians.
The problems involved should be coordinated to the greatest possible extent in order that the estate as a whole shall be of maximum benefit to the Nation.
The administration of the Indian lands has ever been an important item in the Department's guardianship of the American aborigines, The development of a system of Federal national parks and monuments of outstanding scenic, recreational, and historie value has been and is the work of the Department of the Interior.
After more than 50 years of advocacy by this Department, the Congress, in 1934, adopted a program of administration, conservation, and rehabilitation for the vast area of public grazing lands under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Interior.
The only major land-administrative activity that is not now, though it was originally, within the jurisdietion of this Department is concerned with the lands within national forest boundaries.
Aceording to reports of the Forest Service, more than half the area within these boundaries is not available as a source of merchantable timber and is considered to be chiefly valuable for grazing and the maintenance of a useful forage cover.
The administration and use of such lands should be coordinated or combined with those of the far greater area of lands of similar general character in grazing districts under the jurisdiction of the Department of the Interior.
Visitors to national parks and monuments for the travel year that ended September 30, 1935, numbered 7,676,400, an increase of 21 percent over the preceding period.
The new Shenandoah (Virginia) and Mammoth Cave (Kentucky) national parks were admitted to the system.
Areas of several other national parks and monuments were increased, and 11 new national monuments and other historie areas were conditionally authorized by Congress.
Allocation of $705,000 from an emergeney fund was made for the acquisition of lands within the area of the proposed Isle Royale National Park in Michigan, on which to provide work for C. C. C. camps in cooperation with the Department of Conservation of the State of Michigan.
A nation-wide survey of historic buildings and sites and a comprehensive study of publie parks and recreational area programs and possibilities in the United States were initiated.
Forty-six recreational demonstration projects in 24 States.
The land-recording activities of the vear included the receipt of original entries, selections, and filings for 425,834 acres: final entries for 1,937,529 acres; issuance of patents for 2,216,684 acres and certification of 253,903 acres under State grants—leaving 16,862,271 acres in unperfected entries at the close of the year.
Ünder the Taylor Grazing Act there were received 19 applications for exchange of private lands, 261 for that of State lands, and 266 applications for sale and 2,255 for lease.
All this in addition to applications for grazing rights within grazing distriets.
The grazing act of June 28, 1934 (48 Stat. 1269), as amended on June 2§, 1936, sets aside 142 million acres of public land to be divided into grazing districts and provides for their orderly use, improvement.
By the end of the fiscal year 1936, 37 such districts, ineluding a gross area of about 200 million acres, of which about 80 million acres were public land, had been created and more than 15,000 licenses for the grazing of more than 8,396,000 animals had been issued.
Nominal fees of 5 cents per month for cattle and horses and 1 cent per month for sheep were adopted for present purposes, and $48,271 in fees were collected during the year.
Thus were initiated control of the public range and conservation of its soil and forage cover in the interest of the stock industry and for all useful purposes that the range lands might serve.
The aid of the stock industry itself in initiating, developing, and administering this wholesome national policy was assured by the election from the stockmen of 523 district advisors to work with officials of the Department.
A program of range improvement was undertaken involving water development; construction of trails, bridges, fences, and cattle guards; control of rodents and insect pests; eradication of poison plants; protection against erosion as well as other work designed to make the range more useful.
With the increase of the public-land area available for grazing districts to 142 million acres by the act of June 26, 1936, it is antícipated that upwards of 400 million acres will be included within the boundaries of grazing districts within a year on request of the users of the range.
This area, together with some 80 million acres of grazing lands within national forests, will make nearly half a billion acres capable of orderly regulation for grazing.
The Department of the Interior is charged with responsibility for an internationally known hospital for the treatment of mental diseases, a hospital administered and operated by a staff almost exclusively of the Negro race, and other hospitals for care of the Indians that have a total capacity of about 5,00 beds.
In the field of education the Department maintains an institution for instruction of the deaf, including a department that offers the only educational program in the world for the higher education of the deaf, and a department for the training of teachers of the deaf; a university for the higher education of the Negro race; and many day schools, boarding schools, vocational schools, and colleges for the instruction of the Indians.
The Department, through the Office of Education, also conducts researeh into and disseminates information regarding foreign and domestic methods and systems of education, promotes vocational education, and administers substantial grants to educational institutions for the benefit of agriculture and the mechanic arts.
Under the heading of human welfare should be mentioned mine health and safety activities and the widespread recreational facilities afforded by public park and parkway systems.
An earnest effort was in progréss during the year to expand and coordinate all existing public facilities for recreation and outdoor sport.
In 1936 literally millions of the citizens of the United States enjoyed fishing, hiking, horseback riding, boating, swimming, skiing, mountain climbing, and other outdoor activities in natural wilderness areas of unusual importance administered by the Department of the Interior.
These recreational areas are supervised by employees trained to educate the visitors concerning the birds and animals, plants and trees, as well as on matters of historical, geological, and archeological interest.
Just prior to the beginning of the fiscal year the Congress passed the Indian Reorganization Act, already referred to, which makes provision for the economic rehabilitation of the Indian, for the organization of the Indian tribes so as to manage their own affairs, and for the civic and cultural freedom and opportunity of the Indian.
Outstanding among the social-welfare activities of the year has been the progress made under and in line with this act.
More than twothirds of the Indian tribes have accepted this legislation, and constitutions for the governance of tribal affairs have been approved or are in process of being perfected.
Already profound changes are taking place in Indian communities through the increased interest of the Îndian in his social and economic affairs.
The Division of Territories and Island Possessions exercises supervisory functions in connection with the Federal Government administrations of Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Baker, Howland, and Jarvis Islands; also the Alaska Railroad, Alaska Road Commission, Alaska Reindeer Service, Alaska Insane, Puerto Rico Hurricane Relief Loan Section, Hawaiian Homes Commission, the Virgin Islands Co., and the Government-owned Bluebeard Castle Hotel, St. Thomas, Virgin Islands.
Through the Puerto Rico Reconstruction Administration, Puerto Rico Hurricane Relief Loan Section.
A comprehensive reconstruction program is now well under way in Puerto Rico.
This program is being administered by an agency independent of the Interior Department.
Loans made by the former Puerto Rican Hurricane Relief Commission are now in process of composition and adjustment as authorized in Public Resolution No. 60, Seventy-fourth Congress, approved August 27, 1935.
The Matanuska colonization project, under the direct supervision of the Alaska Rural Rehabilitation Corporation, during the second summer just passed has demonstrated that it is solidly established.
The ultimate effect of this development upon the economy, conditions of living, and population of the Territory, cannot be over-estimated.
In the Virgin İslands, the sugar and rum industries are being restored to the important position they once held.
Handieraft is being encouraged, small industries are being built up, and the tourist trade developed.
Thanks to the poliey of this administration, there is virtuaÎly no unemployment in the Virgin Islands.
The recently reorganized Hawaiian Homes Commission is proving to be energetic and enthusiastic in the discharge of its duties and there is every reason to believe that its businesslike management and vigorous enforcement of policies and regulations will prove beneficial to the Hawaiian people and assure the perpetuation of the race.
Quarterly expeditíons out of Honolulu, T. H., are conducted in connection with the colonization projects on Baker, Howland, and Jarvis Islands, and valuable scientific data for use in connection with anticipated development of air routes to the South Seas, New Zealand, and Australia is being compiled.
In Hawaji the rehabilitation of the Hawaiian race is going forward under new legislation and a new commissioner.
A survey of possible water supplies for irrigation on the island of Molokai has been authorized.
Reports of the several bureaus and other administrative agencies of the Department, setting forth in detail the operations under their jurisdiction, are submitted herewith.
All lead to the conclusion that the conservation of water, land, and minerals, with due attention to specifie problems of human welfare, is soundly established as the major departmental poliey.
Substantíal progress in each and every activity is recorded.
Many of the accomplishments of the year were made possible only through the financial or personnel aid of the Public Works Administration, the E. C. W. camps, the Resettlement Administration, the Works Progress Administration, and other agencies whose objective has been to relieve unemployment through the performance of useful work.
Once again I commend to your consideration the desirability of changing the name of the Department of the Interior to that of the Department of Conservation—a name more expressive of its fundamental purpose and nature.
Such a designation would give conservation an authority heretofore lacking, it would promote an increased consciousness of conservation as a Government poliey, not only in the minds of officials but among the people of the Únited States generally, and it would place upon the personnel of the Department a definite responsibility for advancing the cause of conservation to the end that the resources of the United States may be used for the maximum benefit of every citizen of the country.
Secretary of the Interior.
The White House.
The immediate staff of the Solicitor was reduced from 21 to 19 regular members during the course of the past fiscal year.
However, five attorneys have been specially assigned to this staff for the examination of land titles in connection with land acquisitions which are a feature of the Indian reorganization program.
Otherwise, there has been no noteworthy change in legal personnel either in Washington or in the field.
The tasks of the immediate staff of the Solicitor have included the representation of the Secretary of the Interior and, in two important cases, the Federal Emergeney Administrator of Public Works in litigation in the Distriet of Columbia, the drafting of proposed legislation and reports thereon, the representation of the Department before congressional committees, the preparation of land decisions and departmental opinions and findings, the handling of the legal features of Indian reorganization and the disposition of such miscellaneous legal mattens as are involved in the business of the Department.
During the past year the Solicitor has represented the Secretary of the Interior in various actions contested in the courts of the Distriet of Columbia.
The Department has prevailed in six such cases in the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia and has been defeated upon but two occasions.
Three of these controversies concern publie lands, three were war minerals relief cases, one was a matter of Indian enrollment, and one arose out of the administration of a reclamation project.
The two cases in which the Solicitor has represented the Federal Emergeney Administrator of Public Works have involved the vital question of the constitutionality of basic features of the low-cost housing and slum-clearance program of the Public Works Administration.
The issues in controversy have yet to be decided by the Supreme Court of the United States.
In the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia 62 war minerals relief cases were disposed of by dismissal or by entry of consent decrees.
There remain of record in that court 78 war minerals relief cases, the disposition of which has been delayed by the failuré of the local courts to decide definitely the question whether the rights claimed survive the death of the claimant or the dissolution of a claimant corporation.
However, the fact that during the session just ended Congress legislated with reference to the abatement and transferability of war minerals relief claims (sec. 2 of aet of June 30, 1936, Publie, No. 847, 74th Cong.) will undoubtedly speed the ultimate disposition of the pending cases.
It will be noted that public-land cases and miscellaneous submissions for opinions of the Solicitor continue to inerease in number.
The number of such matters received during the year ended June 30, 1936, represents an increase of about 50 percent over the number received during the preceding year.
Of the 334 opinions rendered, as contrasted with 237 during the preceding year, about one-third were accident cases and 99 were title opinions.
The number of title opinions is not an index to the volume of title work since the usual title opinion involves numerous tracts of land, each with a distinct chain of title.
While the problem of title examination in connection with the numerous acquisitions of land under the Wheeler-Howard Aet is less acute than a year ago by reason of the recent special assignment of five attorneys to this office to aid in this work, the prospective doubling of the Indian land purchase program during the eoming year makes it doubtful whether the title section has been augmented sufficiently to dispose of this work with dispatch.
Moreover, no additional attorneys have been provided to assist in the examination of the numerous titles involved in purchases by the National Park Service under its expanding program for providing new park and recreational faeilities.
With more than 100 title cases from all sources pending at the end of the year and with the anticipated increase of such work it will prove increasingly difficult for the present staff of title attorneys to keep pace with the land acquisition sections of the Indian Office and the National Park Service.
In addition to these special categories, requests for opinions have covered the usual broad range.
As the statutes under which various bureaus of the Department act multiply with every session of Congress and the enterprises of the Department become more numerous and varied, the interpretation of statutes and their exposition in relation to particular undertakings becomes a larger task.
Each year the variety, as well as number, of questions submitted for opinion witnesses the importance and the manifold aspects of the function performed by the legal officers of the Department in directing and safeguarding administrative action.
Power of the Department to regulate the sale of liquor upon private premises within national parks.
Authority of contracting officers to waíve time limitations and other provisions in Government contracts.
Extent of the visitorial power of the Bureau of Mines with respect to privately owned mines.
Necessity for State authorization for Federal appropriation of underground water by means of wells to be developed on the publie domain.
Restrictions upon the ownership of mining property by persons employed in the Bureau of Mines.
Limitations upon the investment of land-grant college funds by a State.
Validity of oil and gas leases for seattered traets in the North Dome Kettleman Hills.
Present right to perfect title to allotment selections made before the passage of the Wheeler-Howard Act.
Extent of Indian title within the Red Lake and San Carlos Reservations.
Three sessions of Congress have now elapsed since the organization of a legislative section in the office of the Solicitor for the better handling of the specialized tasks of drafting bills adequate to meet particular departmental needs and objectives, preparing and reviewing departmental reports and recommendations concerning pending legislation, and representing the Department at congressional hearings upon particular measures.
Steadily increasing success in obtaining congressional action in accord with proposals and recommendations of the Department attests to the thorough research, technical expertness, and skill in advocacy which have characterized the performance of these important tasks.
Thus, during the second session of the Seventy-fourth Congress, almost every important bill sponsored by this Department, with the exception of the bill to change the name of the Department, was enacted.
The act of June 26, 1936 (Publie, No. 827, 74th Cong.), amending the so-called Taylor grazing law to increase the area which may be included in grazing districts from 80,000,000 acres to 142.000.000 acres, thus assuring planned and orderly use of praetically the entire area of the publie domain which is suitable for grazing rather than for cultivation.
The act of June 23, 1936 (Publie, No. 770½, 74th Cong.), providing for a comprehensive Nation-wide study by this Department in conjunction and cooperation with local authorities to the end of developing and coordinating udequate park and recreational facilities throughout the United States.
The act of June 22.
1936 (Publie, No. 749, 74th Cong.), providing the Virgin Islands with an organic aet charaeterized by universal suffrage and an inereased measure of local participation and control in local government.
A large amount of legal work, both in Washington and in the field, has been required for the accomplishment of Indian tribal organization under the so-called Wheeler-Howard Act.
At the end of the fiscal vear, 43 separate tribal constitutions had been drafted, accepted by the tribes concerned, and finally approved by the Secretary of the Interior.
In 24 other cases substantial progress had been made toward the adoption of constitutions.
As a further step in organization, the Wheeler-Howard Aet authorizes the incorporation of tribal groups.
Only one corporate charter has been issued, although work is in progress on more than 20 such charters.
The exercise of tribal authority with respect to such matters as tribal lands and funds, traders, personnel and taxation necessarily involves much legal detail.
Thus, many legal problems have already arisen in the administration of the affairs of reorganized Indian communities.
Such problems will continue to arise and to require extensive legal services as is true in the administration of the affairs of ordinary municipalities and similar organized communities.
The preparation of new or greatly revised departmental regulations has been a necessary step in administering much new legislation and in carrying out departmental policies caleulated to accomplish the conservation of natural resourees through better administration of the public domain and conservation of human values through the better administration of Indian affairs.
Thus, the preparation of departmental regulations has been an important work of attorneys in the various bureaus as well as of members of the immediate staff of the Solicitor.
Amended regulations governing the mineral development of the public domain, including oil and gas, sodium, and phosphate regulations.
Amended regulations governing the practice of attorneys before the Department.
Regulations governing appeals from the decisions of the Director of Grazing.
The work of the legal seetions of the Geological Survey and the General Land Office has increased noticeably as the administration of conservation measures has progressed.
Extensive legal services have been required in the consummation of unit plans for the cooperative development of particular oil and gas fields.
In the General Land Office the superimposition of conservation laws, ineluding the Taylor grazing law, upon the old and familiar publie land laws is ereating many new legal problems.
The efforts of claimants to establish equities in public lands antedating the present general withdrawals continue to be numerous and ingenious and to require careful legal analysis.
The important business of administering the estates of deceased Indians is being handled by a staff which is numerically inadequate despite improved organization and administrative procedure.
The present staff of nine examiners of inheritance in the field and three attorneys in Washington can effectively handle somewhat less than 2,000 estates in 1 year.
There are now about 3,000 estates awaiting administration.
Such undesirable accumulation of work and the resultant complication in administration can be avoided only by adding to the present probate staff.
Reclamation projects in various stages of development have required extensive legal services in Washington and in the field.
For example, the Provo River project, still in its early stages, has required the organization of a new water users association on one division, the negotiation of a large repayment contract upon another division, and the carrying out of the legal detail necessary to bring newly organized metropolitan water distriets within the project as stoekholders in water users associations.
Even old and established projects present their legal problems.
Thus, the complex organization of the Owyhee project with its numerous independent contracting entities has been simplified by the devising of a single omnibus contract which has been accepted by the various irrigation districts involved.
Again, for some projects the negotiation and drafting of contracts for the sale of power are important tasks.
In connection with the Boulder Canyon development the most recent of a series of such contracts has been a contract with the State of Nevada for the use of power generated at Boulder Dam.
The regular annual appropriation for the Division of Investigations for the purpose of conducting investigations for the Department of the Interior for the fiscal year 1936 was $391,700.
The average number of active field investigators, exclusive of special agents in charge, was 65; average number of clerks employed in divisional offices, 18; total average force employed, including special agents in charge, and the Washington office force, 88.
Due to the activities of field investigators, $19,063.67 was collected and turned into the Treasury, and 424,564.02 acres restored to the public domain, representing fraudulent entries, etc., canceled on proceedings based on their reports.
On July 1, 1935, there were pending field investigation 8,167 cases.
During the year 12,345 new cases were received; 13,217 cases were investigated, reported, and closed, leaving 7,295 cases pending investigation.
Four cases were turned over to the Post Office Department as the result of investigations made in the field; and five criminal cases were presented to the Department of Justice during the year; four convictions were secured in criminal cases and one indictment returned during the fiscal year.
The Division of Investigations conducts all investigations for the Public Works Administration.
The staff personnel on June 30, 1936, including the central office at Washington, consisted of 10 special agents in charge, 220 special agents, and 152 other employees.
Cases investigated by the Division of Investigations relate to expenditure of Public Works Administration funds, collusion and fraudulent bidding where contractors and subcontractors are involved, wages and disputes arising from rates of pay, irregularities in the employment of labor and use of materials, underpayment of employees, repayment to contractors of wages of employees, contracts relating to housing projeets, governmental personnel, and misconduet of officers and employees of the Public Works Administration, activities of the National Reemployment Service and other governmental agencies, to which Public Works Administration funds are allotted.
These investigations, having to do with the allotment and expenditure of large sums of money, enabled the administrative officers to uncover numerous frauds and irregularities and prevent substantial losses to the Government.
Saving was accomplished by and through investigations covering such items as cancelation or rescission of contract bids and awards where fraud or collusion was found to exist, rescission of allotments for loans and/or grants due to irregularities or fraudulent representation; lack of economic soundness in projects investigated, inadequate financial ability of the borrower or his inability to liquidate loans, and the use of insufficient or inferior material in construction work.
There also were included penalties imposed on contracts for violation of the 8-hour law on Federal projects, reduction in allotments where it was found that the borrower had included excessive amounts in estimates covering overhead and engineering fees, reduction of allotments due to fictitious estimates and excessive appraisals covering the purchase of lands for projects, sites, and savings effected by requiring a change in the method of construction from force account to a contract basis.
The Division of Investigations also effected other savings.
One of the more important of these was reimbursement of wages to labor where such pay was wrongfully withheld by contractors through what has been designated as the “kick-back racket.
It is estimated that this saving to labor by such reimbursements amounted to $182,- 137.83 for the fiscal year.
Nineteen thousand seven hundred and twenty-six cases were investigated and reported by special agents of the Division of Investigations.
Included in the foregoing were 60 eriminal prosecutions, of whieh 18 cases received court action, 39 cases resulted in indietments, and 1 case received a prison sentence.
The Director of Investigations performed all investigations, under the supervision of the Secretary of the Interior in the enforcement of the provisions of the act of Congress of February 22, 1935 (Public, No. 14), generally known as the Connally Act.
During the first 6 months of the fiscal year, the Division of Investigations (oil enforcement) maintained eight offices, which on January 1, 1936, were reduced to four, namely, Kilgore and Houston, Tex., Chicago, Ill., and Washington, D. C.
Federal Petroleum Agency No. 1, with headquarters at Kilgore, Tex., was created by Executive Order No. 7024–B dated April 25, 1935, under authority of the Connally Act.
The Secretary of the Interior designated this agency to exereise all duties and functions pertaining to investigations necessary to the enforcement of the Connally Act.
The marine unit with headquarters at Houston, Tex., was engaged in the enforcement of the Connally Act insofar as the movement of petroleum and its products into interstate or foreign commerce by water-borne vessels was concerned.
The Chicago office conducted investigations on shipments of petroleum and its products from producing areas.
The Washington office was comprised of an administrative force and a branch of the marine unit which compiled statisties on the movement of petroleum and its products by tankers and barges.
The personnel of the Division of Investigations engaged in the enforcement of the Connally Act as of July 1, 1935, numbered 82.
The personnel absorbed by the Petroleum Conservation Division as of May 1, 1936, as a result of the Secretary's order no. 1054, dated March 14, 1936, and no. 1067, dated May 1, 1936, numbered 34.
The total obligations incurred by the Division of Investigations (oil enforcement) amounted to $147,751.
The total number of cases investigated was 1,255, of which 8 Criminal Code cases and 99 cases of violations of the Connally Act were referred to the Department of Justice.
The work of the Board on Geographical Names is essentially a service which the Department of the Interior renders to other governmental organizations and to the public.
The principal function of the Board is to insure uniformity in the use of geographie names on maps and in publications issued by the Federal Government.
As the official authority on the use of geographic names by the Government, the Board decides unsettled questions as to the form, spelling, or application of geographic names, and considers new names proposed by Government officers.
Its decisions, according to Executive Order No. 399, are "to be accepted by the departments of the Government as the standard authority."
The Board also serves as an informally recognized standard authority in the nongovernmental use of geographie names.
In this capacity it renders decisions on geographic names at the request of local authorities, institutions, publishers, and individuals.
The Board is also called upon, by Government, State, and local officials, educational institutions, scientifie societies, publishers, teachers, and others, to furnish information on many geographic subjects other than names.
The broad geographic scope of the Board’s activities, and the extent to which it serves other organizations, are shown by the following tabulation of cases that have been before it for formal action during the year, grouped by the location of the features and by the organizations that submitted the names.
Although the work of the Board is administratively under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior, in whose name, and with whose approval, the decisions of the Board are promulgated, its investigations are made with the cooperation of, and its decisions are rendered by, an advisory committee of 14 members, consisting of representatives of various departments that make and use maps, and of geographie societies.
This advisory committee operates chiefly through its executive committee of three members.
The routine administrative and investigative work of the Board is performed by a small organization in the office of the Secretary of the Interior.
These two units have been operating since December 10, 1935, under a single name, in accordance with a departmental order.
The advisory committee held three meetings during the year, at which interim action of the executive committee was considered and approved, and questions of general policy and procedure were discussed.
The executive committee held 14 meetings during the year, at which 472 geographic names were approved.
In addition to the names that were automatically rejected by the approval of the above, six other proposed new names were rejeeted as unsuitable.
The committee had before it, at the end of the year, eight names which had been considered without final action.
The work of the Board has increased far beyond that of the preceding year, when 267 names were approved.
Decisions were rendered during the year ending June 30, 1936, on 478 names, and 502 cases were on hand June 30, in various stages of completion.
A pamphlet entitled “Decisions Rendered Between July 1, 1934, and June 30, 1935”, was issued in February 1936.
Manuscript of a pamphlet entitled “Decisions Rendered Between July 1, 1935, and June 30, 1936", has been submitted for publication.
The purpose of the act of June 28, 1934 (48 Stat. 1269), known as the Taylor Grazing Act, is to “stop injury to the public grazing lands by preventing overgrazing and soil deterioration, to provide for their orderly use, improvement, and development, to stabilize the livestock industry dependent upon the public range, and for other purposes.
This act is a new development in the national policy for the conservation of natural resources, and few laws entrusted to the Federal Government so vitally affect the livelihood of so many people.
Both from the standpoint of national conservation and of the livestock industry, it is of transcendent importance.
This act has the approval of the country as a whole, and the administration of it has been received generally with enthusiasm by those affected in the public-land States of the West.
Through the aid of hundreds of these people, rules and regulations governing grazing have been prepared, ways of conserving the forage resources of our public lands worked out, and methods of administration devised to provide equitable rights to all.
The current report deals with the activities of the second year of administration of the act.
During the first year, the Department was engaged principally in preliminary steps necessary for the carrying out of the terms and provisions of the law, the establishment of an organization, the devising of rules and regulations, the working out of plans for cooperation, and numerous other duties and activities for the administration of 80 million acres of public grazing lands.
The second year has been devoted to enlarging the area brought under control, improving the rules and regulations as a result of the experience gained, perfecting the details of organization, and the institution of administrative control over areas through cooperative agreements with local interests as provided in section 2 of the act.
Range survey studies and the measuring of private holdings to determine the commensurate ratings of various applicants for grazing privileges have been initiated in all of the States involved, and in the States of New Mexico and Arizona material of great assistance to administrative officers is now available.
The matter of wildlife protection has been given every possible consideration.
Agreements have been reached with the Bureau of Biological Survey for the establishment of game ranges under the joint jurisdiction of the Departments of the Interior and Agriculture.
The Division has adopted what is known as the New Mexico plan, which provides for representation by the wildlife interests of that State upon the advisory boards whose functions are to assist in the administration of all grazing areas.
Similar proposals have been made to the game interests of other States, and progress is being made toward a satisfactory solution of this important problem.
One essential element of the administration of the Division of Grazing is the advisory boards, consisting of 523 representative and able stockmen elected by the licensees of the various districts.
Through their knowledge of local conditions and usage, the Division has access to information and advice concerning every point and section of the country under jurisdiction of the act.
These boards function in an advisory capacity and their value to the administration of the act cannot be overestimated.
A tribute should be paid to the loyalty and untiring efforts which members have applied to solving the problems before them.
This system of home rule under Federal administration and supervision, instituted as one of the main objects and integral parts of the Taylor Grazing Act's administration by the Department, has been highly successful and satisfactory to the stockmen.
On January 13 and 14 a meeting was held in Salt Lake City, attended by four delegates from each of the district advisory boards, totaling 800 persons, and including representatives of the Department, the Division of Grazing, the General Land Office, and other Federal, State, and livestock organizations interested in the grazing work.
The meeting, which was called by the Secretary, was in the nature of a get-together to discuss the problems of grazing, to find possible weaknesses, and to make plans for betterment of the administration, as well as to discuss future policies.
Information obtained at this meeting was used as a basis for formulating the 1936 rules and regulations covering the issuance of grazing licenses.
The end of the fiscal year 1936 finds 37 grazing distriets under administration, including substantially 80,000,000 acres of public grazing lands.
During the year, more than 15,000 licenses were issued for the grazing of livestock, involving a total of more than 8,000,000 anímals.
On June 26, 1936, an amendment to the original Taylor Grazing Act was passed.
This amendment provides, among other changes, an added allotment of 62,000,000 acres, making a total of 142,000,000 acres available for inclusion in grazing districts.
This will permit the placing in grazing districts of practically all of the public domain grazing lands which are of such character as may be administered suitably in grazing districts.
To make available information concerning the activities of the Division, the Secretary of the Interior has authorized a quarterly publication, the Grazing Bulletin.
The first two issues of the bulletin were published in Mareh and in June.
The organization of the Division of Grazing has been developed on the principle of decentralizing administration as far as consistent.
Following this principle, an administrative office has been established in Washington, a regional field headquarters office in Salt Lake City, Utah, and nine regional offices located at Salt Lake City, Utah ; Reno, Nev.
Burns, Oreg.
Boise, Idaho; Billings, Mont.
Grand Junction, Colo.
Albuquerque, N. Mex. and Phoenix, Ariz.
This provides ready access to responsible administrative officers of the Division by the persons affected by the act, brings about a hetter understanding of the problems involved, and speeds administrative action.
Each regional office is in charge of a regional grazier who is assisted by one or more graziers and office personnel.
At the elose of the year, the Division had in its employ a total of 60 permanent employees, 13 of which were attached to the Washington office and 47 to the various field offices.
This involves an increase of 25 employees during the year, including 13 graziers, 4 junior range examiners, and 8 clerical employees of various grades.
All new personnel in the grazier and range examiner class are western men from one of the States in which the grazing act is operative, and so far as possible, men have been employed and assigned to work in the State in which they reside.
The administration of grazing districts involves application and enforcement of rules and regulations pertaining to the use of the range, and the establishment and fixing of boundaries of such districts.
It also includes issuance of licenses, term permits, and range allotments; the handling of appeals and protests arising from action taken upon applications for grazing privileges; maintenance of range improvements; application of range management plans; and wildlife protection.
State of New Mexico to represent wildlife and recreational resources was approved August 21.
Circular No. 4, entitled“Rules and Regulations Governing Appeals from Decisions of the Director of Grazing", was approved October 7, 1935.
Cireular No. 6, entitled “Procedure for Enforcement of Penalties for Violation of the Act of June 28, 1934, and Rules and Regulations Issued Thereunder", was approved December 9, 1935.
Following the general meeting of departmental officials and stock interests in Salt Lake City on January 13.
1936, when certain changes in the rules and regulations were recommended, a revised set of general rules for administration of grazing districts was prepared and approved March 2, which superseded previous Cireulars Nos. 1, 2, 4, and 6.
These regulations provided for the first time the payment of a fee for grazing privileges, which is established at 5 cents per month for each head of cattle or horses and 1 cent per month for each head of sheep or goats.
By order approved May 15, the rate to be charged was clarified to the effect that where a grazing period involves a fraction of a month, the grazing fee for such fraction shall be charged on a daily basis, prorated on a 30-day month.
As of June 30, 1935, there were 32 established grazing districts under the Tavlor Act.
During the year just ended, 5 more districts were established on the recommendation of State committees, making a total of 37 districts.
These districts include a gross area of 198,338,000 -acres, of which 79,805,186 acres are vacant, unreserved, unappropriated publie lands.
Fifteen thousand eighty-one temporary licenses were issued during the vear for 8,396,351 head of livestock, a detailed summary of which is shown in the attached table.
These licenses were issued on a temporary basis.
1. Qualified applicants with dependent commensurate property with prior use.
2. Qualified applicants who have prior use but not adequate commensurate property.
3. Qualified applicants with dependent commensurate property but without prior use.
1. Qualified applicants with dependent commensurate property with priority of use.
2. Qualified applicants with dependent commensurate property but without priority of use.
3. Qualified applicants who have priority of use but not commensurate property.
4. Other qualified applicants.
A number of users of the publie lands cannot meet the requirements set forth in the regulations for a grazing license, and the problems arising from this condition have been among the most difficult to solve in the administration of the act to date.
The Division is fully cognizant of the hardship whieh may result from immediate ejectment of these persons from the range, and in all cases adequate time was granted in which to make other provisions for the handling of their livestock.
The termination of free and unrestricted grazing which has prevailed for so long has naturally resulted in some violation of the rules and regulations providing for the administration of the public ranges.
However, these violations have been remarkably few.
A large number of alleged trespasses have been investigated, trespass notices served, and trespasses abated.
Many cases have also been investigated for violation of the terms of the licenses.
Approximately 100 motions for review of the decisions of the regional graziers have been fled and are now pending local hearing.
Many of these are expected to be adjusted without the necessity of a hearing.
Court proceedings have been found necessary in a number of eases of continued trespass in which parties have failed to remove their stock after due notice.
An outstanding case involving violation of the rules and regulations during the year was that of the U. S. v. Joe Odiago and Oleto Achabal, in which the defendants challenged the constitutionality of the Taylor Act.
It is settled by the highest judicial authority that, “All public lands of the Nation are held in trust for the benefit of the whole country" and that the Constitution vests in the Congress all the rights incident to the private ownership of such lands.
The provision of the act authorizing the Secretary of the Interior to establish grazing distriets and make such rules and regulations as shall be necessary to accomplish the purposes of the law, does not constitute a delegation of legislative power but creates administrative duties.
Obviously the fixing of boundaries of grazing districts so as to prevent overgrazing and soil deterioration is a matter of detail, and a necessary subject of inquiry and determination by an administrative officer.
The Secretary of the Interior is authorized by the act to make rules regulating permits and preferences not inconsistent with the provisions of section 3 of the act.
The defendants were held for trial before the United States Distriet Court for Oregon which is expected to be held during the October session of 1936.
Under the authority granted in the section above quoted, the Secretary on March 17, 1936, approved a form to be followed in entering into cooperative agreements with local associations of stoekmen.
This particular form of agreement was drawn to provide for grazing administration in Montana, where the public lands in grazing districts constitute only about 25 percent of the area and are intermingled with State, county, tax default, railroad, and other privately owned lands.
It is, however, adaptable for use in any State where a similar situation may exist.
Licenses are issued to those entitled to them by the board of directors of the association under the general supervision of the Division of Grazing.
This method is meeting with approval, and agreements have been entered into with nine associations in Montana.
A number of local associations in other States are in the process of organization, and it is expected that in the near future numerous agreements will be submitted to the Secretary for approval.
The Taylor Act provides for the construetion, purehase, and maintenance of range improvements within grazing districts, and that 25 percent of all collected fees when appropriated by Congress are returnable for this purpose.
No money was available from this source during the past year, but a diversified range improvement program has been carried on through the C. C. C. camps.
Stockwater development, construction of trails and fences, rodent and insect control, and soil erosion activities are under way, and the accomplishments are described more fully later in this report.
The Division has also acquired approximately 100 wells distributed over grazing districts in the State of Utah from the Utah Drought Relief Commission.
These wells afford increased utilization of available resources in areas where permanent water was formerly lacking, and are a distinct asset to the grazing ranges of this State.
The wells are operated by the Division through the temporary employment of local help.
Administration of established stock driveways within grazing districts was placed under the jurisdiction of the Division of Grazing April 20.
These driveways are reserved under the provisions of the act of December 29, 1916 (39 Stat. 865 U. S. C., title 43, see. 300).
It is the purpose of the Division to effect at the earliest possible date a practical system of driveways within districts which will involve revision of many of the existing withdrawals.
In cooperation with the Bureau of Biological Survey, the Division has begun a program of wildlife conservation through the establishment of game ranges to be managed cooperatively by both agencies.
The preparation of orders establishing other ranges is almost complete and their establishment should be consummated within a short time.
Under the terms of these orders, the right to forage resources of the lands will be reserved for a definite number of wildlife, with the remaining forage to be utilized by domestie animals.
The Division has also fully cooperated with the Bureau of Biological Survey in the establishment of refuges for waterfowl and game, which will be administered entirely by the Bureau of Biological Survey.
The Secretary of the Interior on August 21, 1935, approved Division of Grazing Cireular No. 3 entitled “Special Rules for Grazing Districts in New Mexico", which embodies the so-called New Mexico plan.
In substance, it provides that in addition to the regularly elected district advisors for each grazing district established under the Taylor Grazing Act in New Mexieo, there be appointed one district advisor in each grazing distriet to represent wildlife and recreational resources.
Such district advisor shall have the same qualifications as the elected adyisors, except that he need not be an owner of livestock, and he shall be nominated by the land-use committee of the New Mexico State planning board.
This board adyisor will be appointed by the Secretary of the Interior in the same manner and form as the other district advisors.
The plan provides that the utilization of grazing district lands by domestie livestock shall be in aecord with the following fundamental principles for conservation and propagation of wildlife and other natural resources upon the public domain.
In allotting range resources, allowance will be made for a reasonable utilization by wildlife.
Game and bird refuges may be established within grazing districts.
In areas determined by the Secretary of the Interior, upon consideration of all interests involved, to be of higher value for and better adapted to production of wildlife than to domestic stock, preference shall be given to such higher use.
Should game animals beeome overabundant, the State or Federal laws will be invoked to limit by removal, through hunting or otherwise, game animals until a reasonable number has been attained.
All permittees on grazing districts shall comply with State and Federal game laws, and officials of the Department of the Interior will cooperate in enforcement of these laws.
This plan has met with the approval of the varied interests of New Mexico, and the game interests of other Western States are now being consulted to work out similar arrangements.
From an individual standpoint, the ranchers and livestock men are themselves the greatest conservators of the wildlife in the West.
Many of the large ranches are literally game reserves and bird refuges, where grouse, sage hens, pheasants, deer, and antelope abound and are afforded such protection as the owners of the ranches on which they roam are able to give them.
The work of the Division with respect to the classification of lands embraces chiefly the range-survey program by which fundamental basie data is secured to build range-management plans.
These surveys embrace both reconnaissance and detailed studies pertaining to the character of range lands with respect to their present condition and carrying capacity, proper seasons of use, classes of livestock to which adapted, needed range improvements, and other pertinent data which must be secured in making plans both for current use and ultimate rehabilitation of the forage resources.
A considerable amount of data of this kind was previously obtained by the Geological Survey, and this information is now available to the Division of Grazing, All phases of this work are now under way in all the grazing districts under administration, and it is being pushed as rapidly as'possible with the available means.
During the year, the Division has acquired and compiled considerable additional information through the cooperative efforts of the various State agricultural colleges, the Division of Investigations of the Department of the Interior, and other Federal agencies.
The end of the fiscal year finds the preparation of status maps εpproximately 60 percent completed; the analysis of basic range properties, approximately 25 percent completed; and necessary field work on range studies, approximately 10 percent completed.
The Division is also charged with the classification of lands with respect to their value for agricultural purposes as required by the various land laws.
These classifications involve recommendations for designations under the enlarged and stock-raising homestead acts, a determination of the value of watering places for public purposes, elassification of lands applied for under section 7 of the Taylor Grazing Act, and determination of the propriety of approving applications under sections 8, 14, and 15 from the standpoint of the publie benefit where lands involved in these applications fall within boundaries of grazing distriets.
Recommendations for designations of lands under the enlarged and stock-raising homestead acts have been substantially terminated by the Executive orders of November 26, 1934, and February 5, 1935, withdrawing public lands for classification.
During the year, 1,711 cases under these acts were acted upon, embracing principally those filed prior to the Executive withdrawals, and on June 30, only 110 such cases were still pending action by the Division.
During the year, 1,120 acres were designated under the enlarged homestead act in 6 States, increasing the total acreage so designated at 268,468,865 acres; 7,295 acres of land were designated under the stock-raising homestead act in 11 States, increasing the outstanding area to 102,436,542 acres.
One thousand one hundred fifty cases have ben received for action by the Division under sections 7, 8, 14, and 15 of the Taylor Grazing Act, and a total of 72 applications under these sections have been acted upon.
During the fiscal year, 2,240 acres in 8 States were ineluded in public water reserves, and 80 acres in 1 State were excluded from such reserves, resulting in a net increase of the gross publie water reserve areas in 12 States to 510,388.
Action on pending applications under sections 14 and 15, which involve lands in present and proposed grazing districts, has necessarily been delayed pending a study of the areas involved to determine the practicability of administration of the land as a part of the district.
Field offices are now engaged in preparing reports on the advisability of eliminating certain areas including scattered tracts of publie land from districts in order that they may be disposed of under these sections of the act.
On July 1, 1935, 7 C. C. C. camps engaged in range improvement work were being operated by the Division, and plans were formulated for receiving 53 additional eamps under the expanded program of Emergeney Conservation Work.
However, a revision in the general program and a reduction in the total number of C. C. C. companies reduced the quota of camps allotted to the Division to 45—an increase of 38.
Each State, with the exception of Montana, was allotted a number of camps, and the entire publie-domain area was divided into three regions for efficient administration and supervision of work projects.
Region 1 comprises the States of Colorado, Utah, Wyoming, and Idaho, with regional headquarters at Salt Lake City, Utah.
Region 2 comprises the States of Oregon, Nevada, and California, with regional headquarters at Reno, Nev.
Region 3 comprises the States of New Mexico and Arizona, with headquarters at Albuquerque, N. Mex.
Construetion of camps was delayed, and the entire quota was not officially turned over for occupaney and operation until the middle of October, so that the actual increase in work accomplished and completed over that done by the seven camps during the fifth enrollment period, April 1, 1935, to September 30, 1935, was not appreciable.
The rigors of winter prevented a full-time schedule for the sixth enrollment period.
October 1.
1935, to March 31, 1936, but satisfactory progress was made and the various livestock organizations, district advisory boards, stockmen, and interested citizens have expressed their satisfaction and appreciation for the improvements made in the range areas.
On April 1, 1936, the E. C. W. branch of the Division was fully organized and functioning efficiently, and work programs recommended and approved by the advisory boards of the grazing districts were ready for execution by the C. C. C. companies under the technical supervision of the Division and the appointed supervisory personnel.
The public domain range lands are generally located in areas of low precipitation, with a maximum of 15 inches per year.
Aecordingly, the work projects, outlined and approved by the stockmen and the advisory boards, directed toward water development and means for the movement of stock, have been given preference.
Water-development projects have contributed considerably to an actual inerease in water resources and have been a means of better utilizing the forage resources of the range.
By judiciously placing these water developments difficulties sustained in former years through a lack of water will be eliminated and will accomplish a great deal toward placing the livestock operator on a more substantial plane of operation.
Four hundred twenty thousand mandays were expended on water-development projects, including wells, flood eradication, construction of reservoir and other storage facilities during the year.
The construction of fences to control the movement and grazing of livestock, construction of stock trails, truck trails, and minor roads to facilitate movement through grazing districts, and the construction of corrals form other major parts of this construction program.
Rodents definitely destroy incaleulable amounts of forage annually, and the control of these pests has been undertaken with the cooperation of the Bureau of Biological Survey in infested areas.
The program also includes campaigns against the destructive mormon crickets, the eradication of noxious and poisonous plants, and erosion-control measures.
In addition a large volume of work has been completed on erosioncontrol structures involving the construction of more than 30,000 check dams, diversion ditches, terracing, channel exeavations, and stream-bank protection.
Emergency work has been done by the enrollees in time of fire and flood.
During floods in New Mexico which almost destroyed the city of Las Cruces and cost millions of dollars in damage to the surrounding valleys, the C. C. C. workers were highly praised by local officials for the heroic part they played during the disaster.
Besides giving assistance in the flood-stricken districts, a dike was built near the town of Hatch which saved the town from destruetion.
Enrollees have given valuable aid in fighting fires, and approximately 8,600 man-days of labor were consumed for this purpose.
Through cooperative agreements with other Federal and State agencies, use of C. C. C. enrollees of any camp is made immediately available for any fire emergency.
The educational program is an important part of each C. C. C. camp, and it has been planned to fit the requirements of the individual enrollee.
The chief objectives of the program are vocational, character, and citizenship development, with specific consideration given to job training.
Every opportunity is given the enrollees to master the machinery used on the work projects, and through the daily work in connection with classroom instruction many skilled workers have been developed from completely untrained men.
Systematie instruction on the job ineludes practice on the job in the feld and at least 2 hours per week of systematie basic instruction underlying the work off the job.
This basic instruction includes a general course in conservation.
The Emergency Conservation Work organization of the Division has grown from a total of 133 persons on July 1, 1935, to 585 persons on July 1, 1936.
The personnel has been employed with particular attention to the supervision necessary for the specialized work projects and the administration incident to Emergency Conservation Work.
A survey of the range areas and a full realization of the imminent need for stabilizing the stock industry by improvement means, indicate that in order to supply properly and adequately the needs of 142,000,000 acres of range lands, now or to be included in 50 grazing distriets, requires at a minimum 200 200-man C. C. C. camps for a minimum period of 10 years.
By judiciously locating the camps and with smaller units working from the base camp in each grazing district according to seasonal conditions and construction or type of camp, it is believed the entire area can be easily and efficiently served.
The quota of 45 camps now allocated to the Division permits only a very small portion of the public domain to receive range improvements.
The participation of the Division of Grazing in Emergeney Conservation Work should be decidedly increased and the activities expanded.
The Division of Territories and Island Possessions was created by Executive Order No. 6726,issued by the President on May 29, 1934.
This order provided for the transfer of all functions pertaining to Puerto Rico, previously vested in the Bureau of Insular Affairs, War Department, to the new Division to be administered under the supervision of the Secretary of the Interior.
In accordance with the intention of the order to centralize and coordinate territorial affairs, the activities pertaining to Alaska, Hawaii, and the Virgin Islands, already under the jurisdiction of the Department of the Interior, were transferred to the new Division.
These activities included not only general supervision of the respective governors' offices, but also the Alaska Railroad, the Alaska Road Commission, Alaska reindeer, Alaska insane, the Virgin Islands Co., the Government-owned Bluebeard Castle Hotel at St. Thomas, Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico Hurricane Relief Loan Section, and the Hawaiian Homes Commission.
The supervisory relationship of the Division of Territories and Island Possessions to the activities under its jurisdietion was cemented during the year by inspection trips of its officials to Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands; also the governors and other officials of the respective Territories and possessions visited Washington for the purpose of presenting problems and securing the assistance of the Division in their solution.
This interchange of visits and conferences has brought about a feeling of mutual understanding and cooperation which provides a firm foundation for effective administration in the future.
Through the Puerto Rico Reconstruetion Administration, the Virgin Islands Co., the Alaska Rural Rehabilitation Corporation, and the Hawaiian Homes Commission, long-range policies for the improvement and economic social welfare of the Territories and possessions are being effectively carried out under the supervision of the Division.
A general outline of these activities is set forth later in this report.
Congress made an appropriation for their colonization.
These equatorial islands are situated in the Pacific Ocean south of Hawaii and headquarters for their direct administration have been set up by the Division in Honolulu.
The first expedition under the supervision of the Division was organized with the cooperation of several other Government departments in June, and four colonists, with food, supplies, water, ete.
The Division has been active in supervising the administration of the government of the Virgin Islands and in carrying out the program for economic and social rehabilitation.
Under date of August 21, 1935, the President issued an Executive order placing the administration of relief, work relief, and useful projects for the islands under the jurisdietion of the Governor of the Virgin Islands, subject to the supervision of the Secretary of the Interior.
This order has had the effect of coordinating all Federal relief activities in the Virgin Islands.
The United States Government purchased 5,000 acres of land together with 2 sugar mills, a distillery, warehouses, 10 villages, machine shops, garages, wharves, livestock pens, and miscellaneous agricultural buildings.
A P. W. A. allotment of $2,000,000 was made available to acquire these properties, to recondition them with new machinery, to construct new villages and to purchase tractors, trucks, work animals, and, in general, to ereate a reconditioned agricultural and industrial plant.
The Virgin Islands Co. is the corporation organized to manage and operate these properties.
The company has raised 4,000 crates of tomatoes and shipped them to the New York market.
The company has planted and cultivated 1,500 acres of sugareane.
Each year the company purchases $45,000 worth of sugarcane grown by 700 small growers.
Last spring the company sold 25,000,000 pounds of sugarcane to the privately owned LaGrange Sugar Factory and rum distilleries on the island of St. Croix.
Tractors and farm equipment are rented to all persons and corporations applying.
All of the sugarcane purchased by the company and part of the cane raised by the company has been processed into 500,000 gallons of straight cane juice rum, which has been placed in charred oak barrels to be aged.
The Congress of the United States has enacted legislation authorizing the Virgin Islands Co. to pay taxes into the treasury of the islands.
This ieome is to assist the local legislatures to provide funds for school, hospitals, island publie works, and police and fire protection.
The Virgin Islands Co. program has been established to ereate commeree, furnish employment to approximately 1,000 persons, improve living conditions and gradually to relieve the Congress of the United States from making annual appropriations for the support of the islands' schools, hospitals, and other municipal expenses.
As referred to in the report of last year, a comprehensive reconstruction program has been put into effect covering rural rehabilitation, rural electrification, slum elearance and housing, reforestation, and construction of buildings for the University of Puerto Rico.
Legislation was obtained from the Seventhy-fourth Congress by which, beginning with the fiscal year to end June 30, 1938, Puerto Rico is entitled to share in appropriations which may become available for apportionment under the Federal Aid Road Act of July 11, 1916, under the same terms and conditions as any of the several States.
Under another act, approved August 23, 1935, bank deposits in Puerto Rieo may be insured, thus affording the same protection to depositors there as now given to depositors in the United States under the Federal deposit insurance laws.
Also pursuant to recommendation of the Governor, we obtained extension of the Liquor Enforcement Act of 1936 to Puerto Rico.
Loans made by the former Puerto Rican Hurricane Relief Commission are now in process of composition and adjustment as authorized in Public Resolution No. 60, Seventy-fourth Congress, approved August 27, 1935.
Regulations governing the procedure to be followed in making the compositions and adjustments were approved August 26, 1936.
Two loans were paid off during the year.
There are now 3,013 loans outstanding, which were originally contracted in the amount of $5,655,760.
Prior to making adjustments, the total sum due the United States, including unpaid interest, now exceeds $6,000,000.
Hon.
Martin Travieso was confirmed as associate justice of the supreme court on March 19, 1936, succeeding Hon.
Pedro de Aldrey, retired.
Hon.
Benigno Fernandez Garcia was confirmed as attorney general on June 18, 1936, sueceeding Hon.
Benjamin J. Horton, resigned.
Much political unrest has existed in Puerto Rico, due in large part to long-standing unemployment and the real need of relief for the poorer people.
Col. Francis E. Riggs, chief of the insular poliee, was assassinated on February 23, 1936.
The agitation continued, and eight of the Nationalist leaders were tried and convicted on charges of conspiring, to overthrow the United States Government by force.
Maj. Enrique de Orbeta, a native Puerto Rican, was appointed by the Governor to succeed Colonel Riggs and he assumed the duties of the office on June 2, 1936.
Three bond issues aggregating $3,973,000 were sold on behalf of the government of Puerto Rico.
Refunding bonds amounting to $3,778,000 were awarded to the highest bidder at 100.209, to bear an interest rate of 2% percent per annum.
The proceeds from this issue were used to retire seven outstanding issues, which were callable prior to maturity, and bearing higher rates of interest, thus making a substantial saving in interest charges.
Promoting the orderly development of Alaska’s resources and the establishment on its 6,000 square miles of territory a greater permanent population, the Division of Territories and Island Possessions has been actively interested in all those factors of administration and legislation affecting the course of Territorial affairs.
Protection of the welfare of the native population, conservation and utilization of Alaska's natural resources, the inereased local production of foodstuffs, better transportation facilities within the Territory and with continental United States, more equitable and better coordinated Federal appropriations, and more satisfactory conditions of service of Federal representatives residing in the Territory have appeared to be immediate considerations for the attainment of major ends.
In these fields, the vear has witnessed important and basic developments.
The extension of the economic and social benefits of the Indian reorganization act to Alaska has paved the way for the security of approximately one-half of the present population of the Territory, whose stabilized future is not only an essential act of humanitarianism but also an important item of wholesome advance.
The Matanuska colony, under the auspices of the Federal Emergeney Relief Administration, during its second summer has demonstrated that it is solidly established.
Undoubtedly, the success of its settlers, as it becomes more thoroughly demonstrated, will lead to an increased agricultural population and a greater production of necessary foodstuffs.
Already other farming districts, notably the Kenai Peninsula, report numbers of settlers who, upon individual initiative, have acquired homesteads.
The ultimate effect of this development upon the economy, conditions of living, and population of the Territory cannot be overestimated.
In keeping with this movement and enabling the Alaska University at Fairbanks to further demonstrate its value as an educational and service center, was the extension of the Adams, Purnell, and the Capper-Keteham Acts to the Territory.
Community service and agricultural demonstration activities, essential aids to pioneering effort, sponsored for several years by the university, can now be more adequately expanded.
The deliberations of the Inter-Departmental Committee have resulted in additional emphasis upon the conviction that the progress of Alaska and the needs of its population may better be served by the increased coordination of the plans and activities of the several departments represented in Alaska.
In this connection, plans have been formed for a unified attack upon Alaska's transportation and budgetary problems with a view toward securing more adequate appropriation for the development of its natural resources, a better system of roads, additional air transportation aids, and more adequate harbor facilities.
At the same time, overland transportation between Alaska and continental United States has taken an important step forward because of the enactment of a law authorizing the President to negotiate with the Canadian Government for the location, survey, and construction of an international highway.
Additional recognition of the value of local autonomy has been secured through the enactment of the law to enable incorporated municipaļities to incur bonded indebtedness, thereby relieving Congress of the consideration of local problems in which it can have but causal interest and extending to organized local communities direct control of their financial programs.
Alaska Railroad employees, hitherto excluded from the benefits of any Federal retirement provision, by virtue of congressional action are now included in that body of Federal employees for whom cooperative retirement plans have been established.
Needless to say, this legislation is considered by the personnel of the Alaska Railroad as a noteworthy accomplishment.
In these contributions to the welfare and development of Alaska, the Division of Territories and Island Possessions has taken aetive participation in directing the affairs of the Governor's office, the Alaska Road Commission, the Alaska Railroad, the Alaska Reindeer Service, in arranging for the care of Alaska insane, and through its liaison capacity in relationship to the other branches of the Department having activities in Alaska, as well as by its participation in the conferences of the Inter-Departmental Committee on Alaska and hearings of committees of Congress.
While the Territory of Hawaii is a comparatively self-contained political subdivision, the Division of Territories and Island Possessions has been concerned with several of its major problems.
By act of Congress of July 9, 1921, known as the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, large areas of public lands of the Territory were set aside to be administered by the Hawaiian Homes Commission for the benefit of native Hawajians, in order to rehabilitate the Hawajian race and prevent the decrease and possible extinction thereof.
Under an amendment to section 202 of this act passed by the Seventy-fourth Congress—Public 223—a new commission was appointed by the Governor to administer this activity.
The Secretary of the Interior designated George K. Larrison as his representative to cooperate with the commission and to report on its activities directly to this Department.
The new commission is proving to be energetic and enthusiastic in the discharge of its duties and there is every reason to believe that its businesslike management and vigorous enforcement of policies and regulations will prove beneficial to the Hawaiian people, and assure the continuance and possible expansion of the homes project.
As a further benefit to the Hawaiian people and in the interest of diversified farming and inereased produetivity for the approximately 40,000 acres which are administered by the Hawaiian Homes Commission on Molokai, a water survey was authorized by the Secretary of the Interior.
The object is to determine the possibilities of diverting the flows of perennial streams located on the north side of East Molokai to supply the arable portions of the islands where the Hoolehua homesteads are located.
When the present survey is completed, it will be definitely determined whether the proposed irrigation project is practical from the engineering point of view and also if the amount of land to be reclaimed will justify the expense involved.
During the fiscal year, the Territory has received generous allotments of funds from the Federal Government for relief and various construetion projects.
Also, under the provisions of Publie Aet 204 of the Congress of the United States, approved July 15, 1935, the city and county of Honolulu was authorized by the President during the fiscal year to issue bonds in the amount of $700,000 for publie improvements designed to control the floodwaters of certain valleys on the island of Oahu.
The total amount of bonds authorized for issuance by the city and county of Honolulu was $1,200,000, leaving a balance of $500,000 to be expended, with the President's approval, during the coming fiscal year to complete the projeets now under way.
The duties of the Petroleum Administrative Board in assisting the Administrator for the Petroleum Industry in the administration of the Code of Fair Competition for the Petroleum Industry terminated with the decision of the United States Supreme Court on May 27, 1935, in the case of United States v. Schechter Poultry Corporation (295 U. S. 495).
From July 1, 1935, to April 1, 1936, in complianee with Executive Order No. 7076, the Board carried on studies and research with respect to the petroleum industry.
Studies were completed and the following reports were published: Report on the Cost of Producing Crude Petroleum, Operation of New Pool Plans of Orderly Development Under the Code of Fair Competition for the Petroleum Industry, and the Final Report of the Marketing Division.
During the period from July 1935, to April 1, 1936, the Petroleum Administrative Board advised with the Secretary of the Interior on the enforcement of the act of Congress of February 22, 1935 (49 Stat. 30), generally known as the Connally Act, and so referred to hereinafter.
The Secretary of the Interior, by order no. 1054 dated March 14, 1936, established the Petroleum Conservation Division, effective April 1.
The Division advises and assists the Secretary of the Interior in the enforcement of the Connally Act and in the administration of Federal Tender Board No. 1 and Federal Petroleum Ageney No. 1; is authorized to discuss the work of any agency dealing with oil and gas; recommend action on any case brought to its attention; coordinate information; and, through appropriate channels, act as the contact ageney with the Interstate Oil Compact Commission; present required data to the Congress; attend oil and gas conferences in which the Department is interested; cooperate with the oilproducing States in the study of physical waste and the enactment of uniform oil and gas conservation laws; and contact other departments of the Government whose work deals in any measure with oil and gas.
An interstate oil compact, ratified by the States of New Mexico, Colorado, Illinois, Kansas, Texas, and Oklahoma, was approved by Congress on August 27, 1935, and in response to a request from the Interstate Oil Compact Commission, the Division assigned a member of the staff to work with a subcommittee of the Commission in an analysis, indexing, and compilation of State laws, with a view toward uniformity in State oil and gas conservation statutes.
The Rodessa feld in Louisiana and Texas has been under observation, personnel of Federal Petroleum Ageney No. 1 having been assigned to observe developments and to assist the States in oil and gas conservation and the prevention of the movement of contraband oil in interstate commerce.
The original Federal Tender Board which was established by the Secretary of the Interior on October 18, 1934, under authority of the National Industrial Recoverv Act, approved June 16, 1933 (48 Stat. 195), was terminated by the decision of the Supreme Court of the United States dated January 7, 1935, on section 9 (c) of that act in the Panama Refning Company case (293 U. S. 388).
Federal Tender Board No, 1, with headquarters at Kilgore, Tex., was established by Executive Order No. 6980–C, Mareh 1, 1935, under authority of the Connally Act, and operates in a designated area known as the East Texas field, comprised of the counties of Gregg, Upshur, Smith, Rusk, and a part of Cherokee County.
The Board is required to issue certificates of clearance or tenders permitting the shipment in interstate commeree of petroleum and its products whenever it determines that the petroleum or petroleum produets does not constitute contraband oil.
Contraband oil is defined as petroleum which, or any constituent part of which, was produced, transported, or withdrawn from storage in excess of the amounts permitted to be produced, transported, or withdrawn from storage under the laws of a State or any regulation or order prescribed thereunder by any board, commission, officer, or other duly authorized agency of such State, or any of the produets of such petroleum.
Excess oil has been produced in the East Texas field since the first proration orders were issued by the State, estimates of excess production from the discovery of the field in October 1930 up to July 1, 1936, varying from 80,000,000 to 100,000,000 barrels.
The amount of such excess production in June 1936 was estimated at 5,000 barrels daily, compared with 75,000 barrels daily in June 1935, a decline of 70,000 barrels.
The East Texas oil field, which has produced approximately 1,000,- 000,000 barrels of oil, is from 3½ to 10 miles wide and about 50 miles long.
On July 1, 1935, it contained 124,000 productive acres; a year later, 130,000 acres.
On June 30, 1936, there were 20,848 producing wells, a gain of 2,977 wells during the fiscal year.
The density of spacing changed from one well to 6.92 acres on July 1, 1935, to one well to 6.21 acres on June 30, 1936.
Approximately 90 percent of the crude oil produced in the field is transported to the Gulf coast through 14 pipe lines.
Practically all of the remainder is refined in the field, the produets being transported in tank cars and trucks.
On July 1, 1935, the Railroad Commission of Texas listed 73 refineries in the field, of which 28 were operating and 45 were shut down.
On July 1, 1936, there were 59 refineries, 17 of which were operating and 42 were shut down.
On July 1, 1935, there were 17 natural-gasoline plants as compared with 19 on July 1, 1936.
The production of natural gasoline increased from 6,840 barrels to 10,000 barrels per day over the year.
The average gravity of east Texas crude oil is 39.5°.
It has a paraffin-asphalt base and produces by skimming about 33 percent of gasoline and by cracking as much as 70 percent.
The posted price of crude oil was $1 a barrel from July 1, 1935, until January 6, 1936, when it was raised to $1.15 per barrel.
Under State authority the total allowable for the field was 160,476,943 barrels for the fiscal vear, and the Railroad Commission of Texas reported actual production of 157,953,452 barrels, and the United States Bureau of Mines reported 173,580,000 barrels.
The production of natural gasoline totaled 2,734,243 barrels, and the butane production 115,483 barrels.
Reservoir pressure declined from 1,227.80 pounds per square inch on July 1, 1935, to 1,182.44 pounds per square inch on June 30, 1936, a decrease of 45.36 pounds per square inch.
Crude oil production equaled approximately 3,500,000 barrels for each pound decline in pressure.
The production of gasoline and naphtha in the east Texas field totaled 8,322,169 barrels, kerosene 665,432 barrels, fuel oil and residuum 3,323,865 barrels, and gas oil and distillate 1,218,147 barrels during the fiscal year.
Of a total of 16,379,339 barrels of petroleum products, including butane and natural gasoline, 12,226,761 barrels were shipped by tank car.
During the fiscal year, the Federal Tender Board received 6,207 applications for tenders, 3,789 being for permits to transport 209,131,673 barrels of crude oil, and of which 3,668 applications involving 207,569,560 barrels were approved, 103 involving 1,292,573 barrels were not approved, and 18 involving 269,540 barrels were pending as of June 30, 1936.
There were 225 applications covering 3,218,567 barrels for tenders on natural gasoline, of which 214 involving 3,080,437 barrels were approved, 1 involving 5,256 barrels was not approved, and 10 involving 132,874 barrels were pending.
Butane applications numbered 24, involving 203,429 barrels, of which 21 involving 156,682 barrels were approved, 3 involving 46,747 barrels were pending.
Applications for tenders on refined produets numbered 2,169 involving 12,224,553 barrels; 2,065 involving 11,227,832 barrels were approved; 93 applications involving 914,244 barrels were not approved and 11 applications involving 82,447 barrels were pending at the end of the fiscal year.
The following table summarizes the action taken by Federal Tender Board No. 1 and Federal Petroleum Agency No. 1 upon applications for certificates of clearance received during the fiscal year.
Federal Petroleum Agency No. 1, created by Executive Order No. 7024–B, dated April 25, 1935, under authority of the Connally Act, was designated by the Secretary of the Interior to exercise all duties and functions pertaining or incidental to investigations necessary to the enforcement of the Connally Act and to investigate and report on all applications for tenders.
This agency was under the supervision of the Division of Investigations (oil enforcement) from the beginning of the fiscal year until May 1, 1936, when it was placed under the supervision of the Petroleum Conservation Division.
During the first 6 months of the fiscal year the Division of Investigations (oil enforcement) maintained eight offices, which on January 1, 1936, were reduced to four—namely, Kilgore and Houston, Tex., Chicago, and Washington.
The primary activity of the marine unit, with headquarters at Houston, Tex., during the fiscal year was to obtain information covering shipments of petroleum and petroleum products.
By May 1, 1936.
In June the marine unit was reduced to one boat in active service and two boats in storage.
The Chicago office during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1936, confined its activities to investigations of inbound shipments of petroleum products from producing areas which came under the jurisdiction of the oil enforcement unit.
A periodical check of railroad records and marine terminal records was made.
An average of approximately 70 cases per month was investigated.
During the fiseal year, the ageney received from the tender board 6,207 applications, involving 209,131,673 barrels of crude petroleum, 6,653,054 barrels of gasoline, and 8,993,495 barrels of other products.
Examination of these tenders resulted in 5,968 being reported on favorably to the board, 197 not approved, and, as of June 30, 1936, 42 were pending.
The 197 applications not approved included those withdrawn by applicants, those rejected, and those filed by the board without action.
During the year, the agency diseovered many trucks transporting East Texas crude oil without Federal tenders from Texas to Louisiana for delivery to refineries in that State.
For the period, 125 criminal cases were developed and approximately 75 percent of the violators were apprehended after warrants were issued.
Cases were developed and presented against the Louisiana refineries receiving this oil and injunctions obtained.
A special investigation of the Conroe field, with respect to contraband oil, was started on January 13, 1936, but was not completed at the end of the fiscal year.
Throughout the fiscal year, continuous efforts were made by the agency to deteet criminal violations of the Connally Act and to prepare and present cases to the Department of Justice.
From October 1935 to the end of the fiscal year, 396 investigations were assigned to members of the staff and 196 cases were referred to the Department of Justice.
Federal authorities and the Railroad Commission of Texas have cooperated in the investigations made pursuant to Federal and State law.
During the fiseal year funds available for the Petroleum Administration of the Department of Interior, including the Petroleum Administrative Board, Petroleum Labor Policy Board, Petroleum Conservation Division, Division of Investigations, Federal Tender Board No. 1, and Federal Petroleum Agency No. 1, totaled $714,361, which was obligated for $565,632, leaving an unexpended balance of $148,729 as of June 30, 1936.
The gross fund was comprised of allotments of $214,361 from National Industrial Recovery and Publie Works Administration, and of a direet appropriation of $500,000 in the deficiency bill approved August 12, 1935.
Öf the allotted funds the Petroleum Administrative Board obligated $167,659 and the Petroleum Labor Policy Board obligated $27,749, leaving an unexpended balance of $18,953 when the activities of these agencies terminated on March 31, 1936.
From April 1 to June 30, 1936, the Petroleum Conservation Division obligated the deficiency appropriation for $15,560, and during the entire fiscal year this appropriation was obligated for $206,913 by the Federal Tender Board No. 1 and the Federal Petroleum Ageney No. 1, and for $147,751 by the Division of Investigations (oil enforcement), leaving an unexpended balance of $129,776.
As of July 1, 1935, the Petroleum Administration had 263 employees, 110 with the Petroleum Administrative Board, 17 with the Petroleum Labor Policy Board, 54 with Federal Tender Board No. 1 and Federal Petroleum Ageney No. 1, and 82 with the Division of Investigations (oil enforcement).
At the end of the fiscal year the number of employees had been reduced to 97, of which 19 are in Washington and 78 in the field.
The appropriation available for the year beginning July 1, 1936, has been reduced to $300,000 and personnel adjustments pending at the close of the fiseal year have resulted in a further reduetion in the number of employees.
Acting under the War Minerals Relief Act (40 Stat. 1272) as amended February 13, 1929 (45 Stat. 1166), the Secretary of the Interior made 26 awards and 7 disallowances during the fiscal year ending June 30, 1936.
Six awards, totaling $5,840.61, carried over from the previous fiscal year, and 13 awards, totaling $83,582.17, made during the present fiscal year, were paid through the Treasury deficiency appropriation (Public, No. 440, 74th Cong., approved Feb. 11, 1936); and 7 awards, totaling $19,800.68, were paid through the Treasury deficieney appropriation (Public, No. 739, 74th Cong., approved June 22, 1936).
À total of $109,223.46 was paid during this fiscal year.
Six awards, totaling $21,395.33, were certified to the General Accounting Office prior to June 30, 1936, to be paid through a future Treasury deficiency appropriation.
Thirty-four cases were heard and dismissed upon final order of the court, which held: (1) Conduet of milling and smelting operations and the manufacture of ferro-alloys not to be within the meaning of the War Minerals Relief Acts; (2) profits in one operation by a claimant may be considered in arriving at a net loss in all operations by a single claimant; (3) failure of plaintiff to prosecute cases; (4) claims not assignable by operation of law, and death of claimant and dissolution of corporation relieved the Government of jiability under the act; (5) that the court could not review as matter cf law an item not considered by the Seeretary of the Interior.
Ten deerees were entered by the court during the fiscal year ending June 30, 1936, authorizing the Secretary of the Interior to review previous decisions made by him.
Neil Crowley, as receiver of the Cuyuna-Minneapolis Iron Co., no. 6537, March 23, 1936: Court upheld the right of a receiver to prosecute the claim under the 1929 amendment of the Relief Aet.
W. L. Gazzam, no. 6602, March 30, 1936: Court remanded the case to Supreme Court of the District of Columbia to give petitioner opportunity to show his right to sue on the claim and to receive the award—if one is made—on the partnership's behalf.
Tungsten Reef Mines Co., no. 6554, May 11, 1936: Court sustained a decision of the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia that an item of loss was not subject to review by that court as a matter of law unless the item had been previously considered and denied by the Secretary of the Interior.
Publie.
No. 602, approved May 18.
This act sets a limitation of $1,250,000 for this purpose.
An appropriation of $500,000 was ineluded in the deficiency appropriation (Publie, No. 739, approved June 22, 1936).
Publie, No, 847, approved June 30, 1936, authorized claimants who failed to ile snit under the 1929 amendment of the Relief Act to petition the Secretary of the Interior to review their claims upon matters of fact in the light of decisions of the court in similar cases.
By the Bituminous Coal Conservation Aet of 1935, approved by the President on August 30, 1935, there was created in the Department of the Interior a National Bituminous Coal Commission, the five members of which were duly appointed by the President on September 21, 1935.
The basie act specified that the provisions of seetion 4 “shall be formulated by the Commission into a working agreement to be known as the Bituminous Coal Code.
Immediately after its organization on September 28, 1935, the Commission proceeded to the formulation of the code and by its order no. 1, dated Oetober 9, 1935, promulgated the code.
This was followed by the issuance to producers of forms of acceptance of the code, and on May 18, 1936, acceptances had been received from 4,332 producers whose 1934 tonnage totaled 251,745,140 tons and constituted 70 percent of the entire national production.
The act divided the coal fields of the United States into 23 distriets and, for the purpose of establishing minimum prices, grouped these districts into 9 minimum price areas.
On October 9,1935, the Commission issued instructions for the election of members of the 23 district boards of coal producers, as provided in the act, and by November 1, 1935, district boards had been organized in practically all districts.
These district boards, under the general supervision of the Commission, were required to assist in the establishment of minimum prices and in the general administration of the act.
One of the major funetions of the Commission was the establishment of minimum prices for all kinds, qualities, and sizes of coal produced and marketed in the United States, and prior to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Carter v. Čarter Coal Company et al. rendered on May 18, 1936, the Commission had completed a large part of the work ineident to the establishment of minimum prices in all minimum price areas and had actually established and put into effect minimum prices in some of the western price areas.
In order to facilitate the compiling of statistical information necessary to the establishment of minimum prices the Commission directed the organization of statistical bureaus in each of the districts.
These bureaus collected from the code members within the respective distriets data on producing costs as required by the act and submitted the compilations therefrom to the Commission, which computed the weighted average cost of production for the various minimum price areas and reported its findings to the distriet boards for use in the determination of proposed minimum prices for all kinds, qualities, and sizes of coals produced within the respective districts.
As a further step in the establishment of minimum prices the Commission directed the classification of all coals of all code members within the various distriets, and, prior to the establishment of minimum prices for a priee area, required representatives of all district boards within the minimum price area to coordinate proposed minimum prices in the various common consuming markets, under the direction of the Commission.
In addition to these informal conferences, formal publie hearings were held in Washington as well as in the producing fields relative to the establishment of minimum prices.
When the Supreme Court decision of May 18, 1936, invalidated the minimum price provisions of the aet, the work necessary to the establishment of minimum prices for coals produeed in minimum price area po.
1, which comprised approximately 90 percent of all coal produced in the United States, was practically completed.
Under authority of section 18 of the basic law, the Commission, in conjunetion with the consumers' counsel, opposed before the Interstate Commerce Commission the application of the class I railroads in the United States for a continuance of emergency freight surcharges on bituminous coal beyond their original expiration date, June 30, 1936 (I. C. C., Ex parte 115).
These surcharges were conservatively estimated as amounting to $30,000,000 annually and constituted a very heavy burden on a depressed industry and on the eonsumers of bituminous coal, with the additional effect of reducing the coal tonnage shipped by rail.
The Commission was represented at hearings and also submitted testimony and exhibits to the Interstate Commerce Commission in support of the position taken.
In addition, it filed a brief jointly with the consumers’ counsel setting forth both the detailed factual evidence and the arguments against any continuance of the freight surcharges on bituminous coal.
The decision of the Interstate Commerce Commission in this matter, handed down on June 9, 1936, denied the petition of the railroads for a continuance of the surcharges indefinitely beyond June 30, 1936.
It authorized a temporary extension for 6 months but required a reduction during this period in the maximum surcharge on coal and coke from 15 cents to 10 cents per ton.
This decision will, in a degree, relieve the bituminous-coal industry of a heavy burden and will represent savings of millions annually to consumers of bituminous coal.
Sec. 16.
1) The economie operation of mines with the view to the conservation of the national coal resourees.
2) The safe operation of mines for the purpose of minimizing working hazards, and for such purpose shall be authorized to employ the services of the Bureau of Mines.
3) The rehabilitation of mine workers displaced from employment, and the relief of mine workers partially employed.
The Commission's findings and recommendations shall be transmitted to the proper agency of the Government for relief, rehabilitation, and subsistence hiomesteads.
4) The problem of marketing to lower distributing costs for the benefit of consumers.
5) The Commission shall, as soon as reasonably possible after its appointment, investigate the necessity for the control of production of bituminous coal and methods of such control, ineluding allotment of output to districts and producers within sueh distriets, and shall hold hearings thereon, and shall report its conelusions and recommendations to the Secretary of the Interior for transmission by him to Congress not later than January 6, 1936.
The work of the Commission in the immediate future will be limited to the consummation of the studies required under section 16 of the act and to the continued representation of the bituminous coal industry before the Interstate Commerce Commission as provided under section 18 of the aet.
By a decision of the Comptroller General of the United States, dated May 25, 1936 (A–75704), it was held that these sections of the act were in nowise impaired by the decision of the Supreme Court invalidating certain provisions of the statute.
At no time has the staff of the Commission reached the quota anticipated due to the fact that numerous court actions directed by producers against the collection of the tax provided for in section 3 of the act and the injunctions granted by the courts in many of these cases seriously impeded the work of the Commission, and also because it was not until February 11, 1936, that the bill appropriating funds for the use of the Commission was passed by Congress, Prior to that time the Commission operated with a skeleton organization borrowed from the National Recovery Administration.
Following the decision of the Supreme Court the staff of the Commission has been reduced to the number necessary for completion of the various studies being conducted.
The Bituminous Coal Conservation Act of 1935 was the first Federal statute enacted to regulate a major natural resource industry by the establishment and enforcement of minimum prices, and although the injunctions obtained by various producers and the decision of the Supreme Court invalidating its price provisions made the act inoperative to a large extent, nevertheless the work of the Commission and the data compiled as to conditions in the industry will prove of definite value in determining upon a regulatory program within the constitutional limitations upon the power of Congress to deal with the broad subject of conservation of natural resources and regulation of natural resource industries.
Government participation through exhibits in State, national, and international expositions and at numerous scientific and otherwise educational conventions has become an established policy.
One important funetion of all Government departments and independent establishments should be to acquaint the general publie insofar as possible with the many and varied activities being carried on by them, and to inform the publie of the services rendered by each department and establishment.
Experience has proved that one of the best methods by which the publie may be made acquainted with the activities and services of the Government is provided by participation in expositions and the other gatherings above described.
In carrying on this work the use of motion pictures, animated dioramas and models, stereopticon slides and colored transparencies, and murals has proved to be highly successful and adaptable.
Further, in making presentations relating to our island and territorial possessions, and the American Indian, experience has developed that the display and use of native handicraft is both desirable and important.
In the past, with exception of one Government department, there has been no organized effort throughout the various Government departments and establishments to plan, coordinate, and supervise the activities of the various bureaus, divisions, and offices in each department and establishment in connection with Government participation in expositions.
Such participation having become an established policy, however, as indicated above, and expositions having become so regular and frequent, it has been deemed advisable by several of the Government departments to establish an exhibits office to plan, coordinate, and supervise the exhibits and displays which will portray the work of the bureaus in each of the departments and establishments.
With the appointment of a supervisor of exhibits by the Seeretary of the Interior under date of February 1, 1936, an Office of Exhibits under the Secretary's office was established, and the official referred to has supervision over the Department's exhibits at the California Pacific International Exposition, the Texas Centennial Exposition, and the Great Lakes Exposition.
Further, the Office of Exhibits, through its diorama and model studio, is constantly at work preparing additional and new exhibit material, and is already making preliminary and tentative plans relating to the fortheoming San Francisco and New York expositions.
Further, for distribution from Washington and at the Department’s exhibits at various expositions the Office of Exhibits during the past few months, with the valuable assistance of the various bureaus within the Department, and the assistance as well of the Public Works Administration and the National Resources Committee, compiled a booklet entitled “Back of the Buffalo Seal", which contains printed matter and pictures descriptive of the work of the several organizations which are under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Interior.
The results obtained thus far have quite clearly demonstrated the desirability and importance of an Office of Exhibits in the Interior Department, and it is believed that future developments will tend to demonstrate this fact even more conclusively.
The Division of Motion Pictures was established on November 25, 1935, by Order No. 1005–A.
This order consolidated the motion and still picture activities and personnel of the Department, except the cooperative production of the Bureau of Mines and the specialized work of the Geological Survey.
The major purpose of the Division has been to provide educational film service for C. C. C. camps under technical supervision of the Department.
This has been accomplished by production, purehase, and distribution of suitable films.
Another important purpose of the Division has been that of producing still and motion-picture records of the activities of the Department and of the C. Č.
C. for their record value and for educational use.
The motion pictures are being used extensively by schools and other nontheatrical institutions.
Prints from still negatives are used by newspapers, magazines, and book publishers.
Enlargements are prepared for decorative use among Government offices, and for educational exhibits.
Other departments and bureaus have requested and received the cooperation of the Division in the production and distribution of motion and still pictures of their activities.
This has included cooperation with the Veterans’ Administration, Department of Commerce, Emergeney Conservation Work, Resettlement Administration, and others.
The physical equipment of the Division includes two adjoining photographic laboratories, an enlarging laboratory, a motion-picture laboratory, and facilities for the proper storage, care, and distribution of finished films and pictures.
The laboratories are equipped to accomplish all ordinary and many special requirements.
Exhibitions of motion pictures loaned by the Division during the past year were attended by more than 1,000,000 persons in C. C. C. camps, schools, colleges, and other institutions.
Untold millions saw still pictures of the national parks, reclamation projects, and Indian activities.
Enlargements and special exhibits of photographs have been on display throughout the United States.
There have been many more requests for films, slides, and photographs than could be accommodated.
The Division is well organized and efficiently equipped to take an important part in that vital program which the Federal Government is approaching effectively—that of keeping the people intelligently and impartially informed of its far-flung activities.
The activities of the office of the Adviser on Negro Affairs may be divided into two groups: Those matters which concern the Department of the Interior and the Public Works Administration: and those things which are outside the direct province of the Department of the Interior and the Publie Works Administration.
This office has watched constantly the employment of Negro skilled and unskilled labor on Public Works Administration projects.
In this connection it suggested, and had approved, at the initiation of the program of the Housing Division a nondiscrimination elause which establishes prima facie evidence of discrimination.
It has cooperated with the Labor Department in effecting negotiations with local union officials, and has investigated local labor conditions so as to determine the availability of qualified Negro workers.
During the last year, 10 Public Works Administration housing projects have been submitting monthly reports to the Adviser on Negro Affairs relative to the operation of this clause.
To date four projects are practically completed, and in each instance the compliance with the nondiscrimination clause has been obtained.
In this work the cooperation of the Inspection Division and the Labor Relations Division of the Public Works Administration has been most helpful.
On the basis of past experience, the clause based on prima facie evidence of discrimination has proven to be a successful means of protecting Negro labor on Federal projects.
In addition to the work in relation to labor policy and practices on housing projects, the Adviser on Negro Affairs has kept in touch with the Housing Division and has cooperated with that division in handling matters of policy in relation to plans for the management of low-rent housing projects.
He and his staff have visited these projects when the need has arisen, and have kept abreast of developments in connection with the housing program of the Public Works Administration.
On general Public Works Administration projeets the office of the Adviser on Negro Affairs has supplemented and cooperated with the work of the Labor Relations Division of the Public Works Administration in an effort to prevent and correct diserimination against Negro labor.
This office has gathered data relative to Public Works Administration projects designed for Negro occupancy or use, and has disseminated this information when requests have been received.
In January of 1936 the Works Progress Administration granted an allotment to the Adviser on Negro Affairs for the initiation of a white-collar survey among Negroes.
This allotment provided for the expenditure of $467,042, to be used for a survey of the training and employment of Negro white-collar and skilled workers.
This office was sponsor for the project, and the Adviser on Negro Affairs is the administrator of the survey.
The survey operated in 87 cities in 30 States and the District of Columbia.
All field work has been completed.
Editing, coding, and tabulation will be conducted in New York City and Nashville, Tenn.
At the peak of production the survey gave employment to 1,899 workers.
Of this number 315 were nonrelief, and 1,584 were relief.
At the request of local Works Progress Administration administrators and of workers formerly connected with this survey, the office of the Adviser on Negro Affairs is planning to submit additional surveys which will be sponsored by this office, and will give employment to workers who have not yet been absorbed in the white-collar projects of the Works Progress Administration.
In the fall of 1935, at the request of the Tennessee Valley Authority, the Adviser on Negro Affairs made a survey of the Tennessee Valley Authority.
This study concerned itself with the program of the Tennessee Valley Authority and its relation to the Negro community and the Negro farmer.
It also made specific recommendations relative to housing, employment, and classification of Negro workers attached to the Tennessee Valley Authority.
The Adviser on Negro Affairs has interested himself in the promotion of qualified Negro employees in the Public Works Administration and the Department of the Interior.
He conducted recently a survey of the employment status of Negroes in these departments in an effort to advise more effectively in this connection.
In instances where complaints of discriminatory practices have been voiced, the office of the Adviser on Negro Affairs has stimulated investigations and reviewed corrective measures undertaken.
In March of 1936 the Associate Adviser on Negro Affairs investigated charges of discrimination on the Coulee Dam Project.
As result of his trip and negotiations, Negroes have been employed on that project.
In spite of the fact that the dam is located in an area in which few Negroes reside and labor is being taken from persons living in areas contiguous to the project, there has been a steady increase in the number of Negro workmen employed on the project since the initial employment of a Negro laborer was made as result of the activities of this office.
The Adviser on Negro Affairs has maintained his contacts with other governmental agencies and has submitted memoranda, suggestions, and advice to these agencies in response to their requests.
He has prepared speeches and articles relating to the impact of the program of the Public Works Administration upon Negroes and has cooperated with the United States Information Service in answering a hundred or more requests relative to various phases of the Negro's economic, educational, and social status in this country.
Dwindling revenues have emphasized the necessity for increasing the number of sources from which flow the funds for reclamation.
In 1902, when Federal responsibility toward the arid and semiarid western public land States was recognized with the enactment of the Reelamation Act, the sale of public lands constituted an important source of revenue.
Funds from this source were relied upon to make the then new reclamation policy effective.
Today the situation is entirely altered.
Salable public lands have been exhausted.
The remaining public domain has been withdrawn, and a new policy has been established with regard to it.
Nearly all of it has been set aside as a permanent public range to be administered by the Federal Government and conserved for perpetual use by the people.
This was a logical step, long overdue, but now that it has been taken it focuses sharply the imperative need for the discovery of new sources of revenue to the reclamation fund.
Revenues to the reclamation fund from the sale of public lands have dropped from $9,430,573.98 in 1908 to $154,567.65 this year.
During this long period of diminishing revenue from this source, Congress has recognized the need for added sources of revenue to the reclamation fund.
A very valuable addition was made by the Oil Leasing Act of February 25, 1920.
Royalties received from the exploitation of oil on the public domain in 1924, added $6,693,908.15 to the reclamation fund.
This year only $2,053,152.48 was received due to effective application of an oil conservation policy.
Thus, the one important supplementary revenue to the reclamation fund is seen to be diminishing.
The only revenue to the reclamation fund which can be called stable at this time is that received from repayment of project construetion costs by those benefiting.
A moratorium granted and extended by Congress has postponed or curtailed these repayments for a space of 6 years.
Even with the resumption of the annual repayments in full, and this resumption is an immediate prospeet, revenues to the reclamation fund will be insufficient due to the vaníshing receipts from other sources, to uphold the long-recognized responsibility of the Federal Government toward these arid and semiarid public land States.
There can be no overemphasis of the immediate urgeney of the requirement for augmented revenues to the reclamation fund.
The value of the Federal reclamation policy in knitting together the western third of the Nation, in sustaining the people and in stabilizing the agriculture of the far western States, in moderating the effects of droughts and similar disasters has been demonstrated repeatedly in recent vears.
The 1935 crop season was one of about normal precipitation throughout the West.
It followed an acute drought of the previous year, and preceded what appeared to be (at the end of the 1936 fiscal year) another drought of great severity.
There was sufficient water for all Federal reclamation projects in 1935, just as there had been during the drought of 1934, and prospects for the 1936 irrigation season, despite the threatened drought, were good.
Federal projeets are prosperous.
Only two projects went into the 1936 season with low reservoirs, and the visible stored water supplies for these was sufficient to eliminate the possibility of serious losses.
The time has arrived when serious consideration must be given to an additional conservation activity in the arid and semiarid west; namely the control of the floods of small streams and the preservation of their waters for beneficial use.
The extended period of deficient rainfall, now 7 years long, has emphasized the importance of this work.
Failure to control and to use this resource is an offense against the theory of conservation as well as an economic loss.
State authorities have investigated possibilities presented by their small waters.
They have reported finding several hundreds of opportunities for construction of small reservoirs costing from $5,000 to $50,000 and serving from a few hundred to a few thousand acres.
If this work is to be fitted into the national plan for control of floods, regulation of streams and beneficial use of water supplies, the Bureau of Reclamation logically must be the agent through which this is effected.
Investigation should be made by the Bureau to determine the extent of these opportunities and the feasibility of projects on small streams.
Standard designs should be made for structures suitable for these small developments, and standard plans mapped out for construction of these projects.
The Operation and Maintenance Division, newly organized, assisted materially during the year in establishing closer contacts with the operating projects and creation of a better attitude on the part of water users.
Federal projects generally were in an improved condition as a result of increased settlement.
Irrigated farms attracted many from among those who were looking for new opportunities as a result of general improvement in the agricultural outlook and those who previously were dry farmers but who were dislodged by the drought of 1934.
On the Owyhee project in Oregon 107 public land farm units were offered.
In addition, 27 were offered on the Vale project in the same State and 28 on the Sun River project in Montana.
Settlement proceeded quite satisfactorily.
The great construction program of the Bureau of Reclamation went forward expeditiously throughout the year.
Three storage dams, begun since emergency funds first were made available, were completed and put in service.
They are the Rye Patch Dam of the Humboldt project, the Hyrum Dam of the Hyrum project, and the Agency Valley Dam of the Vale project.
These dams already are stabilizing important communities in the States of Nevada, Utah, and Oregon, respectively.
The death of Dr. Elwood Mead, for more than a decade Commissioner of Reclamation, on January 26, 1936, was a severe loss to the Bureau of Reclamation and the country.
To commemorate his fine, long service to the West he loved, the Division of Geographic Names gave the name Lake Mead to the great body of water created by Boulder Dam on the Colorado River.
This lake, already the largest artificial lake in the world, grew steadily larger throughout the year, until it reached a length of 91 miles at the close of the fiscal year.
At capacity it will be 115 miles long.
During the fiscal year, an extensive construction program was prosecuted with funds remaining from the Public Works allotments and with additional funds allocated by the Emergency Relief Administration.
There were constructed 160.2 miles of roads, 1.6 miles of railroad, 55.3 miles of transmission lines, 523.1 miles of canals and drains, 40 tunnels with a total length of 46,022 feet, 4,875 canal structures, 192 bridges, and 630 culverts.
There were excavated 46,107,497 cubic yards of earth and rock, making the total to date 402,317,184 cubie yards.
The Bureau used 1,159,958 barrels of cement and placed 890,959 cubic yards of concrete.
Construction of five storage dams and one diversion dam was started.
The Denver office organization exceeded 800 employees for the increased activities and a continuation of the design and specification work for the Tennessee Valley Authority.
Boulder Dam was accepted as complete from the Six Companies, Inc., March 1.
Installation of electrical equipment and machinery in the power-house has been continued throughout the vear with Government forces.
Storage in Lake Mead reached a maximum of 8,978,000 acre feet on June 30.
Construction work on the Columbia Basin project, Washington, has been the major undertaking during the year.
The principal contractors, Mason-Walsh-Atkinson-Kier, have excavated 6,272,100 cubic vards of earth and rock by means of the belt-conveyor system, and have completed the aggregate and cement storage and concrete mixing plants.
In the west abutment section, which rises more than 90 feet above bedrock, 625,000 cubie yards of concrete have been placed.
The Columbia River highway bridge, including realinement and enlargement of the pier due to movement of the east river bank, has been completed.
Dormitories, residences, a garage, and fire station have been constructed, and sidewalks and street paving have been completed in the Government camp site.
Construction is under way on the Casper-Aleova project, Wvoming.
W. E. Callahan and Gunther & Shirley were awarded the contracts for construction of tunnels nos. 3, 4, 5, and 6 and Alcova Dam, Seminoe Dam is being constructed by the Winston Bros., Morrison-Knudsen, and Utah Construction Cos.
Schedules 1, 2, and 3, covering earthwork, tunnels, and structures of the Casper Canal, have been completed.
Government buildings at Seminoe Dam site and residences at both the Alcova and Seminoe sites are under construction by Dutlox, Kendall & Hunt, Ine.
During the year, 28,500,000 cubic yards have been excavated, which totals 39.678.000 cubic vards to date on the All-American Canal.
Work has been continued by the W. E. Callahan and Gunther & Shirley Cos.
The Morrison-Knudsen, Utah Construction Co., and Winston Bros. are constructing the Imperial Dam and desilting works under a contract amounting to $4,374,240 and the concrete aggregates for the structures are being prepared by the Triangle Rock & Gravel Co. and Charles Holmes, who were awarded a contract on their bid of $149,900.
The Malheur River and Dead Ox siphons have been completed on the Owyhee project by Parker-Sehram, Consolidated Steel Corporation, and J. A. Terteling & Sons, and numerous contracts have been in force for earthwork and structures for both the north and south canals and laterals.
Principal contractors have been Morrison-Knudsen Co., who held three contracts totaling $236,294; J. A. Terteling & Sons, whose seven contracts amounted to $112,407; and George B. Henley, whose seven contracts totaled $62,675.
On the Carlsbad project, New Mexico, work was started on the construction of the Alamogordo Dam, a 135-foot earth-fill structure across the Pecos River in De Baca County, which will store 115,000 acre-feet of water for the irrigation of lands in the vicinity of Carlsbad.
The contractor on the dam is the Hallet Construction Co., of Crosby, Minn., and the contract price is $1,132,547.
The contract was 15 percent complete at the end of the year.
Construction of the Island Park Dam, an 85-foot earth-fill dam, was started on the Upper Snake River Storage project, Idaho, to form a reservoir on Henrys Fork with a capacity of 114,000 acre-feet.
The contract, awarded to the Max J. Kuney Co. of Spokane on its bid of $478,838, was 14 percent complete at the end of the year.
Reservoir cleaning is being done by the Nevada Construction Co., of Nevada, Mo., for $66,890.