Washington.
My DEAR MR. PREsIpENtT: The reports of all agencies of the Department of the Interior which are herewith transmitted, demonstrate a new and lively national interest in the conservation of our land, water, and mineral resources which continued to be the principal activity and objective of the Department for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1937.
It would appear that our citizens have adopted the concept that prudently conserved pational resources can be made to produce a far higher standard of living for the country over a longer period if government is intelligent and energetic in enlisting our resources for such service.
Unprecedented demands made upon the Department are testimony that there exists in the United States today a better understanding of the conservation movement, with a wider appreciation of the longrange purposes of projects undertaken by your administration to protect our national heritage of wealth.
The facilities of the Department have been taxed to satisfy this healthy conception that has come to dominate national thought on certain phases of government.
Fifteen million of our people in the past 12 months have availed themselves of the recreational resources administered by the National Park Service.
The Bureau of Reclamation, although it is carrving on a program of hitherto unequalled scope, has been unable to meet the requirements of vast numbers of our people who seek the economic stability available through wise use of land and water.
Officials of other units of the Department of the Interior report similar situations.
Energetic and faithful endeavors have been made by the members of the staff to follow the conservation tasks which have been assigned to us.
A review of the reports of Bureaus and Divisions will demonstrate the progress that has been made since 1933.
In a letter of transmittal, I cannot touch upon all of the many achievements, activities, programs, and plans of an organization as far reaching as the Department of the Interior, but I shall summarize a few of them.
Stabilization of the livestock industry, dependent upon the public range, is in sight.
Progress beyond earlier expectations has been made under the Taylor Grazing Aet and its amendments which increased the limitation on publie grazing lands from 80,000,000 acres to 142,000,000 acres.
The largest program of construction in its history was carried forward during the year by the Bureau of Reclamation, with excellent progress being made in the building of the Grand Coulee Dam, the principal engineering feature of the Columbia River Basin project.
No Federal reclamation project was without water in 1936 and the total value of the crops produced on the 2,901,919 acres of reclamation land in 1936 was $136,502,480, which was $29,721,186 more than in 1935 and $36,713,477 more than in 1934.
The 1936 travel year in the national parks was the best on record with indications that the 1937 travel vear will be even better.
During the fiscal year increases in the national park and monument system brought the total number of areas from 135 to 140 and the total acreage from 15,496,808.34 to 17,086,671.31.
At the close of the fiscal year, 65 tribes had adopted constitutions and bylaws under the Indian Reorganization Act which were approved by the Secretary of the Interior.
There was a marked increase in Indian initiative and management.
Indians increased the use of their own lands for grazing, with a resultant growth of their livestock industry.
The emergency conservation work was of fundamental importance in the revitalization of Indian life.
The Office of Education pioneered in the fields of conservation education, radio education, and public forums.
Conservation is now being taught in a number of the schools and universities.
The Bureau of Mines continued to give valuable technical assistance to the oil industry with a view to prolonging the life of this irreplaceable resource.
Öther scientifie studies were made during the year the results of which will be of great value to the mining industry and American business generally.
The Geological Survey continued its investigations of underground waters, so important in the drought-stricken areas; maintained technical supervision over more than 9,000 properties containing oil and gas, more than 600 containing coal, and more than 100 containing other minerals.
Improved economic conditions were reported from Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands.
The Puerto Rico Reconstruction Administration, which is now a part of the Department of the Interior with the Secretary as Administrator, is making satisfactory progress in the rehabilitation of Puerto Rico.
Primarily the work of the Department of the Interior is concerned with the custodianship of a vast national estate.
The administration, protection, and prudent use of this land, our greatest natural resource, is today the chief function of this Department.
When the topsoil is gone, men must go; and the process does not take long," said Theodore Roosevelt nearly 30 years ago.
For the first time since 1908 we have in the seat of Government an administration that is giving actual heed to that warning.
There was a time when, under existing acts of Congress, the chief concern of the Department of the Interior was to dispose of public land and to encourage the exploitation of the vast mineral wealth that was to be found beneath its surface.
This was the national policy and for the development of the country it was undoubtedly thought by all to be a proper policy.
But we are living in a new era.
The Commissioner of the General Land Office takes cognizance of our new land poliey.
He points out that the work of the General Land Office has undergone a decided change in recent years.
Conservation, rather than disposal, is now the dominant note in the administration of the public lands under existing laws.
While formerly the public lands were open range, subject to unrestricted grazing use, more than 110,000,000 acres of the 142,000,000- aere authorization have been included within grazing districts, and grazing leases have been issued under the supervision of the General Land Öffice regulating the use for grazing of approximately 5,643,000 acres outside of such grazing districts.
As of June 30.
1934, the date on which a computation was last made, the area of the unappropriated and unreserved public lands was approximately 165,695,479 acres, excluding Alaska, and not including small areas remaining undisposed of in several States.
Of such lands 119,341,782 acres have been surveyed and 46,353,697 are unsurveyed.
The area of the unappropriated and unreserved public lands in Alaska was approximately 346,174,242 acres, of which only 2,044,421 acres have been surveyed.
The Department's grazing regulation program in forwarding which we have the cooperation of the stockmen, moved forward on an enlarged basis.
Just before the beginning of the last fiscal vear the law was amended increasing the 80,000,000-acre limit of public lands to be included within grazing districts to 142,000,000 acres.
The first 2 vears of operation under the Taylor Act were largely organizational and educational while the fiscal year ended last June was marked by a decided enlargement of the program.
There was undertaken a definite program of wildlife conservation.
Among other accomplishments were the determination of the proper relationship of the private and public lands involved, the study in range carrving capacities and the cooperative agreements with local stockmen and with the Federal and State agencies, having as their objectives the rehabilitation and preservation of the land.
A survey of the range, which was begun in March 1936, includes not only a determination of the carrying capacity and proper seasonal use of the land but also an examination of the private lands and water within these areas.
It is believed that by 1940 we will have sufficient data to put all districts on a permit basis.
Range improvement allotments have been apportioned in accordance with the amounts of fees collected in grazing districts.
These improvements consist of fencing; posting stock driveways; extermination of rodents, insects, and predatory animals; maintenance of water development, and construction of stock trails.
Parts of the range used partially or not at all in past years were made available for grazing largely through the conservation and equitable distribution of water.
Dams were built to impound the water from mountain streams and to store the early run-off and check dams were constructed in dry creeks to arrest soil erosion during the wet seasons.
Wherever they could be located, springs were developed, wells were sunk, and troughs and tanks were constructed.
In conjunction with the water program we opened truck trails into grazing regions and built stock trails to facilitate the movement of animals.
More than 2,300,000 acres were covered in an extensive campaign against rodents and other pests.
As an important phase of the grazing administration, we instituted a four-part program of wildlife management which consisted of agreements with the stockmen and district advisory boards; range improvements through emergency conservation work; cooperation with the Bureau of Biological Survey of the Department of Agriculture in setting aside game ranges to be used jointly by domestic livestock and game, and State plans for wildlife such as those in New Mexico and Oregon.
There were issued 15,067 temporary licenses for 7,434,416 head of livestock during the year.
Enforcement of grazing regulations has been based on education and understanding.
There have been comparatively few complaints.
Only 607 applicants (about 4 percent) filed motions for review before regional graziers.
In other words, 96 percent of the applicants were satisfied with the action taken by field officers.
Public opinion has crystallized in support of regulation of grazing on the public lands, which not only protects a priceless natural resource but ministers to the wellbeing of 2½ million people depending upon the cattle and sheep industry.
The record in reclamation and irrigation is one of which I am particularly proud.
The people of the West know of that record.
An increasingly larger number of our citizens in other sections of the country now have a better understanding of the problems of the West and a truer conception of what the Federal Government, through the Bureau of Reclamation, is attempting to aceomplish through the erection of dams and irrigation systems for the benefit of all of the people.
Having completed Boulder Dam, the operation of which controls the Colorado River, the Bureau of Reclamation is now engaged in building the Grand Coulee Dam which will make useful for power and irrigation purposes the turbulent waters of the Columbia River.
Boulder Dam's first generator went into action on September 11, 1936 when the President pressed a button in Washington.
Grand Coulee Dam, 550 feet in height and containing 11,250,000 cubic yards of concrete, was the outstanding project under construction by the Bureau during the last fiscal year.
Eventually it will make possible the irrigation of 1,200,000 acres of arid but fertile lands in the Columbia River Basin.
It is estimated that the completed dam and appurtenant works will cost $119,000,000; the power plant $67,000,000 and the irrigation system $208,000,000.
Revenues from power and from repayments by irrigation water users are expected to repay the cost of the project.
In addition to the production of cheap power and its irrigation features, the Grand Coulee project will serve important functions in controlling floods and improving navigation on the Columbia River.
The construetion contract for the foundation was 54 percent completed at the beginning of the fiscal year and 82 percent at the close of the fiscal vear.
During the year more than 2,000,000 cubic yards of concrete were placed, a record of 13,002 cubic vards being made on June 24.
The estimated cost of the foundation section is $62,900,000 and it is scheduled to be completed about the middle of the fiscal year 1938.
Progress during the vear was many months ahead of schedule.
An average of 6,000 men was employed at the site of construction during the vear.
Possibly two and a half times as many more were employed indirectly in the manufacture and transportation of equipment and materials.
Work also has proceeded satisfactorily on the Central Valley project in California, another major undertaking, designed to regulate the flow of both the Saeramento and San Joaquin Rivers.
The principal construction features of this project include the Shasta Dam, built of concrete masonry, 450 feet high, storing about 4,500,000 acre-feet of water, and a powerhouse with an initial capacity of 280,000 kilowatts, and an ultimate capacity of 350,000 kilowatts.
The Reclamation Bureau reports that since 1906 the grand total of crop revenues from reclaimed land is $2,311,783,232, which is approximately 10 times the cost of the Federal irrigation works serving the land.
The Bureau carried forward the largest construction program in its history, with new records set in construction of all the types in which it engages.
Six major dams were begun, making 18 storage dams and 3 diversion dams under construction.
Pine View Dam, Odgen River Project, Utah, was completed and placed in service.
During the fiscal year construction work was in progress on 35 projects in 13 States.
The Bureau constructed 249 miles of canals; 134 miles of drains: 14 tunnels of a total length of 49,393 feet; 222 miles of roads; 2.4 miles of railroad; 34.5 miles of transmission lines; 4,739 canal structures; 383 bridges; 851 culverts; 46 miles of pipes and 192 flumes: 2,065,006 cubic vards of concrete went into dams, together with 3,553,870 cubic vards of earth and 536,180 cubic yards of rock fill.
Excavations consisted of 43,858,688 cubic yards of earth and rock.
There are tables included in this report which show that the population .
There were 210,466 persons living on farms and 653,441 persons in towns on the projects.
În the same areas were 859 schools and 996 churches.
As an indication of a returning prosperity, total bank deposits of $226,903,747 were reported.
Before I leave the very excellent record of the Reclamation Service, I wish to direct attention to the act of Congress to curb speculation in the lands adjacent to the Grand Coulee Dam project which was enacted on May 27, 1937.
This was one of the most important pieces of legislation bearing on Federal Reclamation during the past year.
By this measure there was written into the law dealing with the Columbia Basin development provisions which had been covered by departmental regulations on other projects since 1926.
The purpose of the act is to assure settlers and home seekers of the opportunity to acquire land at its value before the expenditure of Federal funds on the project.
The act requires ratification by the State of Washington and the negotiation of repavment contracts before construction can proceed beyond the completion of the Grand Coulee Dam.
The operations of the Bureau of Reclamation over a period of 35 vears have resulted in the construction of 138 storage and diversion dams: 24 powerhouses: 2,344 buildings: 19,116 miles of canals, ditches and drains: 72% miles of tunnels: 4,367 miles of telephone lines; 267 miles of dikes and levees; 6,041 flumes; 18,694 culverts; 13,166 bridges; and 182,964 other irrigation structures.
Another agency of the Department of the Interior that deals with the preservation of our natural resources is the National Park Service.
At the end of the fiscal vear there were 26 national parks, 2 national historical parks, 72 national monuments, 11 national military parks, 8 pational battlefield sites.
8 national miscellaneous sites, 11 national cemeteries, and 1 national parkway under the jurisdiction of the Department of the Interior.
By Executive order there were transferred to the Park Service 46 recreational demonstration areas from the Resettlement Administration.
The national park system embraced 17,086,671.31 acres, a gain in one year of 1,594,733.43 acres.
One of the outstanding achievements in national legislation affecting the parks was the enactment of the bill which saved thousands of acres of the dwindling supply of the rare, giant sugar pine trees bordering the western boundary of Yosemite National Park.
The Department is availing itself to the fullest possible extent of the powers granted under the legislation which, to our way of thinking, represents true conservation both theoretical and applied.
The authorization for acquisition covering 7,200 acres includes 6,700 acres which were owned by a private lumber company which was preparing to turn the two- and three-century-old trees into lumber leaving only the desolate, sheared-off stumps as a memorial to despoiled nature.
There is no opportunity anywhere else in the world to preserve as magnificent an example of virgin sugar-pine forest as exists in this one place.
Amicable relations with Mexico were strengthened through the cooperation of the National Park Service in connection with studies and investigations with respect to the proposed Big Bend National Park in Texas.
Tentative boundaries of the proposed park were agreed upon at joint sessions of the commissions representing the United States and the Government of Mexico.
The plan is to establish an international park linked by a bridge across the Rio Grande River at Boquillas.
Under the Service's recreational demonstration program 47 organized camp grounds were under construction in 24 areas, of which 15 wère completed in time to be put into use during the 1937 summer season.
There was begun a Nation-wide study of park, parkway, and recrea tional area programs in the United States with a view to setting up a comprehensive plan to serve as a guide to the States and as a basís upon which future cooperation will be extended.
Increased consideration was given to the regional method in developing and administering park areas.
More than 4½ millions of persons were contacted during the fiscal vear as a result of the educational program of the Park Service which consists of campfire circles, hikes, attendance at park museums, and lectures by ranger-naturalists and historians.
Progress was reported in archeological and historical conservation.
The number of historical and archeological sites authorized or established under the National Park Service was increased to 100.
Travel in the national parks reached a new high level during the 1936 travel vear which ended on September 30 and an all-time high of nearly 15,000,000 visitors was attained during the past travel year.
The United States Tourist Bureau, a national clearing house of information on recreational and travel opportunities in the United States, territories and insular possessions, was established by the National Park Service in New York City.
This bureau cooperates with the States, Territories, and insular possessions, and transportation and travel agencies in assembling and disseminating tourist information.
One of its purposes is to promote abroad an interest in travel to and within the United States.
No discussion of conservation would be complete without adequate recognition of the splendid work done by the Indian Service and of the accomplishments of the Indians themselves.
In his annual report to me the Commissioner of Indian Affairs says that the conservation program has been put ahead at least 20 years by the Indian Service's program of activities in soil erosion control, water development, etc.
Under the Indian Reorganization Act, there has been a marked improvement in the economic status of the Indians.
They have increased the use of their own lands for grazing with a consequent growth of their livestock industry.
Livestock cooperatives increased from 55 in 1935 to 119 in 1936.
Indian education also is on the upgrade.
There was noted an increase in Indian dav-school enrollment from 4,532 in 1928 to almost 12,000 in 1937.
During the same time the number of Indian pupils in public schools grew from 34,163 to 50,328.
There were 37 new day schools during the last 2 vears.
There also was a greater interest in secondary education, with a substantial attendance increase, taxing capacity, expected next year.
The problem of the Indian continues to be that of land.
In 1887 when the General Allotment Act was passed 130,000,000 acres of land were held in trust for Indians.
In 1933, when the present administration came into power, only 49,000,000 acres of the poorest land remained.
At the close of the last fiscal vear there was a total of 52,650,000 acres of Indian lands with additional purchases pending.
Sixty-five tribes, with a population of 86,238 as of last June 30 had adopted constitutions and bylaws under the Reorganization Act which were approved by the Seeretary of the Interior.
Since this report was compiled, 71 tribes have adopted constitutions.
The Connally Act, which prohibits the shipment in interstate and foreign commerce of petroleum and its products that are produced in violation of State law, was extended on June 14, 1937, to June 30, 1939.
It has been necessary to establish but one tender board, that in the East Texas field.
Should the need arise, additional boards may be established by the President.
The law is effective, however, in other fields although the tender system is not employed.
The need for a tender board in the east Texas field is evident when the magnitude of the area is understood.
This field contains more than 130,000 acres of productive territory in which 23,000 oil wells were producing in June 1937.
This field produces about 15 percent of the national crude oil output.
When it was discovered in 1930, it contained at least one-quarter of the oil reserves of the entire United States.
During the fiscal year the reported production of crude oil in east Texas was 160,717,784 barrels of which 92 percent were shipped on Federal tenders.
Although only 8 percent of the crude oil is refined in the field.
The Government and the State of Texas have worked together in east Texas in the prevention of waste, with the result that the ultimate productive capacity of the field has been greatly extended.
It has been estimated that the recoverable oil from this field has been increased by 30 percent or 600 million barrels, which would be equal to the discovery of 60 average-sized oil fields.
The market for contraband oil has been virtually destroyed and the production of "hot" oil in east Texas has been reduced to the vanishing point.
The Bureau of Mines has given valuable technical assistance to the oil industry that is designed to prolong the producing life of wells through the application of better engineering practices and by estimating the probable life of wells by working out the relationship between the rate of fluid production and the pressure drop in the producing formation.
The Bureau also has given advice in order to avoid waste in transportation and storage.
The petroleum industry as well as State regulatory bodies realizes that the difficult problem of oil- and gas-well spacing is one of major importance.
Knowledge as to how wells should be spaced in order to assure maximum recovery through prolonged flowing is far from perfect.
A study of present-day conditions that would show the fallacies of ruthless offset drilling would aid greatly in conserving the country's oil reserves.
The Bureau has continued to issue monthly forecasts of demand for petroleum products, thus assisting State commissions in their efforts to control production.
No one knows when it will come, but most experts foresee a day when our petroleum reserves will begin to fall and prices begin to rise.
In anticipation of this, the Bureau of Mines has been operating a continuous hydrogenation plant at its Pittsburgh station to test the adaptability of various domestic coals to the process.
The Bureau reports that Great Britain, Germany, France, and Japan are preparing to supplement their inadequate petroleum stocks with gasoline obtained bv the hvdrogenation of lignite, tar and bituminous coal.
The Bureau of Mines has continued its research for methods for making America self-sufficient in strategie minerals, particularly those of importance in warfare.
Development of an electrolytic process for recovering pure metallie manganese gives hope that this country may be able to produce all that may be required of that important metal.
The treatment of pegmatite tin ores is another metallurgical enterprise which, if successful, may make it possible for the United States to produce at least a part of its tin supplies now obtained from abroad.
Of late the scrap metal industry has attracted considerable attention.
At one time exports attained proportions that many considered alarming.
Because of the interest in this industry the Bureau, in addition to the seven nonferrous metals ordinarily included in the annual surveys of secondary material, made consumption studies of iron and steel serap.
The canvass of the use of primary and secondary tin was resumed at the request of tin consumers.
The Bureau has developed a cheap method of concentrating lowgrade spodumene ore, one of the principal sources of lithium salts, that promises to help the establishment of a paying industry in the South.
Spodumene occurs in large quantities in North Carolina.
Sielting companies and city governments showed a keen interest in a device for precipitating solids from air or other gases, which was developed by the Bureau on a laboratory scale and which was demonstrated successfully on a number of occasions.
The Department was called upon for technical advice following the destruction of the airship Hindenburg and the gas explosion at the New London, Tex., sehool.
Experts on explosions, helium, natural gas, and safety collaborated in studies to determine the cause of the school explosion.
Since that catastrophe, other communities have asked the Bureau of Mines to make similar studies of schoolhouses and other public buildings.
The Director of the Bureau of Mines points out that the number of nonmetallic minerals is so great and the variety of things that might be done with them by using cheap eleetric power is so numerous, that a study of the problem is urgently needed.
The Director also recommends that two additional wells be drilled in the Government-owned helium-bearing structure at Cliffside, Tex., and that one of the existing wells, which is in faulty mechanical condition, be repaired.
This is necessary to meet an anticipated increase in the demand for helium for commereial and medical use.
Since the end of the fiscal year, the act authorizing the conservation, production.
The Secretary of the Interior will render to Congress on or before the first day of January of each vear a report showing the status of the helium production fund.
The National Munitions Control Board shall include in its annual report to the Congress full information concerning licenses issued, together with such information and data collected by the Board as may be considered of value in the determination of questions related to the exportation of helium gas.
During the years immediately preceding the creation of the Bureau of Mines there were on an average each year 17 mine disasters resulting in 562 fatalities.
During the past fiscal year there were only 6 major catastrophies from which 56 deaths resulted.
Training courses conducted by the Bureau teach men how to treat injuries and what to do in emergencies.
Inspections, recommendations for improvement of practices at mines, first-aid meetings, and other means of promoting education and safety among the 2,000,000 employees of the mine industry have contributed to the conservation of natural resources, to the preservation of life, and to the prevention of suffering.
The Geological Survey during the year made more than 9,000 findings of technical facts regarding the mineral resources, water power, or storage possibilities of publie lands.
Surveys of underground waters were continued.
Much of this work was done in cooperation with the States and 75 reports on this subject were released for public use.
Drought and flood studies were continued and the measurement of stream flow was maintained at 3,379 stream-gaging stations.
The Survey made more than 4,500 tests of mineral and rock samples and in excess of 2,200 chemical analyses were completed.
More than 14,500 square miles of new areas were surveyed topographically, which will result in 102 contour topographic maps in 36 States and in Puerto Rico.
In addition, by the aid of aerial photography, 4,780 square miles were surveyed in five States for the production of planimetric maps without contours.
Fifty-seven books of the Survey's regular series, dealing with geology, mineral resources, and water supplies, were issued during the year and about 673,000 copies of 296 topographical and other maps were printed.
A geologie map of Texas was completed.
The United States is now 47.4 percent mapped, the fiscal year's increment amounting to 0.3 percent.
Fifty-nine geologic parties were in the field in 33 States during the year.
Work was begun on several new projects, including studies of areas in Idaho, Arizona, the Big Horn Basin in Wyoming, and the Ohio River flood.
The Conservation Branch added 100,699 acres to the outstanding water power reserves, making a total net reserve of 6,583,439 acres.
Two deposits of activable bleaching clay are now in commercial production, largely as a result of studies and tests in the laboratories of the Geological Survey.
This investigation, aceording to the Survey's report, led to a rationalization of the operation and other deposits foud may eventually result in a more economical use of the raw materials available.
The Chief of the Conservation Branch reports a loss of revenue because of insufficient appropriations to provide adequate supervision of operations under the mineral leasing activities on the public domain.
It was pointed out that there were 85 operating properties under leases on the public domain upon which production increased between 5 and 10 percent during the year, resulting in increased revenue to an aggregate total of $6,300,000.
The Conservation Branch complains that, as in other years, as the result of inadequate appropriations, revenue far in excess of the appropriation asked for has been lost because of inability to make timely inspections of field properties and to assure that operations were conducted so as to accomplish the greatest ultimate production and effective current beneficial use of the mineral resources involved.
The Office of Education organized a service in conservation during the vear in addition to its activities in public forums and radio education.
There has been considerable demand for consultative service and for teaching materials on the subject of conservation and the Commissioner of Education reports that conservation education is gaining ground rapidly.
Conservation is being included with increasing frequency in the curricula of elementary and secondary schools, especially in connection with courses in science and social studies.
Also, in the universities.
A conference of leaders in the conservation field was held in Washington last June.
Among the significant trends noted in rural education was the abandonment of a large number of one-teacher schools in favor of larger centralized schools.
The number of one-teacher schools has been reduced by 10.169 in 4 years.
During the same period the number of rural schools offering high-school work was increased by 883, or 5.3 percent, but the number of children attending high schools in rural communities was increased 764,513 pupils, or 53.2 percent.
The increase in the number of consolidated schools was due to the construction program of the Public Works Administration.
The salary scale of rural teachers was less encouraging.
During the 4-vear period rural teachers' salaries were cut approximately 20 percent while those of city teachers were cut about 10 percent.
The Office of Education reports a steady improvement in conditions in higher education.
Full-time enrollments were up 6.5 percent and total enrollments increased 7.5 percent.
Salaries in most colleges and universities were restored to normal levels.
Five national educational projects, begun with emergency funds, were continued, as follows: (1) Study of local school administrative units: (2) survevs of vocational education and guidance of Negroes; (3) educational radio project; (4) cooperative university research project; and (5) public-affairs forum project.
More than 400,000 listeners responded by letters to the Office of Education, showing their interest in the series of educational broadcasts during the year.
Economic conditions in the territories and island possessions showed marked improvement.
With the aid of Federal emergeney funds, construction programs not only aided employment but created necessary and useful public facilities in Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands.
An important development in Puerto Rico was the purchase by the Government of the Ponce Electric Co. at a total cost of $1,082,431.41.
This will permit the distribution of additional power at a faír price.
In the Virgin Islands the improvement and extension of the Blue Beard Castle Hotel, a continuation of the homestead program, and the construction of roads were among the major developments of the year.
The Alaska Legislature appropriated $400,000 for roads and airfields, passed acts creating a Territorial planning council and aeronautics and communications commission.
Social security legislation and new tax schedules for mines and mining were adopted.
The Alaska Railroad deficit, $172,065, included expenditures of $174,588 for the operation of vessels from Seattle to Alaskan ports during the maritime strike and $7,449 for investigations of the mineral resources of the Territory.
Based on normal operations expenses, the road would have shown a profit of $9,971.
Alaska's budget was in balance for the biennium of 1937–39.
The deficit in the general fund beginning the 1933-35 biennium was $1,527,944.49.At the close of 1937 there was a surplus of $1,315,133.51.
The commerce of Hawaii showed a substantial increase, the total value of exports and imports, $219,639,784, was an increase of more than $35,000,000 over 1935.
The population of Hawaii during the fiscal year increased 3,458, making the total population 396,715, of whom 310,956 are American citizens.
As a result of the widespread and varied activities of the Puerto Rico Reconstruetion Administration, this island possession is making rapid economic recovery.
The reconstruction program is checking certain economic tendencies among which are the concentration of land in fewer hands, the concentration of population in urban areas, absentee ownership of important property, one-crop farming, and poor health conditions.
To meet these problems the Puerto Rico Reconstruction Administration is pushing forward a comprehensive recovery program including rural rehabilitation; land purchase and resettlement; crop diversification; reforestation and soil erosion control; development of hydroelectric power; rural electrification and irrigation; extension of agricultural and vocational education; expansion of the university; and establishment of health centers and housing, including low-cost and slum-clearance projects.
The Puerto Rico Reconstruction Administration has been reorganized since the close of the last fiscal year.
The President, by executive order, placed it within the Department of the Interior and designated the Secretary of the Interior as Administrator.
I wish to record my appreciation of the splendid work that has been done by the Civilian Conservation Corps.
With the cooperation of this fine organization the Department's conservation program has been put forward many years.
During the fiscal year, the National Park Service supervised the work programs of 91 C. C. C. camps in national parks and monuments and 353 camps in Federal, State, county, and municipal areas.
The Park Service also was responsible for camp management and work supervision over 800 enrollees in Hawaii and 400 in the Virgin Islands.
There were 45 C. C. C. camps assigned to the Division of Grazing during the fiscal year.
The work projects of these camps in nine States were recommended by the advisory boards of the grazing districts in which the camps were located.
There was an average of 34 C. C. C. camps in operation on reclamation projects engaged in the reconstruction of distribution systems, rodent control work, weed eradication, and forest-fire- and flood-control work.
There were also 6,387 Indian enrollees engaged in conservation work on 69 Indian reservations.
The Civilian Conservation Corps educational program of the Office of Education was considered an essential part of the entire Civilian Conservation Corps program.
During the year this program was extended to include 90 percent of all of the enrollees and there were improvements in the educational activities and the instruction offered.
The Bureaus and Divisions of the Department began to move into the new Interior Department Building last January and the flag of the United States was flown from its masthead for the first time on January 20, 1937.
The new office facilities have greatly increased the morale and efficiency of the staff and employees.
I again renew my recommendation that the name of the Department be changed to that of the Department of Conservation.
Under the present adminístrative set-up the public domain, in general, is administered by the Department of the Interior which, for many years, has been preeminent in conservaton.
If that policy is to be followed seriously, as self-preservation demands, this Department furnishes the natural agency within which to concentrate conservational activities.
The President's Committee on the Reorganization of the Executive Departments has stated that conservation represents a major purpose of our Government.
It also recommended the creation of a Department of Conservation to replace the Department of the Interior.
Legislation to carry this recommendation into effect is pending before the Congress.
The personnel of the Department, trained in conservation work and guided by the conservatíon ideals which have been so clearly set forth by the President, joins me in urging the early enactment of this important legislation—important to a proper reorganization of the Government and economically important to the people of the United States.
Secretary of the Interior.
The White House.
SEVERE drought over the Great Plains area and part of the West during the summer of 1936 again made the Federal reclamation projects oases within vast fields of desolation, serving anew to emphasize the value of well planned water conservation undertakings in the arid and semiarid regions.
Areas protected by adequate water storage reservoirs and canal systems suffered little.
In many counties dependent upon dry farming 95 percent of the taxes were in default.
Adjacent counties which included irrigated lands had tax delinquencies amounting to 5 percent or less of the total.
This striking illustration of the manner in which Federal reclamation developments serve to strengthen and stabilize local governments demonstrates also one of their major services to the Nation.
No Federal reclamation project was without water in 1936, and none suffered major crop losses.
It was a year of prosperity in all of these areas.
The heavy demand for new irrigable lands was sustained throughout the year.
More than 100,000 farm families have been dislodged by drought from their homes in the Great Plains alone.
The greater number of these families have moved on west, looking for new opportunities on irrigated lands where stored water and canals will protect them in the future from the disaster which had befallen them.
In addition to these, many others sought new lands.
Some of these were recruited from those with farm backgrounds who were participating in the "back to the land" movement.
They were leaving cities in search of more promising opportunities.
Others were among those who had exhausted their resources on poor lands in various sections of the country.
Still another group of home seekers was made up of young men and women who have come to maturity in homes founded on the irrigated lands of the West.
In the semiarid and arid West where irrigation is essential to safe agriculture, all of these hopeful homeless people look toward the irrigated districts to provide them with the opportunities they seek.
Except for the new lands for which the Bureau of Reclamation was prepared to supply water for the first time, there were few farm sites available.
During this year the Bureau had only a few thousand acres ready.
These were rapidly settled.
It is estimated that the young men and women from other irrigated areas of the West who are now looking for places to make homes for themselves are more numerous than the offerings of new farm units which the Bureau of Reclamation can make for several years.
This situation recommends as a wise poliey the early completion of several projects and divisions of projects whieh are now in construction and which will provide water for the irrigation of new lands.
The Gila project in Arizona, which will make available on completion 150,000 acres of new land, nearly all of which is public land.
The All-American Canal in California, including the Coachella Branch, when completed will provide water for 525,307 acres, mostly public lands.
The Payette division of the Boise project in Idaho, 51,442 acres.
The Greenfields division of the Sun River project in Montana, 20,000 acres.
The Tule Lake division of the Klamath project on the Oregon-California border, 12,809 acres.
The Owyhee project in Oregon, which is partially complete, but where the irrigation facilities for 47,800 acres remained to be constructed.
The Kendrick projeet in Wyoming, which will serve 39,793 acres.
The Heart Mountain division of the Shoshone project in Wyoming, 41,000 acres.
At the end of the fiscal year, going into the 1937 irrigation season, drought conditions still prevailed in parts of the West.
Generally, however, storage reservoirs were well-filled and the lands of Federal projects amply protected.
Prospects were bright for a good year on the projects.
Lake Mead, the reservoir created by Boulder Dam, continued to fill.
At the close of the fiscal year, it contained 15,000,000 acre-feet and was filled nearly to half of its capacity.
Sufficient water was on hand and in reserve to serve the irrigators of the Yuma Federal reclamation project and the Imperial Valley and other downstream irrigation projects for 3 years.
The largest program of construction in its history was carried forward during the year by the Bureau of Reclamation, with new records set in construction of all types in which the Bureau engages.
During the year 6 major dams were begun, bringing to 18 the number of storage dams and to 3 the number of diversion dams now under construetion.
In addition, the Pine View Dam on the Ogden River project in Utah, was completed and placed in service.
This brought to a grand total of 138 the number of storage and diversion dams which have been begun and completed by the Bureau of Reclamation since its origin in 1902.
Of these, Shoshone, Arrowrock, Owvhee, and Boulder Dams each were, at the time of their completion, the highest in the world, and Boulder Dam with a height of 726.4 feet holds the record at this time.
The Bureau's construction program has been accelerated by emergeney fund allotments and by appropriations.
Since 1933, in 4 fiscal vears, a total of $226,786,000 has been made available for construction by the Bureau of Reclamation.
Of this amount, $96,254,000 was allotted from Public Works Administration funds; $61,922,000 was allotted from emergeney relief funds of 1935, and $68,610,000 has been appropriated directly by the Congress.
During 1937 construction work was in progress on 35 projects in 13 States.
The new dams begun were Bartlett Dam on the Salt River project, Fresno Dam on the Milk River project, Grassy Lake and Crosscut Dams on the Upper Snake River project, Boca Dam on the Truckee River storage project, and Marshall Ford Dam on the Colorado River of Texas project.
Two dams—the Midview Dam on the Moon Lake projeet and the Anita Dam on the Huntley project were being built by C. C. C. forces.
During the vear the Bureau constructed 249 miles of canals, 134 miles of drains, 14 tunnels with a total length of 49,393 feet, 222 miles of roads, 2.4 miles of railroad, 34.5 miles of transmission lines, 4,739 canal structures, 383 bridges, 851 culverts, 46 miles of pipe, and 192 flumes.
It placed in dams 2,065,006 cubic yards of concrete, 3,553,870 -cubic yards of earth, and 536,180 cubic yards of rock fill, and it exeavated 43,858,688 cubic yards of earth and rock.
The outstanding project under construction by the Bureau was the Grand Coulee Dam, principal engineering feature of the Columbia Basin project.
This dam on completion will be the most massive masonry strueture in the world.
It will be 550 feet high and will contain 11,250,000 cubic yards of concrete.
The dam will have twin power houses on either side of the river with a total of 18 generating units capable of producing at capacity 2,520,000 horsepower.
The project contemplates eventual irrigation of 1,200,000 acres of arid but fertile lands in the Columbia Basin area.
In addition to Grand Coulee Dam, other features will be necessary to irrigate these lands, including a pumping plant with a normal capacity of 16,000 cubic feet of water per second, and a balancing reservoir in the Grand Coulee, itself, with a capacity of 1,050,000 acre-feet of water.
This reservoir will be formed by earthen dams at each end of the Coulee.
An elaborate canal system to carry the water from the reservoir to the lands also is planned.
It is estimated that the dam and appurtenant works will cost $119,000,000, the power plant $67,000,000, and the irrigation system $208,000,000.
Revenues from power and from repayments by irrigation-water users are expected to repay the cost of the project.
In addition to the irrigation of a rich area, and the generation of a huge block of power which will be available cheaply to the public, Grand Coulee Dan will serve important functions in controlling the floods and improving navigation of the Columbia River, the Nation's second largest stream.
Grand Coulee Dam is the key strueture in the long-range plan for development of the Columbia River, the uppermost and largest of 10 dams proposed in series on the stream.
It will materially increase the output of firm power at all downstream sites on the Columbia River.
During the year, work on the project included continuation of construction of the foundation of Grand Coulee Dam and investigations and surveys of the Columbia Basin lands.
The construction contract for the foundation stage of the dam was awarded to the Mason-Walsh-Atkinson-Kier Co., July 16, 1934, on their bid of $29,339,300.
This contract was 54 percent completed at the beginning and 82 percent completed at the elose of the fiscal year.
During the year more than 2,000,000 cubic yards of concrete were placed with a record daily pour of 13,002 cubic yards on June 24.
Excavation for the year totaled 2,500,000 cubic yards, and the total excavation for the structure was 16,809,204 cubic yards.
The parallel cofferdams by which the contractor confined the river to a narrow channel through the central section of the dam, thus permitting work on either side, were completed before the 1936 flood season.
A second major diversion was achieved before the 1937 flood season, when two cross-river cofferdams forced the river to flow through slots left in the west section of the dam, thus unwatering the central section.
These cofferdams withstood a maximum flow on June 25, 1937, of 273,500 cubie feet of water per second.
An interesting construction feature of the year was the freezing of an arch across the toe of a slide in the east forebay area to restrain 200.000 cubic vards of slipping clay long enough to complete the excavation and place concrete in the dam to a height sufficient to be out of danger.
This arch, resting on a timber crib foundation, was 100 feet long, 20 feet thick, and 40 feet high, and contained about 3,000 cubic yards of frozen earth.
It was constructed at a cost of $30,000, and, through halting the slide, prevented an increase in the cost of excavation which might have amounted to $200,000.
An ammoniabrine refrigerating system was used with 3-inch pipes placed 30 inches apart.
Not only did this operation successfully stop the slide, but it saved several weeks of construction time.
An average of about 6,000 men were employed at Grand Coulee Dam.
The estimated cost of the foundation section of the dam is $62.900.000, and it will be completed about the middle of the 1938 fiscal year.
A total of about 4,250,000 cubic yards of concrete will be placed under the present contract, leaving about 7,000,000 cubic yards to complete the structure.
Progress during the year was very good, and the work was many months ahead of schedule.
Considerable progress was made during the fiscal year in surveys of the lands to be irrigated under the project.
The work consisted of topographie mapping, section line retracement, monumenting and necessary level work, all in the Quiney Flats area.
Work accomplished to date comprised 594,099 acres of retracement, 510,962 acres of monumenting, 475,925 acres of control leveling, and 347,173 acres of topography.
In field mapping 192 topographic sheets were completed.
About 100 men were employed on this work.
Other survey work was in progress in the reservoir site, including right-of-way surveys, and highway and railroad relocation.
Studies were made of migratory fish control in cooperation with State and Government agencies.
The Central Valley project in California, another of the major undertakings of the Bureau, is designed to regulate the flow of both the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers, and to redistribute, geographically, the waters of the great interior valley of the State extending from Redding to Bakersfield, a distance of 400 miles.
Through the storage and conservation of the flood waters of the two streams and their tributaries, the regulated flow of the rivers will be available for irrigation, improvement of navigation, generation of hydroelectric power, and protection in the delta region from salt water intrusion.
In the southern San Joaquin Valley, about 1,000,000 acres require supplemental water supplies for irrigation.
More than 400,000 acres of highly developed agricultural lands in that area are dangerously short of water at this time, having about exhausted the underground irrigation supply.
Some 40,000 or more acres have been abandoned to the encroaching desert.
In the delta area where the Sacramento and San Joaquin rivers join to flow westward to San Francisco Bay there are 500,000 acres of rich lands threatened by an invasion of salt water.
Regulation of the Sacramento River, a major water producer, will provide surplus water for diversion into San Joaquin Valley and a sustained flow which will prevent salt water intrusion into the delta area.
The estimated cost of the project is $170,000,000.
The principal construction features include Shasta Dam, reservoir and power plant on the Sacramento River near Redding; 200 miles of transmission lines from the Shasta power plant to a load center near Antioch; the delta cross-cut canal with a capacity of 4,000 second-feet to carry Sacramento River water to the San Joaquin River near Stockton; the Contra Costa Canal, 40 miles in length with a capacity of 350 secondfeet, which will extend from Antioch to Martinez and serve with supplemental waters the cities and farms on the south side of Suisun Bay; the San Joaquin pumping system which will raise 3,000 secondfeet of water from the San Joaquin delta upstream to Mendota Dam; Friant Dam and reservoir of 450,000 acre-feet capacity on the San Joaquin River, east of Fresno; the Madera Canal extending north from Friant Dam and serving lands in the vicinity of Madera, and the Friant-Kern Canal, which will serve lands south of Friant Dam.
Shasta Dam will be built of concrete masonry.
It will be 560 feet in height and will store about 4,500,000 acre-feet of water.
Plans for the powerhouse call for an initial eapacity of 280,000 kilowatts and an ultimate capacity of 350,000 kilowatts.
During the year preliminary engineering work on severalof themajor features was brought to completion.
Shasta dam site was selected after detailed investigation of several alternate sites including one known as the Baird site on the Pit River and another known as the Table Mountain site on the Sacramento River.
Investigation of the Friant dam site was completed in September.
During the year six contracts were awarded for work in the Government camp at the Friant dam site and bids were received on March 3 for the first construction, a 4-mile section of the Contra Costa Canal.
This contract was awarded to Haas, Doughty & Jones, and Marshall & Stacy of San Franeisco, Calif., on their low bid of $102,646.
They were about to start work at the end of the fiscal year.
The office of the Chief Engineer was engaged in preparation of plans and specifications for construction work to be undertaken in the fiscal year 1938.
This new work will inelude the following: Kennett division—relocation of the Southern Pacific Railroad from Redding to the Pit River, roadbed and structures; Sacramento and Pit River bridges; Kennett camp construction; Delta division—Contra Costa Canal, earthwork and structures; Friant division—construction of Friant Dam; Madera and Friant-Kern canals, earthwork, and structures.
The principal work in progress at Boulder Dam of the Boulder Canyon projeet on the Colorado River between Arizona and Nevada was the installation of machinery and equipment in the power plant.
On September 11, 1936, President Franklin D. Roosevelt pressed a button in Constitution Hall in Washington starting the first generator, the A-0 unit in the Arizona wing of the power-house.
Four of the 82,500 kilovolt-ampere generating units in the Nevada wing of the power-house went on the line during the year.
The dates of their first operations were as follows: N-2, October 26; N-4, November 14; N-1, December 28; and N-3, March 22.
On the All-American Canal system of the Boulder Canyon project, all excavation work necessary for completion of the main canal, 80 miles in length, was under contract.
Part of this work had been completed, and all earthwork, estimated to total about 65,000,000 cubic yards, was expected to be done during the calendar year 1938.
Work was continued on the Imperial diversion dam and desilting works.
The dam is a concrete structure, 2,990 feet long, of the hollow or floating weir type, slab and buttress nonoverflow section with a maximum height of 47 feet.
The desilting works consist of six settling basins, each 269 feet wide by 769 feet long.
Silt deposited in the basins will be removed by 72 rotary-type scrapers, each 125 feet in diameter, and sluiced into the river below the dam.
On the Kendrick (Casper-Alcova) project in Wyoming, construction of the Seminoe storage dam and power plant and the Alcova diversion dam continued, and at the end of the year, these were 30 and 72 percent complete, respectively.
Government forces excavated 28.6 miles of the Casper Canal, moving 3,793,000 cubic yards of material.
In October 1936 contracts were awarded for the manufacture of two 12.000-kilovolt-amphere generating units and turbines and governors for the Seminoe power plant.
Other important dams under construction during the year were the following: Bartlett Dam, 270-foot concrete multiple arch, on the Salt River project, Arizona; Parker Dam, 325-foot concrete arch, on the Colorado River near Parker, Ariz., being built for the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California; Taylor Park Dam, 168-foot earth and rock fill, on the Uncompahgre project, Colorado; Island Park Dam, 80-foot earth fill, and Grassy Lake Dam, 120-foot earth fill, on the Upper Snake River storage project, Idaho-Wyoming; Fresno Dam.
80-foot earth fill, on the Milk River project, Montana; Alamogordo Dam, 142-foot rolled earth and rock fill on the Carlsbad project, New Mexico; Caballo Dam, 85-foot earth fill, on the Rio Grande project, New Mexico-Texas; Unity Dam, 81-foot earth fill, on the Burnt River projeet, Oregon; Marshall Ford Dam, 265-foot conerete, straight gravity, on the Colorado River project, Texas; Utah: Bull Lake Dam, 75-foot earth fill, on the Riverton project, Moon Lake Dam, 90-foot earth fill, on the Moon Lake project, Wyoming.
A contract was awarded for construction of the Boca Dam, 110-foot earth fill, on the Truckee storage project, Nevada.
Plans and specifications were in preparation for the Deer Creek Dam on the Provo River project, Utah, the Vallecito Dam on the Pine River projeet in Colorado, and the Roza diversion dam on the Roza division of the Yakima project, Washington.
Our operations of over 35 years have resulted in the following: 138 storage and diversion dams have been built.
24 powerhouses.
2,344 buildings.
19,116 miles of canals, ditches, and drains.
72½ miles of tunnels.
4,367 miles of telephone lines.
267 miles of dikes and levees.
6,041 flumes.
18,694 culverts.
13,166 bridges.
182,964 other irrigation structures.
Reservoir capacity created by this construction totaled 44,898,910 acre-feet.
The first of the giant generators in the Boulder Dam powerhouse went into operation in October 1936, and by April 1937 four of these were producing energy for the city of Los Angeles and other communities in that vicinity.
As a result, the total output of power from hydroelectric plants on Bureau of Reclamation projects increased tremendously.
During the fiscal year 1937, 24 power plants on 12 projects produced a grand total of 1,056,757,865 kilowatt-hours of energy.
This places the Bureau of Reclamation in a preeminent position among Federal agencies in the field of electric power, although generation of hydroelectrie power is a byproduct.
By the end of the year, the Boulder plant had settled into a steady monthly output of approximately 80,000,000 kilowatt-hours.
Two new generators were being manufactured, and during the year bids for two additional generators were called.
Projects now in construction contemplate additional power developments in connection with dams whicb will control the Sacramento River in California, the North Platte River in Wyoming, and the Columbia River in Washington, and which will store their waters for use in irrigation.
Use of the waters released from reclamation reservoirs to turn turbines increases the over-all efficiency of the project.
In planning all Federal reclamation projects, the feasibility of including power development is investigated carefully, just as are other conservation ends.
As was pointed out last year, accretions to the reclamation fund established by the act of June 17, 1902, are decreasing.
From a high point of more than $9,430,573.98 reached in 1908, accretions to the special fund from the sale of public lands fell to an all-time low of $127,176.17 in the fiscal year 1937.
This source of revenue cannot be revived, because of new conservation policies and exhaustion of attractive farm sites on the public domain.
Again the need for new sources of accretions to the fund must be stressed.
While the fund also receives repayments made by water users on operating projects, this source and the remaining productive statutory sources of accretions cannot be expected to provide sufficient money year by year to finance reclamation construction programs of the size of that now in progress.
Under the reclamation law, project water users are required to contract to repay without interest over a period of years the cost of construction of the project works which serve them.
Also, in instances where the project is operated by the Bureau, the water users pay annual operation and maintenance and water rental charges.
In excess of 98 percent had been collected of all moneys due and payable for repayment of construction, operation and maintenance, and water rental charges.
Construction charges of $48,268,782.16 had become due, and $47,580,012.45 had been paid.
Operation and maintenance charges of $31,622,231.32 had become due, and $31,- 392,552.88 had been paid.
Water rental charges of $9,953,628.17 had become due, and $9,877,494.50 had been paid.
Another source of revenue was the sale of electric energy.
Exclusive of the Boulder Dam power development, this source has yielded a net revenue of $8,446,806.43.
The following tables show the status of the reclamation fund and the situation with regard to collections.
Population of the farms and towns served by the Federal projects exceeded this year that of any previous year.
There were 210,466 living on farms and 653,441 in towns on the projects, and serving these were 859 schools and 996 churches.
As an index to the prosperity of these people, an investigation was made of the bank deposits in banks on the projects.
Deposits totaled $226,903,747.
The following table shows the population and bank deposits of each of the projects in operation.
The estimated gross value of crops produced on Federal reclamation projects during the calendar year of 1936 was $136,502,480, or $29,721,186 more than in 1935 and $36,713,477 more than in 1934.
With an average of $47.10 for each of the 2,901,919 acres for which the Bureau of Reclamation furnished water in 1936, the figure represents a higher total than at any time since 1929.
During only 3 previous years, 1919, 1928, and 1929, has the gross crop returns been greater for Federal reclamation farmers.
Since 1906, when the first Federal project went into operation, the grand total value of crops produced on these projects has been $2,311,983,242, approximately 10 times the cost of the Federal irrigation works serving the lands.
The average per acre return represents an increase of $9.80 an acre over that received in 1935, and was among the highest returns per acre in the history of the Bureau of Reclamation.
The return obtained by the farmer on Federal reclamation projects for each acre he worked during 1936 was two and one-half times that received by the average farmer the Nation over.
Although the 1936 production from our projects represents only 1.1 percent of the value of all the crops harvested from farms in the United States, approximately 864,000 people on 48,773 farms and in 257 towns and cities which have sprung up in these areas were supported by the projects.
With the exception of some fruits and vegetables, these crops do not reach eastern markets and more than one-half of the area is used in the production of hay and forage which is consumed on the farm and is an important factor in the support of the livestock industry of the Western States.
Because of inadequate preciρitation for a number of years in many localities in the West where some irrigation or other farming was being practiced and because of the urgency that homes and new opportunities be provided for people from drought areas, the scope of the investigational work by the Bureau this year was greater than at any time previously.
Funds for investigation and studies of prospective projects were available from specifie appropriations by the Congress, by allotments from the Public Works and Emergency Relief appropriations, and from contributions by States and other agencies for expenditure by the Bureau.
Services of personnel and results of previous independent surveys and other information were furnished to the Bureau through cooperative arrangements by various States and agencies.
Expenditures during the year amounted to $588,717, of which $11,060 were funds contributed to the Bureau.
General report covering investigations.
All secondary investigations were conducted under the direction of the Chief Engineer.
Projects examined are located in 11 States.
Four of the investigations, namely the Rio Grande Basin, the Madison River diversion, the Green River-Bear River diversion, and the Colorado River Basin, involved the interests of several States.
Several investigations involved proposed transmountain diversions within the same State.
In Colorado, four principal projects or groups of projects were investigated.
The Blue River-South Platte transmountain diversion proposal upon which work was still in progress.
The eastern slope surveys, involving 11 more or less separate projects, contemplating irrigation, flood control, and power developments.
These investigations still were in progress.
The western slope surveys, where work was continued on investigations of six projects; work was begun on investigation of four proposals, and a report was completed and issued on the Mancos project.
The Colorado-Big Thompson transmountain diversion project, upon which the final report was prepared.
Replacement reservoir of 152,000 acre-feet capacity at the Green Mountain site on the Blue River near Kremmling; power plant of 26.000-kilowatt capacity at the Green Mountain Dam; storage reservoir of 482,000 acre-feet capacity on the Colorado River near Granby, with feeder ditches to bring the waters of Willow, Meadow, and Strawberry Creeks and Walden Hollow into the Granby Reservoir; a"diversion dam on the Colorado River below the outlet of Grand Lake; pumping plant and canal along the Colorado River between the Granbv Reservoir and the diversion dam; tunnel 13 miles long beneath the Continental Divide between Grand Lake and the Big Thompson River near Estes Park village; a power plant of 30,000 kilowatt capacity at Estes Park to utilize a net head of 705 feet available between the tunnel portal and power plant; 128 miles of transmission lines to conneet the power plants with the Granby pumping plant; regulating reservoirs on the eastern slope at Carter Lake (110,000 acre-feet), .
The initial work is estimated to cost $33,500,000, of which $8,700,000 represents the investment in the initial power system, and will be repaid with income obtained from the sale of power produced at the power plants in excess of that required for operation of the Granby pumping plant.
Water supply studies show a net annual yield of irrigation water of 310,000 acre-feet.
On the basis of a 40-year repayment period, the cost per acre-foot of new water would be $2.
The ultimate project will inelude four additional power plants, costing approximately $10,500,000.
A progress report on Rio Grande Basin investigations, of interest to Colorado, New Mexico, and Texas, was made to the National Resources Committee in February 1937, and at the end of the year a final report was in course of preparation.
Investigations of storage possibilities in the Rio Grande Basin and for supplementing the water supply in that basin by transmountain diversion from other watersheds were continued.
In Idaho, investigations looking toward plans for the comprehensive development of the water resources of the Boise, Payette, Salmon, and Weiser Rivers were continued.
Most of the field surveys for the proposed Madison River diversion to serve lands in Montana and Idaho were completed.
In Montana, a preliminary report on Gallatin Valley investigations was issued, and final report was being prepared.
A previous report on Buffalo Rapids investigations was supplemented by additional surveys and a further report was issued.
A third investigation in Montana covered the Saco Divide unit of the Milk River project on which a report was prepared.
In New Mexico, a report on a plan to provide irrigation works to utilize flood waters conserved by the Conchas Dam, now being constructed by the War Department on the South Canadian River, was being prepared.
In Oklahoma, an investigation of the Altus project on the north fork of the Red River was in progress.
In Oregon, four projects or groups of projects were under investigation.
Previous studies of the Canby project in the Willamette Valley, made by the War Department and Oregon, were reviewed and extended under a cooperative contract with Oregon.
Investigations of the Grande Ronde project were in progress under a contract with the State, and examinations of the Butter Creek project were started.
Investigations started in 1934 of the Deschutes project were completed, and reports on storage facilities, the Crooked River, and north unit, and on the Plainview project investigations were completed, while a report on the south unit was in preparation, and investigations of the Waldo Lake was begun.
In South Dakota, the Black Hills investigations inchuded surveys for the Angostura and Rapid City projects and completion of reconnaissance of the Belle Fourche River.
In Utah, cooperative work on Salt Lake Basin investigations, under a contract with the State, was continued on the Blue Bench, Dixie, Gooseberry, and Ouray projects, and a report on the Salt Lake aqueduct was issued.
Investigations, using funds contributed by the Strawberry Water Users' Association, were continued on the proposed Currant Creek Canal diversion to inerease the flow into Strawberry reservoir.
Preliminary investigations of the main features of possible plans for the utilization of the available waters of the Green and Bear River watersheds were commenced under a cooperative contraet with the States of Utah, Wyoming, and Idaho.
Investigation of irrigation possibilities within the Colorado River basin were continued.
The work this year consisted principally of surveys and mapping of irrigated and arable lands in Colorado and Utah.
Minor expenditures were made for investigations in the North Platte Valley, Nebraska, and southern Nevada.
An average of 34 Civilian Conservation Corps camps were in operation on Federal Reclamation projects, engaged in a program of reconstruction of the distribution systems by lining canals with concrete, replacing wooden water control structures with conerete structures, and realignment and restoration of canals to the original sections.
Rodent control work was continued on nearly all projects.
Demonstrational projects to educate project farmers to the best methods for eradication of weeds were started.
Civilian Conservation Corps construction work on the Midview Dam, on the Moon Lake project, and the Anita Dam, on the Huntley project, progressed rapidly, indicating their probable completion by the fall of 1937.
The Apache Dam for erosion control on the Rio Grande project was completed and the nearby Box Canyon Dam placed under construction.
Recreational developments at Elephant Butte, Guernsey, Minatare, and Lake Walcott Reservoirs had progressed sufficiently to permit partial use by the public.
Cooperative work with the Bureau of Biological Survey for the development of wildlife refuges was inaugurated at the Lake Walcott Reservoir on the Minidoka project and at Tule Lake on the Klamath project.
Plans are under way for similar work at the Deer Flat Reservoir on the Boise project, and at Pishkun Reservoir on the Sun River project.
Enrollees from the camp on the Sun River project aided in combating a serious forest fire in central Montana in July and August 1936.
In February, the most severe winter on record in western Nevada required C. C. C. assistance from the Humboldt project to open roads to isolated towns, ranches, and mines.
In June 1937 three floods in rapid succession occurred on three widely separated projects.
C. C. C. aid prevented the collapse of the MeMillan Dam above Carlsbad, N. Mex., during the greatest recorded flood on the Pecos River.
At Billings, Mont., C. C. C. men from the Huntley project aided in restoration of canals following floods resulting from heavy rains in the valley.
At Austin, Colo., enrollees from the Uncompahgre project assisted in restoration of facilities dèstroyed when the nearby fruit growers dam failed.
The Bureau of Reclamation, in administrative charge of a Commissioner appointed by the President, is under the supervision of the Secretary of the Interior.
The administrative office in Washington has 100 officers and emplovees.
Engineering and construction activities in the States are under the general supervision of the Chief Engineer at Denver, Colo., who is assisted by a staff in Denver of 800.
In addition, each major project is in the charge of a construction engineer, who reports to the chief engineer.
Of these there are 24.
When a project or division of a project is completed it is placed in charge of a superintendent.
These operation and maintenance projects report to the General Supervisor of Operation and Maintenance at Washington.
The combined field offices, numbering 66, have a personnel of 4,750.
RECLAMATION TABLE 1.—Consolidated Financial Statement, June 30, 1937—Con.
Total Treasury cash (schedule 1).
Disbursing officers' cash (schedule 1) .90 124.
THE scope of the conservation activities of the National Park Service, and their effect upon the well-being of our citizens, are vast and diversified.
The Service endeavors to meet all requests for advice and assistance that will increase and conserve park lands everywhere; and its highest ambition is to make each area under its supervision fulfill to the utmost its destiny as a unit in the conservation plan of the United States.
Popular appreciation of this fact is demonstrated in the use made of the national park system.
During the 1936 travel year, which ended September 30, travel to the various units of the national park system reached the unprecedented high of 9,929,432.
The increase during the following fall, winter, and spring months, together with the heavy travel at the opening of the 1937 summer season, indicates that, when the 1937 travel season ends on September 30, a new record will have been made.
From throughout the system came reports of increased registration of the visitors from foreign countries.
The scenic areas of world-wide fame and the military areas took precedence in the preference of these foreign visitors.
The 1936 inerease was along all lines of travel and among users of all types of accommodations.
Not only were hotel and lodge quarters generally filled to capacity during the summer season, but the inereasing number of park visitors traveling in trailers, as determined by a survey made during August of that year, showed a demand for many new facilities in the publie campgrounds, such as electric connections and piped running water.
A study as to the advisability of providing more up-to-date trailer camps is now under way.
Meanwhile, special sites for trailers are being provided in most of the new campground plans.
Publie interest in the national parks was stimulated by the personal interest displayed by President Roosevelt, who on July 3, 1936, dedicated the Shenandoah National Park in Virginia, and who participated in the ceremonies commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of the dedication of the Statute of Liberty (a national monument) on Bedloe Island, in New York Harbor, on October 28, and dedicated the Jusserand Memorial in Roek Creek Park, Washington, on November 7.
The President also visited the Great Smoky Mountains National Park, in North Carolina and Tennessee, on September 9 and motored 150 miles through the park.
Increases in the park and monument system brought the total number of areas from 135 to 140 and the total acreage from 15,496,- 808.34 to 17,049,505.80 acres.
As in the past, the National Capital Parks of the District of Columbia, consisting of 695 separate areas, were counted as one unit of the main park system.
In addition to its administration of park areas, the Service continued supervision of the 108 Federally owned or operated buildings and 7 memorials in Washington and of 13 buildings outside the District of Columbia; supervised plans for the Jefferson Memorial in St. Louis; supervised estimates and expenditures for the Mount Rushmore Memorial in Custer State Park, the George Rogers Clark Memorial in Indiana, and the Fine Arts Commission; supervised plans and construction of the Blue Ridge and Natchez Trace Parkways; and cooperated in the Public Works, Civilian Conservation Corps, Works Progress, and other emergeney programs.
The Thomas Jefferson Memorial Commission designated the National Park Service as its executive agency in the execution of the Thomas Jefferson Memorial, planned for erection in Washington, D. C., and the Director of the Service its executive officer to carry out the plans of the commission.
By Executive order, 46 recreational demonstration areas were transferred from the Resettlement Administration to the National Park Service.
To facilitate administration of the national park and monument system, which in the past 4 years expanded enormously in number of areas and functions, a plan of administration under four regions was devised.
Put into effect early in the year as regards emergency activities, replacing the earlier C. C. C. seven-region plan of administration, late in the 1937 fiscal vear extension of the regionalization to the National Park Service as a whole was approved by the Secretary of the Interior.
Application and operation of the wider regionalization was deferred, however, until after the close of the fiscal year.
Bureau.
This new agency began functioning in the Federal Building in New York City, but later was moved to ground floor offices at 45 Broadway, a more convenient location.
The Tourist Bureau is expected to receive the cooperation of the 48 States, the territorial and insular possessions, the District of Columbia, and various transportation and travel ageneies in assembling, compiling, and disseminating tourist information.
One of its purposes is to promote abroad an interest in travel to and within the United States.
A survey to determine the airport nearest to the various national and State parks was completed during the year.
The purpose of the study was to keep the Service abreast of the rapid developments in transportation and to make available information on the location of existing airports for the benefit of air-minded travelers.
Radio plaved an important part in park operations during the past year.
It was widely used for fire protection, and two rotary snow plows at Mount Rainier were equipped with sending and receiving sets so that the drivers might call for help if their machines were caught in snow slides.
Radio communieation was established at Isle Royale National Park project in Lake Superior and in nine remotely located work relief camps on the North Carolina coast, where no other means of communication are available.
With the cooperation of the United States Coast Guard, a radio communication system is being installed at Fort Jefferson National Monument on the Dry Tortugas Islands in the Gulf of Mexico.
Radio is regularly used for control of the annual national ski races on the slopes of Mount Rainier.
Experiments are being conducted on use of ultra high radio frequencies at Grand Canyon and Death Valley, both areas particularly adapted to use of these frequencies.
Popular acclaim of the Service's free illustrated lectures on the national parks and monuments and on specialized activities in connection therewith led to an expanding of the lecture service during the past year.
Eighteen talks were given in the auditoriums of various Federal buildings, the majority in the departmental auditorium and the last three in the newly completed Interior Department Building.
These lectures were attended by 11,017 persons, or an average of 612 per lecture.
Plans are under way for a still further expansion of this lecture service during the 1937–38 season.
Dwelling Authority, National Park Trust Fund Board, Advisory Council for Emergency Conservation Work, Fredericksburg and Spotsvlvania County Battlefields Memorial Commission, Petersburg National Military Park Commission, Washington-Lincoln Memorial-Gettysburg Memorial Boulevard Commission, and representative of the United States on the International Commission on Historic Monuments.
With a deep sense of sadness, and an acknowledgment of great loss, the Service reports the death on March 23, 1937, of Col. Charles Goff Thomson, superintendent of Yosemite National Park, Calif.
In addition to his exacting duties as park superintendent, Colonel Thomson in his zeal for the good of the Service and in accordance with his tenets of service to humanity took on numerous other duties involving conservation of irreplaceable scenic assets which were threatened with destruction from one cause or another if not soon given the protection of the Department of the Interior.
Colonel Thomson had served as superintendent of Crater Lake National Park, Oreg.
The Service also suffered a serious loss in the death of Dr. Frank R. Oastler, member of the Advisory Board of National Parks, Historie Sites, Buildings, and Monuments.
An ardent conservationist, Dr. Oastler for many years was keenly interested in national-park activities, especially wildlife problems, and his advice to the Service was invaluable.
Amicable relations with Mexico, in the field of both conservation and international amity, were strengthened during the past 2 years through cooperation between the two countries on national-park matters.
This cooperation was the outgrowth of the suggestion of the Secretary of the Interior that the Government of Mexico be invited to consider the establishment of international parks along the frontier between Mexico and the United States.
Meetings in both countries and studies of areas along the boundary have resulted in a broader understanding of the respective ideals and policies of these two North American republies.
Investigations of the Mexican portion of the proposed Big Bend National Park in Texas were made by Mexican and United States authorities, and during November tentative boundaries of the proposed park were agreed upon at joint sessions of commissions of the two countries.
The plan is to link the two sections of the park, when established, by a bridge across the Rio Grande at Boquillas.
Especially interesting is the proposal, originating with Chief Forester John D. Coffman of this Service, that Mexican forestry students be detailed to forestry schools in the United States, and that fellowship awards be granted for that purpose.
The matter was taken up with the Guggenheim Foundation, and that organization expressed its interest and offered its assistance, requesting that applications be obtained from promising candidates through the higher officials of the Mexican Forest Service.
Applications furnished by the Foundation were transmitted through the National Park Service.
It is sincerely hoped that this suggestion will lead to the establishment of Latin-American fellowships in forestry and other conservation subjects.
The value and national importance of the Boulder Dam recreational area was proved by the public use of the area during the past year and by the vast scientific interest in it displayed by specialists in many fields.
To permit development of these recreational values to the fullest extent, a cooperative agreement was entered into between the Bureau of Reclamation and the National Park Service.
The agreement provides that while the Bureau of Reclamation retains complete jurisdiction and authority over and responsibility for Boulder Dam and all the engineering works connected therewith, also for the territory immediately adiacent thereto and for Boulder City and all activities located therein, the National Park Service has jurisdiction over the remainder of the Boulder Dam recreational area, including the airport on the outskirts of Boulder City and authority over and responsibility for all activities in such areas.
Recreational demonstration areas constitute a unique form of land use increasingly valuable to the American people, affording outlets for out-of-door recreation accessible to congested populations, and retiring from agricultural use unarable lands of no economic worth.
They provide facilities for organized camping, pienics, hiking, bathing, swimming, and boating, by means of such projects as trail systems, campgrounds, beach clean-up, construction of swimming pools and dams for impóunding streams, and making artificial lakes.
The National Park Service, by Executive order of November 14, 1936, was given sole responsibility for the acquisition and development of these recreational demonstration areas and is now completing acquisition of lands in the 46 areas being developed in 24 States.
Funds allocated from the Emergency Relief Appropriation Act of 1935 enabled the acquisition of these areas under the Federal land program.
Forty-seven organized campgrounds are under construction in 24 recreational demonstration areas, of which 15 were completed in time to be put into use during the 1937 summer season.
Smaller areas known as waysides, contiguous to main highways, also are being developed in Virginia and South Carolina for the accommodation of those seeking 1-day outings.
Twelve thousand relief workers assigned to National Park Service projects and 4,500 C. C. C. enrollees are carrying on these developments.
While the majority of these areas will be turned over to the States for administration after development, it is planned to retain several under the jurisdiction of the National Park Service for demonstration purposes.
A total of 99,513 acres of land for this purpose has been acquired; 3,607 acres during 1937.
The National Park Service completed 4 years and 3 months of participation in Civilian Conservation Corps work.
During that period conservation projects of long-continuing benefit to the people of America have been carried on in several hundred camps located in national parks and monuments, State, county, and municipal park areas in the continental United States, the Territory of Hawaii, and the Virgin Islands.
The National Park Service supervised work programs of 91 Civilian Conservation Corps camps in national parks and monuments and 353 such camps in Federal, State, county, and municipal areas; and was responsible for camp management and work supervision over 800 Civilian Conservation Corps enrollees in Hawaii, including Hawaii National Park.
Improvement both in quality and quantity of these conservation projects has been marked throughout the year.
A summary of these accomplishments is shown in table 10.
The National Park Service derived funds both from the Emergency Relief Appropriation Act of 1935 and the Emergency Relief Appropriation Act of 1936 for land acquisition and development projects, operated on 46 recreational demonstration areas, 2 national monuments, 1 proposed national monument, 2 parkways, 2 State, 4 county, 10 municipal park areas, and 1 beach erosion control area.
These appropriations and projects gave employment to 19,000 relief workers of which 12,000 were loeal workers and 7,000 workers quartered in subsistence camps operated by the Service.
In addition there were relief workers employed by contractors on some of the Service projects.
Three major projects included in this program are the Jefferson Memorial at St. Louis, the Natchez Trace Parkway project in Mississippi, and the North Carolina beach erosion control project.
A Nation-wide study of the park, parkway, and recreational-area programs in the United States was initiated.
All Governors were advised to cooperate in the study.
Provisions are being made for enlisting the aid and cooperation of other Federal departments and agencies.
The study is expected to result in the preparation and adoption of a comprehensive plan to serve as a guide to the States and be the basis upon which future cooperation will be extended to the States by this Department in the planning, acquisition, and development of park, parkway, and recreational areas.
Similar studies also will be made on a regional basis—chiefly in areas near large population centers and frequently covering sections of two or more States—and on a national basis.
Increased consideration was given by States to the regional method of facilitating joint action in administering and developing park areas, where mutual interests and benefits are involved.
During the year, by action of New York and New Jersey, the Palisades Interstate Park commission was created.
At the request of Missouri and Illinois, the National Park Service is lending professional and technical aid in the formulation of plans for the creation of an interstate compact between those States for the administration and development of Alton Lake and adjacent lands, and the proposed interstate parkway leading to the lake.
The Appalachian Trail conference referred to the Service its proposal for an interstate compact for the protection, extension, and development of the Appalachian Trailway from Maine to Georgia.
A three-volume digest of all laws relating to State parks was prepared and made available to park and conservation authorities.
As a result of the study of these laws, principles were evolved which are now being incorporated in all new State legislation relating to parks and recreation.
A compilation of all State laws relating to archeological matters also was prepared.
A municipal park study was conducted by the National Park Service in cooperation with the National Recreation Association.
Material was received from 1,216 cities and 77 counties located in every State.
Comparison with similar data secured in 1925 and 1930 shows the extent to which local park systems have expanded in recent years.
The National Park Service's conservation program for the protection of nature and the historic and prehistoric works of man made notable advances during the year.
As in the 2 preceding fiscal years, all forest-protection improvements, insect and tree disease control, type-mapping, and tree-preservation activities were financed from emergency appropriations.
The meager allotment for forest protection and fire prevention for the fiscal year 1937 under the regular appropriation provided funds for only the most essential needs for forest protection personnel and equipment which could not be financed under the Civilian Conservation Corps program.
The forest protection accomplishments of the past year are, therefore, largely represented in the report of the C. C. C. program.
The summer of 1936 was an outstandingly serious fire season with several disastrous fires within national park areas.
Extensive use of radio communication was made for protection against forest fires.
Many fire lookouts have been equipped with radio sending and receiving sets, lightweight portable field sets provided for fire-fighting erews, and a few automobiles equipped with radio transmitters.
In the far West, the fire season was of unusual length, extending from early May to December in some of the parks.
However, despite the high-danger weather conditions and a very material increase in the public use of the parks, the number of man-caused fires in the western parks declined and for the first time in the past 10 years was less than the number of lightning fires.
Unfortunately for the National Park System as a whole, both the number of lightning fires and the number of man-caused fires showed a very material inerease during the fire season of 1936 with an all-time high record total of 733.
The most disastrous of the season was the Heaven's Peak fire, in the most visited and one of the most scenic portions of Glacier National Park.
Set by lightning on August 18, in spite of all reasonable precautions it was carried by a high wind across the Continental Divide, burning a total area of 7,642 acres.
Severe drought in the Lake States region, together with high winds, facilitated the spread of three fires on Isle Royale, resulting in a total burn of approximately 33,000 acres in the center of the island.
As Isle Royale is as yet only a national park project, no regular proteetion organization was available and suppression of these fires was handled entirely by C. C. C. enrollees from national park, State park, and national forest camps, together with forestry personnel from regions I and II and the Washingtonoffice.
Because of the status of Isle Royale these fres do not appear in the annual fire statistics for the National Park System for the calendar year 1936.
During the spring of 1937 a very intensive fire protection training program was carried out in all C. C. C. camps under the jurisdiction of the National Park Service.
The taking of panoramic photographs from fire lookout stations and observation points within the National Park System was continued in an effort to improve forest fire detection and fire dispatching.
Such photographs have been prepared to date for a total of 208 existing, proposed, and emergency lookout and observation points in 23 national parks and monuments.
Regular annual extensive surveys of forest insect conditions were continued during the year and a system of permanent sample plots was established in several parks to facilitate this study.
The general situation in national parks within the Pacific Coast States appears fairly satisfactory as a result of the control program which has been carried on for a number of years.
The needle miner in the lodgepole stands of Yosemite still constitutes a serious menace, nevertheless, and the infestation by the mountain pine beetle in Yellowstone and Grand Teton National Parks continues to spread.
The general program of control of the mountain pine beetle was abandoned several years ago because it was so widespread, affecting a number of national forests as well as parks.
Some minor control is exercised in the neighboihood of developed areas.
A serious infestation by the Black Hills beetle was fought this past spring by control operations in Bryce Canyon National Park, and the Forest Service cooperated by extending operations to the adjacent national forest.
There are indications that the infestation by this beetle is growing over a considerable territory and may seriously threaten the magnificent ponderosa pine forest on the north rim of Grand Canyon.
Infestation in Douglas fir by the Douglas fir beetle was also combated in Bryce Canyon.
Inseet conditions in the eastern parks have in general been of endemic character and where serious outbreaks of defoliators have oceurred a satisfaetory degree of control has been maintained through spraying.
The Japanese beetle was found this spring in considerable numbers in George Washington Birthplace National Monument.
The experimental autogiro spraying program for cankerworm at Morristown National Historical Park was continued with marked success.
Blister rust control operations were continued in Mount Rainier, Acadia, and Shenandoah National Parks.
During the past year the C. C. C. itinerant tree-preservation crew provided the care necessary for the preservation and repair of important trees in 9 national cemeteries, 1 national park, 13 national military and historical parks, 2 national monuments, and 3 national battlefield sites, pruning, fertilizing, installing lightning protection, removing girdling roots, bracing with rod and cables to strengthen structural weaknesses, treating wounds, and diagnosing disease and insect conditions.
One additional tree-preservation bulletin was added to the series already published.
Several research projects were initiated or continued in connection with callus splitting experiments, cavity filling materials, and lightning-struck trees.
The type mapping program, which provides a detailed inventory and map of the vegetative cover of the parks for use in planning protection, development, and use of the areas, was continued under C. C. C. Approximately 6,832,829 acres have been mapped to date, of which 1,236,829 acres were mapped during the past fiscal year.
The data obtained in this work have provided much additional information relative to the flora of the parks and monuments covered, permitting the identification of new plants and their addition to the previous lists of known species within those areas.
Forest nurseries were operated in Sequoia, Yellowstone, Great Smoky Mountains, and Platt National Parks, raising planting stock for reforestation on burns where natural reproduction is lacking, for erosion control, and for landscape planting and replacements of dying trees in and adjacent to public campgrounds and other developed areas.
In addition to the parks named, forest planting was conducted during the past year on a recent burn in Mesa Verde National Park, and on deforested areas in Scotts Bluff National Monument.
As a part of the 1936 reduction program to relieve the congested northern range in Yellowstone National Park, 2 new plants of bison were made in the park.
71 animals being released in Hayden Valley and Fountain Flats as nuclei for new herds easily seen by visitors.
Ten bison were shipped to zoos and seven slaughtered for use by the Crow Indian Ageney.
The reduction of elk was carried on in Yellowstone National Park and vicinity in the winter of 1936–37, as in the past 2 years.
Reduction of the herd by 4,000 animals was deemed necessary after exhaustive studies by park personnel and wildlife technicians indicated that, due to the extraordinary drought, the carrying capacity of the range was about one-third less than it was the previous winter.
This reduction program was undertaken by the park staff with the cooperation of the Montana Fish and Game Commission, with the understanding that as many elk as possible would be removed by live shipments and in open hunting areas outside the park.
The reduction goal was not approached, since only 846 elk were removed.
Movements of herds were slow and few elk migrated into open hunting territory.
In Park County, Mont., where hunting was allowed, 256 animals were killed.
Some deaths occurred from miscellaneous causes, 169 were live-shipped for restocking purposes and to zoos, and the remainder were slaughtered—the carcasses given to Indian and relief agencies.
After the reduction, a census of the northern Yellowstone herd showed that 9,673 animals still remained on the range.
The past year has been one of important accomplishments in fish cultural activities within the national parks, based on the poliey adopted in April 1936.
There has been no further encroachment of exotic species of fish into national park waters.
Lakes or streams where only native fish occur, as well as waters that do not contain any fish, received careful study with a view to protecting such waters against any artificial development.
Closer cooperation exists between the Service, the Bureau of Fisheries, and State game departments than ever before.
Some 27,000,000 black-spotted trout eggs were taken in Yellowstone National Park by the Bureau of Fisheries last year, the Park Service receiving 70 percent.
Smaller amounts of eggs were taken in a number of other national parks, all being returned to the waters of the park where taken.
The State of Montana collected approximately 20,000,000 rainbow and Loch Leven trout eggs at the park boundary near West Yellowstone, hatched them, and returned more than 20 percent to park waters.
Egg exehanges were effected by the Service with Utah, Oregon, and Idaho, whereby park waters have been stocked by these States with no cost to the Service.
More than 30,000,000 of fish were planted in the national parks during the past year and there is evidence of improved fishing conditions in many waters.
The National Park Service program for the conservation of historie sites and buildings was greatly expanded.
The historic sites survey is now under way, the field of cooperation with State and local agencies has been extended, and an agreement with the Works Progress Administration requires National Park Service approval of all restoration projects financed by relief funds.
Also, the total number of historic and archeologic sites authorized or established under custody of the National Park Service has been increased to 100 with the addition of Perry's Victory International Peace Memorial and the Ocmulgee National Monument, the latter, one of the most important areas in southeastern archeology.
Considerable progress was made in the past year in putting into effect the important and far-reaching national policy for historic preservation adopted by Congress in the act of August 21, 1935.
The most significant single step was the development, with the aid of the Advisory Board on National Parks, Historic Sites, Buildings, and Monuments, of a comprehensive plan for systematic inventory, investigation, and classification of the great number of historic sites eligible for consideration under that act.
Outstanding historic and archeologic sites will be selected for public protection through ultimate inclusion within the national park system.
Sites of lesser importance will be recommended for State and local protection.
A policy governing restorations was also worked out with the assistance of the advisory board.
Preliminary negotiations were made toward designating certain sites as national historic sites and assuring their permanent preservation for public benefit.
Derby Wharf national historic site project.
Interesting maritime project in Salem, Mass., to commemorate the importance of New England shipping in the early history of our Nation.
The National Park Service took formal possession last year of the customhouse, center of the project.
Hopewell furnace and village.
Revolutionary foundry included within the French Creek recreational demonstration project in Pennsylvania.
A boundary study was completed last year and the area will probably be designated a national historic site.
Harpers Ferry site.
Harpers Ferry, W. Va., had great historic significance during colonial times and during the War between the States.
The project as planned will include the Jefferson Rock, the stone steps, hewn by hand from solid rock up the face of the cliff under Robert Harper's direction; the arsenal site, associated with the story of John Brown; and certain Civil War remains on the heights surrounding the town.
A detailed study of recommended boundaries, comprising an area totaling 1,300 acres, has been completed recently.
Old main building, Knox College.
The only building still standing associated with the Lincoln and Douglas debates.
A cooperative agreement was entered into with Knox College, Galesburg, Ill., for establishment as a national historic site.
Manassas Battlefield site.
Site of Virginia battle important in War between the States.
Land acquisition was nearly completed (1,476.19 acres) and detailed research studies made preparatory to its development.
Two cooperative agreements of the type authorized by the act of August 21, 1935, permitting the Federal Government to exercise a measure of control over the historie values of structures or sites at small cost and without disturbing ownership, were drafted with State and local agencies.
The Service, through its general program of State cooperation discussed elsewhere, has contributed in an important way to the preservation of many historic sites and structures.
Thirty-two projects on areas of primary historical or archeological interest widely distributed throughout the country were in progress during the past year.
Physical improvements to established areas were made throughout the year.
Stabilization of the battlefield areas through erosion control has contributed further to their permanent preservation.
Interesting among the developments are the restoration of such historic structures as the Wick and Guerin Houses in Morristown National Historical Park; the Lightfoot House, Yorktown, in Colonial National Historical Park; Fort Pulaski, Ga.
Fifteen visitor-contact stations were constructed in battlefield areas this past year.
Col. Richard Lieber, of Indianapolis, Ind., was appointed by the Secretary of the Interior to fill the vacancy on the Advisory Board on National Parks, Historic Sites, Buildings, and Monuments, created by the death of Dr. Frank R. Oastler.
Colonel Lieber, who is president of the National Conference on State Parks, is an outstanding conservationist and authority on park matters.
The advisory board as constituted at the close of the fiscal year was as follows: Mr. Edmund H. Abrahams, Savannah, Ga.
Prof, Herbert E. Bolton, Berkeley, Calif.
Dr. Hermon C. Bumpus (chairman), Duxbury, Mass.
Mrs. Reau Folk, Nashville, Tenn.
Hon.
George de Benneville Keim, Edgewater Park, N. J.
Dr. Alfred V. Kidder, Cambridge, Mass.
Dr. Fiske Kimball, Philadelphia, Pa.
Dr. Waldo G. Leland, Washington, D. C.
Mr. Archibald M. McCrea, Williamsburg, Va.
Dr. Clark Wissler, New York, N. Y.
The National Park Trust Fund Board accepted a donation of $3,000 from the Universal Pictures Corporation for the privilege of taking motion pictures in Yellowstone and Grand Teton National Parks.
That contribution, the only one received during the fiscal year, brought the donations credited to the national park trust fund account to a total of $8,000.
No expenditures were made from the fund during the year.
The membership of the National Park Trust Fund Board includes the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of the Interior, the Director of the National Park Service, Mr. J. Horace MeFarland, of Harrisburg, Pa., and Mr. Louis Hertle, of Gunston Hall, Va.
Many new enthusiasts were enlisted in the cause of conservation last year through participation in the activities and use of the facilities provided in national parks and monuments by the National Park Service's educational program.
The Service itself was able to expand this program through the availability of emergency funds and the cooperation of educational and scientific organizations.
A total of 4,550,516 educational contacts were made in the parks during the year July 1, 1936, to June 30, 1937.
Visitors who listened to talks by ranger-naturalists and ranger-historians, visited museums, and participated in hikes and campfire circles gained far more than a quiek-tripper's idea of the national parks.
Students under the sponsorship of various colleges and universities made tours of the different parks as part of their educational programs.
Carlsbad Caverns' records of special school parties give some idea of the extent to which park areas are visited by school groups.
National Park Service information desks were extremely busy, as visitors have come to depend upon these centrally located offices for information of every kind.
A growing number of parks are giving early season training to company bus drivers so that the information which they give to the public will be accurate and in accord with scientific knowledge.
Although there have been some additions to the list of publications useful to the visitor, much remains to be done to furnish adequate printed material.
Yellowstone has issued another number of Trailside Notes, providing the motorist and hiker with a guide from Fishing Bridge Museum to Mammoth Hot Springs.
Yosemite has issued a self-guiding manual describing the auto tour on the floor of the valley, and a revised edition of High Waterfalls of the World.
In press is a publication entitled"Birds and Mammals of Mount McKinley National Park"by Joseph S. Dixon.
This has been issued by the Service designated as no. 3 in the fauna series.
Probably the greatest progress of the year in the educational program was in museum development throughout the Service.
National Park Service museums do not present case after case of loosely organized, uncoordinated displays of documents, scientific specimens, isolated heaps of dry bones, or technical equipment.
Planned to illustrate ideas rather than exhibit collections of specimens, they tell a running story of the parks through pictures, charts, maps, models, and dioramas arranged in narrative sequence.
During the past year better housing and more effective presentation of exhibits were provided.
Eleven administration buildings containing museum wings were built with P. W. A. funds.
The new museum in the Interior Building is completed and exhibits depicting the aims and achievements of the Department's bureaus are in an advanced state of preparation.
Fireproof housing for the priceless exhibits already accumulated in field museums is the next important objective in museum development.
Two laboratories have prepared exhibits for displays ia 31 different units of the park system, including many relief maps and models of the areas helpful to visitors in orienting themselves.
Exhibits were furnished for 12 expositions and conferences during the year.
Increased travel to the parks and the necessity for establishing several centers within a park to avoid overconcentration of visitors resulted in a perceptible increase in naturalist activities last year and revealed the necessity for an enlarged staff.
Campfire circles and amphitheaters suitable for evening gatherings were developed until every major park now has one or more to care for visitors who like to sit around a campfire and hear ranger-naturalists tell the story of the park and explain its major features.
The smaller campfire circles encourage free and open discussion through questions and answers and entice volunteer entertainment talent, while the larger bring park wonders to life for hundreds of visitors, making them see the area with new eves the next day.
An inventory shows a total of 5 community buildings, 16 well-equipped amphitheaters, and 28 simple log circles in the parks.
Lectures, as a whole, have been better planned and executed.
A gratifying number of all-day trips have been developed in practically every park and more knapsackers and pack-train parties were reported as using the trails into the back country.
One of the most popular all-day guided trips was that to the top of Mount Lassen.
Campfire programs and nature hikes were inaugurated on an experimental basis in Shenandoah last year and the response by the public exceeded all expectations.
The naturalist program in the National Capital Parks attracted wide attention and the attendance of 11,128 persons on field trips, 4,219 persons at campfire lectures, and evergrowing numbers on the nature trail proved the necessity for an augmented staff and additional campfire facilities.
New appointments and promotions have given added impetus to the naturalist staff.
Naturalist positions have been newly established at Boulder Dam recreational area, Death Valley National Monument, and Mesa Verde National Park, while new ranger-naturalist positions were established in Acadia, Rocky Mountain, General Grant, and at Devils Tower.
More mature and better-trained men are to be found throughout the Service.
Excellent training for prospective national park personnel is given by the Yosemite School of Field Natural History, and its graduates are in demand for both seasonal and permanent naturalist positions.
The Secretary of the Interior has designated the field school and the Yosemite Junior Nature School as nonprofit scientific organizations engaged in a training enterprise helpful to the Service.
The field school is a full-fledged graduate school, with a college degree a prerequisite.
The instructional staff is strengthened by highly qualified professors from the University of California.
The final field trip has been extended from 1 week to an expedition of 2 weeks' duration.
Much flora and fauna specimen collecting is done, benefiting the Yosemite Museum through new discoveries and added scientifie data.
The 1937 session, constituting the thirteenth class, began its courses on June 21 with the selection of its 20 candidates (14 men and 6 women) from more than 100 applicants.
Eight graduates of the school are now employed in the Service permanently, and at least 25 more have been employed seasonally.
Yale University continued its cooperation with the National Park Service, furthering incentive for scholarship and training through its award of fellowships to Service employees.
During each of the scholastic years of 1935-36 and 1936-37 one such fellowship was granted; and as this report is being written word has been received that two National Park Service fellowships will be awarded during the coming year.
The fellowships are open to employees of the National Park Service interested in pursuing advanced studies bearing upon the educational program of the Service or upon some special feature of interpretation activity such as field studies of wildlife, forestry, history, archeology, or museum display.
A forester and an archeologist were the recipients of the previous fellowships; a historian and a geologist were selected to attend Yale next year.
Constant efforts are being made to improve all types of educational facilities afforded the general public in the historical areas.
Perhaps the most important progress last year was made in the development of field exhibits of all kinds, including sample restorations, outdoor relief maps, orientation maps, trailside museums, and markers.
Outstanding in this class was the reconstruction of the Continental Army hospital hut at Morristown in accordance with contemporary authentic records.
This structure, together with reproductions of a soldier's hut and officer's hut, now presents an interesting group of sample restorations of the Morristown encampment.
As part of the educational program, public lectures sponsored by outside groups have been given by park historians and there are continued requests for this kind of service.
Numerous radio broadcasts were given by the staff and opportunities offered for a series of park historical sketches.
The National Park Service cooperated with various civic organizations in conducting numerous commemorative celebrations during the year, among them being the fiftieth anniversary celebration at the Statue of Liberty, at which President Roosevelt and Secretary Ickes spoke, and reenactment of the Battle of the Crater at Petersburg, Va., attended by 50,000 people.
Perhaps the most notable observation to be made at the close of this third year of C. C. C. support of the wildlife division is the fact that recognition of the importance of a wildlife program in National Park Service activity has continued to grow.
Maintenance of a staff of wildlife technicians through appropriations made by C. C. C. is assured for another 3-year period.
During this time it is expected that provision for some permanent staff of ecologists can be made.
The work of the past year has kept the division fairly abreast of current administrative demands put upon it, but it has not been possible to enter upon the long-time program of research in wildlife needs so necessary to full understanding and adequate handling of biological assets in all areas now under the jurisdiction of the National Park Service.
A satisfactory approach to the problem could be made if additional wildlife technicians were employed for the purpose of making appraisal of all biological values for which the Service is responsible.
Thirty papers covering the distribution, food habits, behavior, and taxonomyof mammals, birds, and amphibians, and management of mammals and fish in National and State parks were published.
An extended field trip was made by the supervisor of fish resources and two wildlife technicians and the most recent developments in warm water fish culture in the central United States was studied.
This particular phase of the Service's fish cultural activities will be exceedingly important in the development of State park areas.
Following the spraying of woodland at Morristown National Historical Park with lead arsenate, a census of bird life was made to check possible detrimental effects.
Observations indicated no material decrease of bird life but this may not yet be regarded as conclusive.
Range studies were continued at Grand Canyon, Rocky Mountain, and Yellowstone National Parks.
Studies of the nesting trumpeter swans at Yellowstone were continued.
A census showed a total of 38 adults and 12 cygnets in the park in the summer of 1936, almost double the number recorded in 1935.
The survey of plants of the Great Smoky Mountains National Park was continued and about 20 species of the higher plants were added to the approximately 1,000 species represented by 4,000 specimens in the park collection.
At Glacier National Park an investigation was made of diseases and other causes of a decline in the park's bighorn population.
Several bighorn have died of a disease described as hemorrhagic septicemia which has also caused serious losses in the Yellowstone bison herd.
Extensive wildlife studies were made in the proposed Big Bena National Park to provide data for proper management when the park is established.
Surveys were made at Oregon Caves and Fort Pulaski National Monuments with recommendations for extension of boundaries to protect native fauna and flora and historical sites, respectively.
A study of the economic food habits of the coyote at Lava Beds National Monument was started in an effort to determine the effect of that animal on the nearby Tule Lake Migratory Waterfowl Refuge.
Research is a continuous major áuty of historians in every national historical park and monument and consumes much of their time.
Closer coordination of the general historical research program is being developed to assure the best possible professional standards.
A master index of research subjects is being prepared and theWashington office made the clearing house for all reports.
To assist the research staff, microcopving and projection equipment has been purchased for each regional office, permitting photographing of valuable documents and materials.
1. Fort Raleigh, Roanoke Island, Va.
2. Battle of Manassas, Virginia.
3. Battle of the Wilderness, Virginia.
4. Castle Pinekney, S. C.
5. Wakefield, George Washington Birthplace National Monument, Va.
6. Kenesaw Mountain, Ga.
7. The Second Battle of Fredericksburg, Virginia.
8. Catalog and index of Brady Civil War photographs.
9. Construction history of Fort Pulaski, Ga.
10. Brompton, Fredericksburg, Va.
11. Study of early Texas and Mexican manuseripts on Goliad Mission, Texas.
12. A study of medical practices in the Revolutionary War made in connection with the installation of exhibits at Morristown Continental Army hospital hut.
The C. C. C. program made possible the continuance of geological work undertaken in previous years.
The staff was kept busy supplying technical information for development of accommodations in the parks.
Activities included research and advice regarding development of master and period plans; location of water supplies; appraisal of natural foundations for dams, reservoirs, bridges, and tunnels; quarrying operations for road metal, structural stone, gravel, and sand; location of roads and trails; and erosion control.
Ninety-five formal reports on special projects of this type were prepared.
The geological map of the proposed Big Bend National Park was approximately 80 percent completed.
The surveys show notable deposits of vertebrate fossils, including dinosaurs and a specimen believed to be the rare, toothed bird, Hesperornis.
Invertebrate fossils, including a phenomenal 48-inch Inoceramus Grandis—a form of clam—were found in great profusion.
An exhaustive study was made of the stratigraphy in portions of the Boulder Dam recreational area and related territory, in an attempt to reconstruct the ecological conditions of the area in remote Permian time.
In the course of this study, a den of the prehistoric ground sloth, Northrotherium, containing much excellent fossil material in an exceptionally fine state of preservation, was discovered in Rampart Cave.
Investigations of Meteor Crater led to the decision that the evidence favors the theory that the crater was formed by the impact of a great meteor, and hence should be included within the category of unusual and spectacular phenomena.
The Oberlander trust of the Carl Schurz Memorial awarded a fellowship to the Chief of the Wildlife Division enabling him to visit Germany from September to December 1936 to make special studies of administrative methods and field procedure in the central offices of the Bureau for Nature Protection and in four of the "national parks" of the Third German Reich.
Cooperation was extended to the Direccion de Parques Nacionales of the Argentine Republic and the Department of Forests, Game, and Fish of the Republic of Mexico.
Conferences with the Mexican officials have continued coordinated planning of international parks, monuments, and game refuges.
By special arrangement with the United States Geological Survey, the assignment of three of its personnel to work in the national parks was continued.
As a result of these assignments, material obtained in field studies in Sequoia and Yosemite National Parks was converted into museum exhibits, and portfolios are being made of park photographs descriptive of outstanding geologie features; a report describing the geology of certain routes of travel and areas of visitation in Glacier National Park was prepared; and field work in the Colorado Plateau is being transcribed into a report covering the parks of that area.
A number of additional field studies through the cooperation of interested agencies were conducted within the parks last year.
In Great Smoky Mountains National Park: Dr. W. H. Camp, assistant curator, New York Botanical Gardens, made extensive studies of the heath family of shrubs.
In Yellowstone National Park: Dr. Leonard P. Schultz, in cooperation with the Bureau of Fisheries, investigated fish food conditions in Yellowstone Lake and other waters of the park and studied exotic fish to determine the possibility and advisability of their reduction as a menace to trout waters of the Madison River and to lakes on this river outside the park; Ranger-Naturalist James R. Simon conducted a study of fishes with cooperation of the University of Wyoming and plans to incorporate his findings in a paper on all game and forage fish of Yellowstone region; Dr. Harvey Schlundt continued his study of thermal waters and rock formations in the park; Miss Edan Lind of England devoted special attention to the plant life of Yellowstone, which she will describe to her students in botanical classes at the University of Sheffield.
Arrangements were made with Miss Elizabeth Morse of the University of California to study the fungi of Zion National Park.
Permission was given the Carnegie Institution of Washington, Department of Research in Terrestrial Magnetism, to carry on earthcurrent measurements in Shenandoah National Park.
This institution also inaugurated a volcanological study of Crater Lake to be conducted by H. Williams of the University of California, and continued studies of the Archean rocks of Grand Canyon.
George Munro, Hawaiian ornithologist, working under the joint auspices of the Bishop Museum, Territorial Board of Agriculture and Forestry, Hawaiian Sugar Planters Association, Hui Manu, and others, conducted a survey of Hawaii National Park to compare the present status of native birds with the finds of 40 years ago.
An airplane reconnaissance of Mount McKinley was made by Bradford Washburn, Jr., in conjunction with the National Geographie Society.
Excavations in Dinosaur National Monument were continued and more of the fossil stratum uncovered to enable the American Museum of Natural History under the leadership of Dr. Barnum Brown to expose and develop a large dinosaur skeleton as an exhibit in place.
C. C. Presnall, park naturalist of Zion National Park, and Dr. E. Raymond Hall, mammalogist, University of California Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, made studies of the small animals and others indigenous to the southwestern national park region, over a 3-year period, followed by comparative studies at the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, Berkeley, Calif., with the discovery of new facts indicating that the red bat and kangaroo bat are comparatively abundant in that area.
Their findings have been published through the Utah Academy of Sciences under the title of "Ranges and Relationships of Certain Mammals in Southwestern Utah."
Recognition has been given 11 nonprofit scientific and historical organizations, engaged in cooperative park educational work through official designation by the Secretary of the Interior, in accordance with the Interior Department Appropriation Act for the fiscal year 1937, approved June 22, 1936, Public Law No. 741.
Behind the successful handling of millions of visitors to national park areas lies a record of exact and careful planning and of construction activities that appear only incidentally, if at all, in the finished picture.
The retention of primitive conditions, where use intrudes upon nature, would be impossible without the skill of the landscape planner and the engineer, who find means to install the necessary facilities and make the needed adjustments with the least possible disturbance of natural conditions.
Appropriation Act's provision for road and trail construction, Public Works, the C. C. C., and Works Progress.
Under the Public Works program all general development, engineering, architectural, and landscape architectural plans for $2,150,000 worth of general physical improvements were prepared.
Under the roads and trails appropriation of $6,500,000 carried in the 1937 Interior Department Appropriation Act, plans for and inspections of major road projects were made, and minor roads and trails were constructed.
Similar service was rendered by the engineering and landscape personnel under the Works Progress program, which included physical improvements, recreational developments, road and parkway construction, and land utilization work to the extent of $1,500,000, on a wide variety of areas—Federal, State, and local, including recreational demonstration areas.
In the contract plans for nearly all road projects were included plans and drawings for bridges, parking areas, guardrails, headwalls, special grading, and other essential items.
In addition to roads and trails, buildings, electric elevators, dam and intake structures, sea walls, reservoirs, pumping plants, water supply and distribution plants, drainage systems, sewerage systems and sewage disposal plants, telephone and power lines, cribbing, and retaining walls were constructed or improved.
In Washington, construction projects included such diversified duties as altering the south front of the Civil Service Building to permit street widening, and elimination of fire hazards at the White House.
Considerable surveying and mapping of both old and new areas of the national park and monument system were accomplished.
The parkway projects, which are perhaps the most spectacular new phase of national park planning and development during recent years, continued to hold popular attention.
Two new sections of the Blue Ridge Parkway project, totaling 15 miles, were placed under contract, bringing the total mileage under contract in both Virginia and North Carolina to 135 miles.
Development of two recreational areas along this parkway was also continued, as were location work and right-of-way developments for bridge and overpass structures.
Additional studies were made of the parkway route in the vicinity of the Great Smoky Mountains National Park.
Contracts for the construction of 34 miles in three Mississippi sections of the Natchez Trace Parkway were awarded.
Survey and location work was continued in collaboration with the Bureau of Publie Roads.
Data on soil mechanics for use in the field resulted from research carried on in the engineering laboratory.
Most of the material so obtained was incorporated in the Manual for the Design of Low Dams prepared for the water resources committee.
This work attracted such favorable attention that the laboratory was visited by the chief engineers of almost every Federal agency.
It also received marked attention and interest at a recent meeting in New York City of the American Society for Testing Materials.
The value of soils investigations, particularly in the construction of earth dams, is rapidly becoming recognized, and the increasing number of samples submitted by the field for analysis is taxing the available laboratory personnel and space to the limit.
Routine engineering work included periodic inspections of Government-owned and rented buildings with a view to insuring the preservation of the buildings and the safety of the occupants, particular attention being paid to elevators and to floor loads imposed by safes, files, and storage.
Technical service on a broad range of problems was rendered other governmental and semigovernmental agencies by the engineering staff of the National Park Service, such work being done on a reimbursable basis.
Typical examples of this cooperation were the construction of the Petroleum Experimental Station of the Bureau of Mines at Bartlesville, Okla., and the investigation of air-conditioning contracts effected under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Agricultural Engineering of the Department of Agriculture.
All major road construction, both under the regular roads and trails appropriations and under Public Works allotments, was handled for the National Park Service by the Bureau of Public Roads of the Department of Agriculture, continuing the excellent cooperation initiated under the interbureau agreement established in 1926.
Landscape planners and engineers of the National Park Service, in cooperation with Bureau engineers, checked and approved all preliminary locations, surveys, and plans for road construction.
The survey of historic American buildings, for the purpose of measuring and recording all important examples of the builders' art erected in the United States and its possessions before the last quarter of the nineteenth century, went into its fourth year of cataloging, measuring, and recording such structures.
The total product of the Historic American Buildings Survey to June 30, 1937, included approximately 14,000 measured drawings of 2,100 buildings and 16,000 photographs of 3,500 buildings, in addition to the data sheets and reference cards for these and additional structures.
Most of the records have been deposited in the Library of Congress, where they are available for public use and reprodution.
In conducting the work of the Historic American Buildings Survey, the structures in each locality in greatest danger of destruction are measured first.
The result of a national plan sponsored by the Department of the Interior through the National Park Service, in conjunction with the Library of Congress and the American Institute of Architects, the Historic American Buildings Survey during the past year was conducted largely through the facilities of the Works Progress Administration.
The Works Progress phase of the program necessarily was discontinued at the end of the fiscal year because of a sharp reduction in Federal projects of that nature, due to curtailment of funds, although in some of the States additional Works Progress Administration projects were set up.
Operations of accommodations for the public on the concession basis were continued and extended during the year.
Two new major contracts were awarded.
After advertising three times for bids for the construction and operation of tourist facilities in the Shenandoah National Park, a 20-year contract was awarded the Virginia Skyline Co., Inc., of Richmond, Va.
A 20-year contract also was awarded the Grand Canyon-Boulder Dam Tours, Inc., for the installation and operation of facilities for the accommodation of visitors to the Bolder Dam recreational area.
The number of contracts and permits for the furnishing of tourist accommodations in the national parks on June 30 totaled 139.
These various operations are under the supervision and control of the Department of the Interior, to which are submitted annually, for review and approval, schedules of rates for accommodations or services rendered and annual reports showing the financial status, details of income and expense, and resulting profit or loss.
The contract of the Mesa Verde Park Co. was taken over by the Mesa Verde Co., with the approval of the Department.
Ansel F. Hall, former Chief of the Field Division of Education, is a director in the new company and in active management of its affairs.
It is believed that Mr. Hall's enthusiasm, and his experience based on 20 years’ connection with the National Park Service, will result in the building up of an operation on a high standard.
Although operating expenses of the concessioners steadily increased during the past two seasons, substantially no increases in rates have been authorized by the Department.
Nevertheless, the park operators were able, by reason of increased volume and lessons in economy learned in the depression days, to maintain generally standard rates for the various accommodations and services furnished.
As a check in the avoidance of excessive rates, orders were issued that no increases be made in salaries or other compensation of corporate officers, managers, or other employees of park operators working under profit-sharing contracts who receive compensation at a rate of more than $5,000 until approved by the Director of the National Park Service.
Field studies of rates for public-utility services in several of the parks resulted in establishing certain new rates and altering some old rates.
At Yellowstone National Park charges that will reimburse the Government $11,000 annually are being set up for telephone, water, and garbage disposal service furnished to the park concessioners.
A similar review of services and rates in Mount Rainier National Park, when its findings are put into effect, will return an additional $1,200 annually to the Government.
The charges are based on depreciation, maintenance, and operating costs.
With the heaviest travel season in the history of the National Park Service in prospect during 1937, additions and improvements in facilities were made in all of the national parks and monuments.
Since the improvements made in Yellowstone National Park, which were particularly noticeable and needed, were typical of those generally shown throughout the system, a résumé of betterments in that park will indicate progress generally.
In the Yellowstone, after a partial shut-down of several years, the old hotel at Mammoth Hot Springs was almost completely dismantled and rebuilt.
A new dining room and grill combination commenced operation of the regular park season on June 20.
During the coming year construction will begin on the new cabins and new recreation center, to be built between the hotel and dining room.
This layout represents a new idea in the planning of facilities for the public in the Yellowstone, bringing all types of services into one center instead of having them scattered in more or less widely separated units, as in the past.
Consolidation of the larger park operators into the present Yellowstone Park Co., effective at the beginning of the 1936 season, made possible this new line of development.
The Lake Hotel, closed for several years, was again opened to the public.
The purchase of 41 new busses, representing the latest ideas in sightseeing equipment, marks the second step in the rehabilitation and modernization of the Yellowstone fleet of approximately 400 busses, probably the largest sightseeing fleet in any resort area in the world.
Authorization was given for remodeling the Government-owned Painted Desert Inn at the Petrified Forest National Monument, and work was continued on the concession buildings being erected at Bandelier National Monument by the Service.
Operation of these facilities under the concession system is expected within another year.
The National Park Service undertook and is continuing supervision of the construction of a hotel at McKinley Park Station, at the entrance to Mount McKinley National Park, Alaska, under an allotment of funds by the Public Works Administration to the Alaska Railroad.
In addition to the hotel structure itself, a complete utility plant must be constructed to provide heat, light, water, and sewage disposal facilities.
This hotel, located along the line of the Alaska Railroad, will be operated by that organization, but will furnish much needed accommodations to McKinley Park visitors.
Cooperation and active participation was continued in the management of the concession operations of the Welfare and Recreational Association of Public Buildings and Grounds, Inc., in Washington, D. C.
Charles L. Gable, chief of the park operators division of the branch of operations, continued to represent the Director of the National Park Service in these organizations.
The entire profits from the Mammoth Cave operations are donated to the United States for the purpose of purchasing additional land to complete the Mammoth Cave National Park.
The Welfare and Recreational Association pays one-half of its profits to the United States as revenue, using the remaining half for welfare and recreational purposes within the District of Columbia.
Constant vigilance was maintained, through inspections of fire hazards, to prevent fires in buildings throughout the national parks.
An automatic sprinkler system was installed in El Tovar Hotel at the Grand Canyon and improvements made in the Mammoth Cave Hotel in the Mammoth Cave National Park.
A safety committee was established within the National Park Service for the purpose of establishing standards for fire protection and accident prevention.
A comprehensive study of the accident problem was made by the Secretary's committee on health and safety, and a report with recommendations submitted.
The chief of the Service's safety division was chairman of the interbureau committee on health and safety.
Permanent all-year administrative and protective personnel in the major units of the national park system and a visiting list approaching 12,000,000 annually entail serious responsibilities toward the safeguarding of health.
With the continued cooperation of the Public Health Service this phase of Park Service work was handled successfully.
Broadly speaking, the work was divided into two main channels, studies of water-supply problems, including examination of the sources of drinking water and bacteriological tests of water used, and the development or continuation of adequate sewage-disposal facilities.
Special attention was paid to sanitary facilities in automobile campgrounds and swimming pools were inspected regularly.
Among the more outstanding developments of the year in the field of sanitation were the design of sewage-disposal facilities for the areas of concentration in the Shenandoah National Park, the near completion of a sewage disposal plant for the Smokemont area of the Great Smoky Mountains National Park, and the preparation of plans for a temporary sewage-disposal plant at Upper Basin in Yellowstone National Park, and for improvements of sewage disposal facilities at the South Rim of the Grand Canyon, in Yosemite Valley, and at Carlsbad Caverns.
The national park and monument system on June 30, 1937, consisted of 26 national parks, 2 national historical parks, 72 national monuments, 11 national military parks, 8 national battlefield sites, 8 miscellaneous national memorials, 11 national cemeteries, 1 national parkway, and the National Capital Parks unit.
The total represented by the above areas is 17,086,671.31 acres, a gain of 1,594,733.31 acres during the past year.
New national monuments account for 1,218,019.73 acres of this increase.
Five new national monuments were established during the fiscal year, and four memorial areas administered in connection with public buildings maintained were given the status of miscellaneous national memorials.
These four are the Washington Monument, the Lincoln Memorial, the Ford Theater, and the house where Lincoln died, now the Lincoln Museum.
The five new monuments are: Ocmulgee National Monument, Ga,; established December 23, 1936, by Presidential proclamation under authority of the act of June 14, 1934 (Public, 350, 73d Cong.); Zion National Monument, Utah, established January 22, 1937, by Presidential proclamation; Joshua Tree National Monument, Calif., established August 10, 1936, by Presidential proclamation; Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument, Ariz., established April 13, 1937, by Presidential proclamation; and Perry's Victory and International Peace Memorial, Ohio, established July 6, 1936, by Presidential proclamation, in accordance with the act of Congress of June 2, 1936 (Publie, 631, 74th Cong.).