Encouraging progress in our campaign of the past 5 years to conserve the vast store of the natural resources of the United States is the keynote of the reports of the bureaus and agencies of the Department of the Interior for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1938, which are transmitted herewith.
I said last year that our citizens were in agreement with the principle that prudently managed national resources could be made to produce a far higher standard of living for the Nation over a longer period.
They have also shown their willingness to support intelligent and energetic action on the part of the Government to this end.
I am gratified to be able to report that, with the passing of another year, it is becoming more evident that the people are demonstrating a greater interest in conservation; are beginning to heed our warnings that, although our resources are bountiful, they are not limitless.
From the accompanying reports of the bureaus and divisions of the Department, most of which deal with some important phase of conservation, and as a result of my own first-hand observations and information, I believe that a great advance in sentiment for conservation has been made during the past year.
A court victory for the Government in the Elk Hills oil case wherein the United States sought to be declared the owner of valuable mineral lands; the establishment of the Olympic National Park in Washington as the result of legislation passed during the closing hours of the Seventy-fifth Congress; the salvage of the old Chesapeake and Ohio Canal between Washington, D. C., and Cumberland, Md., for recreational purposes; and the pending purchase by the Government of important sugar-pine groves adjacent to the Yosemite National Park in California stand out as major triumphs on the side of true conservation.
It is not possible for me in a letter of transmittal to touch upon all of the many activities and accomplishments of the Department during the past fiscal year, but I shall mention some of them.
The construction program of the Bureau of Reclamation, with work in progress on 32 projects in 12 States, was the largest in history.
The base of the massive Grand Coulee Dam on the Columbia River was completed on March 21, 1938, a year ahead of schedule, and, at the close of the fiscal year, work was about to commence on Shasta Dam, the second largest concrete dam in the world and one of the key structures of the Central Valley of California project.
An act of Congress, approved August 20, 1937, set up a Bonneville Authority for the purpose of supervising and selling the electric energy generated at Bonneville Dam on the Columbia River.
Mr. J. D. Ross was appointed Administrator under this act, and for the first time the Administrator's report is included in the annual report of the Secretary of the Interior.
In addition to the creation of the Olympic National Park and the successful fight to save in California one of the finest remaining sugar pine stands in the world, progress was made in the development of the Isle Royale National Park project in Michigan and in the Blue Ridge and Natchez Trace Parkway projects.
An appropriation of nearly $750,000 made possible the purchase of lands to be included within the boundaries of the Great Smoky Mountains National Park.
Three new national monuments were added to the parks and monuments and additions were made to several of our national parks.
Visitors to the units of the national park system mounted to 16,233,688—a new all-time record.
For the second successive year the operations of the General Land Office resulted in a return to the Federal Treasury of 5 dollars for each dollar expended for administration.
For the first time, all of the principal regulations, based upon more than 5,000 laws, have been brought together in up-to-date form and made available for general use.
The control of grazing and the regulated use of the public range has been carried forward with a harmony of purpose between the stockmen and the administration.
Advancement of this sound conservation policy is shown by the fact that during the coming year, preliminary work will have been completed and temporary 1-year licenses replaced by term permits of not more than 10 years' duration in 1 grazing district in each of the 10 States affected.
From 130,000,000 acres in 1887, Indian lands were reduced to 49,000,000 acres in 1933.
At the close of the last fiscal year Indian lands increased to approximately 51,540,307 acres of which 67 percent were tribally owned and 33 percent in trust allotments.
Taking advantage of the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934, which gave to the Indians, at their own option, larger responsibilities of self government, there were 82 tribes operating under constitutions and bylaws.
Of this number 57 tribes had become incorporated under Federal charters.
Because the Department is charged by law with the conservation and management of large forest areas there was created, on May 18, 1938, the Office of Director of Forests for the purpose of promoting a unified and coordinated conservation policy with respect to these lands.
There was also set up within the Office of the Secretary a Division of Information, similar to organizations already existing in other Federal departments and agencies, for the purpose of disseminating to the public official information concerning the work and policies of the Department.
The Office of Education reported more than 6,000,000 students now enrolled in the 4 years of the public high schools and approximately 1,500,000 persons in night and part-time schools.
Gratifying progress was reported by schools, colleges, and universities in the teaching of conservation in its broadest meaning.
Educational radio and forum demonstration projects were continued and extended.
In spite of liberal allotments of loans and grants from Public Works Administration and other emergency funds for new school construction, a survey made by the Office of Education showed a continuing shortage of school building construction.
Regulations were issued to protect from private exploitation the Nation's petroleum resources in the Teapot Dome, Wyo.
This was part of the Department's intensive program which has been carried on during the past 5 years to preserve these valuable deposits of oil and helium for the Nation's use and followed closely upon the finding of a Federal district court declaring section 36 in the Elk Hills to be Government property.
This court decree upheld the original decision made by the Secretary of the Interior on January 24, 1935, declaring the title to these valuable mineral lands in the United States.
The Department has made a similar finding with respect to section 16 in the same area.
The Solicitor of the Department of the Interior and his staff advised and conferred with special counsel for the Government in the Elk Hills oil case (U. S. v. Standard Oil Co. of California, et al.).
The Solicitor's Office also was engaged in the preparation and trial of the Government's case against the city and county of San Francisco to enjoin the continued violation of section 6 of the Raker Act.
This suit likewise was decided in favor of the United States by the district court of the United States.
The creation of the Olympic National Park in the State of Washington, assures the preservation of a fragment of the Pacific coast rain forest with its magnificent Douglas fir, Sitka spruce, western hemlock, and giant cedar.
The largest remaining herds of the rare Roosevelt elk are also finding a refuge in this park.
On the Olympic peninsula cedar trees are standing that are 45 feet in circumference, trees from which Indian women stripped inner bark for clothing a hundred years before Columbus discovered America.
In this new park there are Douglas fir 40 feet in circumference and a thousand years old.
The reservation of this area is not exclusive of or inconsistent with the right of the lumber industry to a proper and legitimate exploitation of the timber resources of this area.
The manufacture of lumber is necessary to our prosperity and well being as a Nation.
There is room on the Olympic Peninsula for forests for both the people and the sawmill.
Assuming that the self-interest of the lumbermen is an intelligent one, we have a right to look forward to the end that this wonderful section may be put to the wisest and best use for all concerned.
Selfishness and commercialism at any cost met defeat in the closing days of the last Congress when the President was empowered to determine the final boundaries of this new national park.
The President's approval of the measure on June 29, 1938, fulfilled the dream of conservationists for a third of a century.
It is interesting to note that the effort to create this great national park dates from the administration of President Theodore Roosevelt, who was personally interested in this area.
Several vears ago John D. Rockefeller, Jr., happened to be visiting the Yosemite National Park when the lumbermen's ax was being sharpened to destroy a magnificent grove of sugar pines.
Mr. Rockefeller contributed $1,644,927.12 for the purchase of this grove, his donation being matched by Federal funds.
This grove is now one of the outstanding features of Yosemite.
Additional thousands of acres of the dwindling supply of this rare giant will be saved from destruction under the authority conferred upon the Secretary of the Interior by H. R. 5394; S. 1791.
This act authorizes the Secretary of the Interior, through the National Park Service, to acquire the Carl Inn tract of 7,730 acres of sugar pines bordering the western boundary of Yosemite National Park, Čalif.
The Deficiency Act of August 25, 1937, carried an appropriation of $2,005,000 for the purchase of these trees; $5,000 was for administration costs.
This is one of the finest sugar pine stands in the world.
The act of Congress came just in time to stop the lumbermen at the edge of this grove, thus saving these exceptional trees for future generations.
Sugar-pine trees, which are rare and becoming rarer because of their value for lumber, are among the finest manifestations of Nature and rank in a class with the spectacular western redwoods.
The sugar pine is a giant among trees, growing as it does to a height of 240 feet and measuring 8 or 9 feet in diameter.
It grows only in California and Oregon in majestic groves and of straight, towering trees that give the impression of trying to reach to the sky.
The Department of the Interior will avail itself to the fullest possible extent of the powers granted under this legislation, which, to our way of thinking, represents a generous spirit and a cultivated imagination on the part of Congress.
We are delighted at this opportunity to assist the Congress and the President in giving the country a valuable object lesson in conservation by saving these trees from the destruction that threatened them.
To my mind, it would have been little short of a crime for the country to have permitted these forest giants to be felled.
So many such treasures of the Nation have already been despoiled that in years to come those who will follow us will rejoice that these sugar pines have been preserved for them.
Of the 7.730 acres to be acquired under the act of Congress, 7,172 are owned by a private lumber company which was preparing to turn the two and three centuries old trees into lumber, leaving only the desolate, sheared-off stumps and broken tops as a memorial to an outraged Nature despoiled of its beauty.
This privately owned area will be acquired through condemnation proceedings if the negotiations that are now under way fail to arrive at a price which seems reasonable to the Government.
Åpproximately 500 acres are in a national forest and under the terms of the act will automatically become a part of the park when the private holdings are acquired.
The Department of the Interior for many years has sought to preserve this forest, in conformity with the policy of the National Park Service to save for future generations outstanding examples of America's flora, scenic and recreational areas by protecting them from commercial exploitation.
Three new national monuments were added to the park system.
They are the Capitol Reef National Monument in Utah, Pipestone National Monument in Minnesota, and the Channel Islands National Monument in California.
The boundaries of Hawaii National Park were extended and the Hot Springs National Park was enlarged.
The Salem Maritime National Historic Site was established.
The Senate Committee on Public Lands was authorized to investigate the suitability and feasibility of extending the Grand Teton National Park in Wyoming by including the Jackson Hole country and an area in the Teton National Forest which surrounds Jackson Lake.
The Senate also directed an inquiry to determine the suitability of enlarging the Petrified Forest National Monument in Arizona into a national park.
During the year the Park Service investigated 24 new areas for possible inclusion in the Federal park system.
Additions to the Nation's parks during the year brought the number of areas to 144 and the total acreage to 19,187,933.
As a result of the continued Historic American Buildings Survey, information is now available on more than 7,000 early American buildings.
Winter sports enjoyed a phenomenal growth and popularity throughout the national parks during the winter of 1937-38 and advisory committees on camping, hiking, and skiing were appointed.
Serious thought has been given to the problem of providing recreation for the heavy Negro population of the deep South.
The number of forest fires reported in the western national parks was the lowest since 1930.
With a total staff of 125 naturalists, the Park Service contacted 4,500,000 visitors through lectures and nature trips in the parks during the year.
Dioramas, photographs, paintings, and models were displayed at 15 expositions.
Över 3,000,000 seedlings, obtained from the Soil Conservation Service, were planted in recreational demonstration areas for the purpose of assist ng in erosion control or to reforest cut-over or burnedover lands.
A comparison of the concession service in the national parks during the last year with 10 years ago shows an interesting trend.
Before the 1929 depression substantially all the profits of the park operators were earned from sightseeing transportation and first-class Americanplan hotel accommodations.
Today the profit-producing facilities are the low-priced cabin accommodations, cafeterias, coffee shops, and grills.
Although the transportation and first-class hotel accommodations still furnish the greater portion of the operator's revenues, they are not so self-supporting as the newer types of accommodations.
As of June 30, 1938, there were 140 corporations, firms, and individuals under contract or permit to furnish accommodations to the public as compared with 131 as of the beginning of that fiscal year and 89 as of 10 years earlier.
The furnishing of accommodations to park visitors through private corporations and individuals in many instances has not worked out satisfactorily.
There is an element of inconsistency in permitting concessionaires to operate on Government property.
It is hoped that the Congress will give serious consideration to this problem with a view to adopting a policy that will be for the best interest of the Government and of the public.
The Federal Park System now comprises 27 national parks, 73 national monuments, 11 national military parks, 11 national cemeteries.
8 national battlefield sites, 8 national memorials, 1 national recreational area, 1 national historical site, 1 national parkway, 3 national parkway projects, 2 national historic parks, and the National Capital Parks unit.
The net increase in the Nation's park and monument system through the adjustment of the boundaries of existing areas and through lands acquired amounted to 1,846,377.363 acres.
At the close of the fiscal year the National Park Service was responsible for the maintenance and operation of 21,122,615 square feet of floor space in the District of Columbia.
Of this total 18,303,567 square feet were in 46 Government-owned buildings and 2,891,048 square feet in 64 privately owned buildings.
Demand from many sources, including those of refugees from drought areas, for farmsteads on Federal reclamation projects continued very high during the year.
For 69 farm units opened for homestead on the Klamath project in northern California, 1,280 formal applications were filed.
On 35 operating projects in 16 semiarid Western States water was provided by federally constructed works for the irrigation of 3,034,769 acres of former desert lands.
The crops harvested from these areas had an average value of $39.09 per acre.
The water supply for the projects was ample, with one exception during the 1937 irrigation year, and at the outset of the 1938 season the prospects were bright for a very good water year.
During the vear the Repayment Commission, created by the act of August 21, 1937, recommended and the Secretary granted an extension of time in the payment by project water users of $300,331 due under repayment contracts.
This sum represented approximately onetenth of that due during the year.
The Repayment Commission also drafted its report on Federal and Indian reclamation projects, and this was transmitted to the Congress.
The appropriation act for the Department for 1939 marked a step forward in the matter of new support for the Reclamation fund.
This act provided for an immediate increase in the Reclamation fund and carried a clause setting up a new source of accretions to the fund which will, in part, replace the dwindling revenues from the sale of public lands.
Work was in progress on 32 projects in 12 States under the largest Reclamation construction program in history.
Thirteen major dams were being built in western stream beds, two having been started during the year.
Six dams were completed during the year, bringing to a grand total of 147 the number of dams constructed by the Bureau of Reclamation since it began operations.
The base of Grand Coulee Dam was completed, and a new contract was awarded for the completion of the dam to its full height of 550 feet.
This contract alone involves the placing of 5,809,500 cubic vards of concrete.
Large-scale construction was started on the Central Valley project in California.
Problems preliminary to the commencement of work in most branches of this wide-flung undertaking were solved.
Bids were opened before the close of the year for the building of Shasta Dam, the key structure of the project.
Additional generating units were installed in the Boulder Dam power plant.
Energy was delivered continuously throughout the year to Los Angeles and other municipalities from the Boulder powerhouse.
A total of 1,427,928,442 kilowatt-hours of energy was sold for a gross revenue of $1,888,132.84.
Work progressed rapidly on the All-American Canal, where all the principal structures were under construction.
The President approved, on December 21, 1937, the finding of feasibility, and thereby cleared the way for the commencement of construction of the Colorado-Big Thompson project in Colorado, the most important of the new projects.
Too often sight is lost of the achievements of our purely scientific organizations—the Bureau of Mines and the Geological Survey.
The Bureau of Mines has continued its dual program of mineral and human conservation.
The accident rate in mining has been much lower during the past 5 years than in any other period for which statistics are available.
The excellent safety records of numerous mining companies working under hazardous conditions show definitely that mine accidents in this country can be reduced at least 75 percent if proven practices are followed strictly.
By the beginning of the new fiscal year the Bureau of Mines had trained 1,146,854 persons in safety courses.
The Bureau has devised and pätented a process for producing 99.7 percent pure manganese metal from low-grade domestic ores and has conducted tests on a variety of American clays to determine whether they can be used for wares as attractive and sturdy as expensive, imported ceramics.
The Bureau of Mines also has pioneered in conducting tests on coal hydrogenation, a process already applied in England, Germany, and Japan for obtaining oil from coal.
By the time that our oil fields approach depletion (and I have been insisting for years that unless our oil producers are more careful this day is rapidly approaching), it is hoped that motor fuel from other sources can be supplied so efficiently and cheaply that the transfer can be made without drastic economic adjustment.
The Director of the Bureau of Mines reports that a factor which contributes to the waste of our mineral resources is unrestrained production that results in stock piles that frequently deteriorate before they are used.
A way would be open to enable the Government to check this overproduction if we could determine the Nation's requirements of the principal minerals.
I am in favor of legislation which will permit this Department to make this determination in the interests of national defense as well as in the interests of conservation of natural resources.
Through funds made avaiiable by the Public Works Administration the Bureau of Mines has increased its facilities by the construction of the southern experiment station at Tuscaloosa, Ala., the eastern experiment station at College Park, Md., and a new laboratory at the petroleum station at Bartlesville, Okla.
The Government's helium plant at Amarillo, Tex., produced 6.100.000 cubic feet of helium during the fiscal year of 1938, an increase of 1,300,000 cubic feet over the previous year, mainly for the use by the Army and Navy in nonrigid airships.
This production was only about one-third of the quantity which a foreign nation desired under the terms of the amended helium act permitting export under certain conditions.
No helium was exported because the Secretary of the Interior was not persuaded that the supply sought was not of military importance under the provisions of the act.
The Government acquired during the year certain private heliumbearing lands in accordance with the amended helium act.
This gives to the United States a virtual monopoly of the world's helium supply.
Helium was supplied to the United States Public Health Service for medical studies, the Bureau of Standards for research and the Weather Bureau for the inflation of small meteorological balloons.
The Weather Bureau has requested 450,000 cubic feet of helium for this purpose during the next fiscal year.
Approximately 70,000 cubic feet of the gas were delivered during the year for medicinal and scientific purposes, and helium-oxygen mixtures for the treatment of respiratory diseases are now available in all parts of the country.
The Geological Survey sent out 63 geologic parties in 35 States and Alaska during the year.
Flood studies were continued and measurements of stream flow were maintained at 3,831 stream-gaging stations.
Mineral production from public and Indian lands and the naval oil petroleum reserves under the supervision of the Survey had an estimated value of $88,500,000.
The revenues accruing therefrom amounted to about $9,750,000.
The piercing eye of the X-ray machine was used more than ever before by Survey scientists last year to reveal secrets which might lead to the advancement of the conservation of natural resources.
The Director of the Survey reports that it is now possible to show that the physical properties of a mineral depend not only upon the kinds of atoms composing it, but also upon their role and arrangement in the crystal—features that can be determined by X-rays.
The densities of strata, rocks, and minerals likewise, in the final analysis, are determined in the same way.
It seems reasonable to expect that further study of the associations and conditions of the formation of minerals will yield illuminating correlations with both their chemical composition and physical structure.
The work of the Geological Survey during the year was basically important in the general program of conservation and there is included in the Director's report a State-by-State recital of its operations.
Special investigations included a study of the base exchange properties of river clays, which are expected to afford a correction of the previously calculated age of the ocean.
A temperature survey was made of a 7,000-foot well near Washington, Pa.
Of the total area of the United States, 45 percent has been covered by topographic maps, the year's increment amounting to 0.02 percent.
The reduced percentage, as compared with 47.4 percent reported in 1937, is due to the fact that during the year maps of 79,668 square miles, based on reconnaissance surveys prior to 1896 and considered inadequate, have been withdrawn from distribution and the areas declared to be unmapped.
The production of petroleum from public lands in 1938 was substantially greater than in other recent years; the production of gas was approximately the same as in 1937; the production of natural gasoline was substantially less than in other recent years.
The production from 519 wells on naval petroleum reserves No. 1 and No. 2 in California and No. 3 in Wyoming aggregated 4,238,533.36 barrels of petroleum, 2,395,996,000 cubic feet of natural gas, and 10,581,504 gallons of natural gasoline and had an aggregate royalty value of $1,020,444.84.
Indians are now increasing at twice the rate of the population as a whole.
In 1887 the Indian had left only 130,000,000 acres.
In 1933 these had been reduced to only 49,000,000 acres, most of it waste and desert land.
At the end of the last fiscal year the Indian land area had been increased to approximately 51,540,307 acres; 67 percent of this was tribally owned and 33 percent was in trust allotments.
During the last fiscal year 64,354.85 acres costing $1,216,725.14 were purchased for Indian land.
In addition, 38,279 acres of former Indian land which had been opened up to sale or entry were restored to tribal ownership or a reservation status.
From 1935 through the fiscal year 1938, 30 purchase projects have been conducted by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs in cooperation with the governmental agencies now merged in the Farm Security Administration.
Options in the amount of $3,521,057, covering 1,207,916 acres in 11 States, have been accepted, and purchases were completed to the extent of 94 percent.
By Executive order, on January 18 and April 15, 1938, the President transferred jurisdiction of approximately 791,405 acres of these lands from the Department of Agriculture to the Department of the Interior.
The act of May 31, 1938, authorized the Secretary of the Interior to withdraw and reserve permanently tracts of land not to exceed 640 acres each of the Alaska public domain for schools, hospitale, and other purposes necessary to aid the Indians, Eskimos, and Aleuts.
Conservation, for the benefit not only of the Indian, but of the whole Nation, is, of course, the controlling policy in the administration of Indian grazing and forest lands.
In no other field does the Government have such an opportunity to prove what can be done in the way of conservation and the proper land use as it does in the supervision by the Indian Service of the Indian domain.
The Indian Service, by virtue of its position as guardian of Indian lands, can apply a concentrated knowledge and action directed to the problem.
In the management of the Indian's forest resources, as in the management of the range lands, conservation is the watchword.
Depletion of the timber supply is geared down to the rate of tree reproduction so that the Indians may enjoy their forest resources in perpetuity.
It is estimated that 426,000,000 feet of timber were cut during the fiscal year 1938 from the 33,000,000,000 feet of timber on Indian lands.
The gross income to the Indians from the sale of this timber was $1,175,000.
The average Indian family of four had an income for the year 1937 amounting to approximately $600.
This figure includes earned and unearned income as well as nonmoney and money income.
During the past year the Indians Årts and Crafts Board initiated a number of policies, ineluding a system of marking to prove the authenticity and quality of Navajo, Hopi, and Pueblo silver products and of Navajo textiles; the development of a home spinning industry in eastern Oklahoma with an organization of 75 spinners; and the formation of arts and crafts groups on three Dakota reservations.
Survey work in Indian arts and crafts looking toward improved production has been carried on in North Dakota, Alaska, and North Carolina.
Indian boarding schools have decreased in number and day schools have greatly increased.
In 10 years, the Indian day school population has risen from 4,532 to 14,087.
Moreover, day schools have become popular in many instances with adult Indians, and there are cases where a larger number of adults than children have used the day school rooms.
Improved practice in hygiene, sanitation, and soil conservation are being taught adults and accepted by the Indians.
Community discussions of tribal affairs, extension demonstrations, and other community activities for the adult Indians are being developed through the day schools.
Under the Indian Reorganization Act since 1934, 82 tribes totaling 93,520 Indians were operating under constitutions and bylaws; and of these 57 tribes with a membership of 64,000 Indians have become incorporated under Federal charters.
Under these constitutions and charters the Indians have an increasingly large sphere of self-government.
On July 1, 1937, there were authorized in the Indian field service and Alaska 6,933 permanent year-round positions.
On April 30, 1938, there were 3,916 Indians employed in the Indian Service, of whom 3,627 were in regular year-round positions.
Approximately one-half of the regular employees of the Indian Service are Indians.
Slightly more than 40 percent of the Indians employed are full-bloods.
The Office of Director of Forests was established May 18, 1938, to promote a unified policy of forest conservation on all of the lands under the jurisdiction of the Department of the Interior.
By law the Department of the Interior is charged with the conservation of a variety of forests and forest lands.
These forests range from the primeval growths in the national parks, which are preserved for the inspiration and enjoyment of our own and future generations, to the intensive commercial development of the revested and reconveyed forest lands in Oregon.
Under the act of August 28, 1937, the Department of the Interior was given new and widened responsibilities for forest conservation over these Oregon lands.
A basis was laid for a new type of cooperative conservation which, if successfully carried out, will provide a new approach to the practice of forestry in this country.
It is my hope that this new approach shall be successful and for this and other reasons I have established the Office of the Director of Forests.
Not only did the act of August 28, 1937, provide this new approach, but for the first time in our history a plan of sustained-yield management for a specific Federal forest property was authorized and outlined in American forest law.
The experience of the Department with the forests on Indian lands, from which 92 percent of the gross receipts are returned to the Indians, has shown that planned, sustained-yield management of forests cannot only be successful but that it can be carried out with low administrative costs.
In addition to the national park, Oregon, and Indian forests, the Department of the Interior has jurisdiction over lands in the United States and Alaska where forests are principally administered for watershed protection.
While it is obvious that the uses of these different forest lands vary, it is also clear that there are certain fundamental forest principles and techniques, such as fire protection and insect control, as well as the basic policy of the Department, conservation, which apply to all of these areas.
The establishment of the Office of the Director of Forests in this Department will not only make possible the coordination, unification, and promotion of sound basic techniques, principles, and policies for the conservation of all the forest resources under the Department, it also marks a progressive step forward, in accord with the best principles of modern administration, in carrying on the conservation work of the Department.
Progress in the program of range use control is indicated by the fact that, with the completion of preliminary surveys and classification work, temporary 1-year licenses will be replaced during the coming year by term permits of not more than 10 years' duration in 1 grazing district in each of the 10 States affected, namely, Arizona, California, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah, and Wyoming.
Installation of the term permit system in all of the 50 Federal grazing districts will be undertaken as rapidly as survey and classification of the 120,000,000-acre Federal range can be completed.
Grazing licenses were issued to 18,752 stockmen owning 9,050,771 head of livestock in 48 grazing districts during the year.
Twelve grazing districts established in 1937 were placed under regulation for the first time in 1938.
The amount of Federal range involved in these 12 districts in Idaho, Montana Oregon, Wyoming, and Nevada, was 30,086,579 acres.
The increase in licenses resulting from the addition of these districts was 3,685 and the increase in the number of livestock using grazing districts under regulation was 3,476,148.
The entire public range of about 120,000,000 acres is being surveyed and classified for its proper use and rehabilitation, and more than 20,000 private properties dependent thereon are likewise being appraised.
Forty-five C. C. C. camps operated by the Division carried on a range improvement program which not only relieved present range conditions but also furnished future means for the conservation and protection of the 120,000,000 acres of range land.
Under this program more than 1,401,378 acres of the Federal range have been treated for control of ground squirrels, gophers, prairie dogs, kangaroo rats, and jack rabbits, and 98,798 acres were treated for the eradication of poisonous weeds.
Protection of wild animals and game birds on the Federal range was assured through the reservation of approximate y 8,000,000 acres of land within the boundaries of grazing districts for their use.
In addition, more than 3,500,000 acres have been set aside on the public land in three game ranges to be administered jointly by the Division of Grazing and the Biological Survey of the Department of Agriculture.
Sixteen wildlife refuges, aggregating in area approximately 4,000,000 acres of public land, have been withdrawn from other uses by Executive order and placed under the Department of Agriculture for the sole purpose of propagating and protecting wildlife.
C. C. C. activities included the transplanting of beaver in small streams in Idaho.
An increase in the beaver population has resulted in arresting stream bed erosion and the consequent loss of soil, and in increasing the water supply and stock-watering facilities.
Although 20,752 applications for grazing licenses were filed, satisfaction of stockmen with Division of Grazing operations is indicated by the fact that appeals from decisions were made in only 420 cases.
In Oregon about 500 unclaimed wild horses were removed from grazing districts after being rounded up on the range by airplane and disposed of in accordance with State law and rules of the range.
A comprehensive system of fire prevention and control on the public lands in Arizona was established by agreement between the Division of Grazing, the Indian Office of the Department of the Interior, and the Forest Service of the Department of Agriculture.
The elimination of 50,000 sheep and 10,000 cattle from the public range in Wyoming was accomplished without any of the affected stock growers requesting a hearing.
In this practically new Division of Grazing region, violations of range rules were exceptionally few, only six being reported.
More than 6,000,000 pupils are now enrolled in the 4 years of the public high schools, which, with the addition of private school enrollment, brings the total high-school enrollment to more than six and one-half million.
Enrollment in night and part-time schools amounted to approximately one and one-half million persons.
Of the 300,000 enrollees in the Civilian Conservation Corps camps, 90 percent participated in the educational program.
Pennsylyania was the third State to provide a parent-education program by legislative action.
The other States with such programs are New York and California.
Parent-education programs were sponsored through the public school systems in 36 cities.
The President's Advisory Committee on Education submitted its report to the President on February 18, 1938.
The committee recommended continuing the present Federal grants and inaugurating a program of new grants to the States for educational purposes with Federal appropriations beginning at $70,000,000 in 1939-40, and increasing to $199,000,000 in 1944-45.
Despite the fact that from December 1933 to December 1936, the Public Works Administration allotted more than $244,000,000 in grants and loans for public school buildings, the total estimated cost being more than $469.000,000, a survey showed that in 62 percent of cities with 10.000 population or more, an additional $496,000,000 were needed for school construction.
The principal reason given for this need was the lag in school building construction during the World War.
Through the educational radio project three major programs were produced during the past fiscal year.
Brave New World, a program based on the good neighbor policy and dealing with Latin America, won first prize as an educational dramatic radio series from the Ninth Annual Institute of Education by Radio.
The program, The World Is Yours, produced in cooperation with the Smithsonian Institution, ran for 51 weeks.
Education In The News was also broadcast.
Forum demonstration projects were conducted under the sponsorship of the Office of Education in 18 areas of the country during the fiscal year.
For the first time in its 70 years, library facilities have been adequate for the Office of Education in the new quarters of the consolidated library in the Department of the Interior building.
A Library Service Division was organized.
College art was given encouragment by the establishment of a college arts section in the Fine Arts Gallery of the Department.
During the past fiscal year 3,517 C. C. C. enrollees received elementary school diplomas, 634 received high-school diplomas, and 13 were awarded college diplomas or degrees.
More than 8,800 iliterate enrollees were taught to read and write during the year.
The War Department is responsible for the administration of the C. C. C. program, but the professional direction of the educational program is a function of the Office of Education acting in an advisory capacity to the War Department.
The Office of Education continued to carry on activities in the field of vocational education and vocational rehabilitation under the authority of eight separate acts of Congress.
Office of Education cooperates with the States in promoting vocational education in agriculture, the trades and industries, home economics, business education, and in rehabilitating for employment persons disabled through accident, illness, or congenital causes.
Canton and Enderbury Islands in the Pacific Ocean were placed under the administrative jurisdiction of the Department of the Interior by Executive order of March 3, 1938.
Colonists from Hawaii were landed, the American flag was raised, radio facilities were established, and lighthouses and living quarters were built.
The Matanuska Valley colonization project in Alaska also has been placed under the jurisdiction of the Department, but since the transfer was made by the Works Progress Administration after the close of the last fiscal year a report on its operations is not included herein.
The Territory of Hawaii reported an increase in business and a favorable trade balance.
The value of pineapple products increased by $4,000,000, while the value of sugar exports decreased by approximately the same amount.
The finances of Puerto Rico were in excellent condition last year, receipts being $43,298,448 while expenditures were $41,666,329.
The Virgin Islands suffered from a severe drought which did considerable damage to its sugar crop.
The fundamental economic problem in Puerto Rico is due to the fact that while the island is essentially agricultural, having little or no industry.
As a consequence.
Arrangements have been made for the construction of a mill for the manufacture of butyl alcohol and acetone as byproducts of molasses obtained from sugarcane which is the principal crop of the island.
Financed by a Puerto Rico Reconstruction Administration loan to the Asociacion Azucarera Cooperativa Lafayette, this plant, having a capacity of 5,000,000 pounds of these solvents annually, is expected to be in operation by January 1, 1939.
Although the Central Lafayette, the island's first cooperative enterprise, had the fourth largest sugar crop in its bistory, the seriousness of the sugar situation is more readily understood when it is made known that more than 100.000 acres of good cane land, capable of employing more than 25,000 laborers, is now lying idle as a result of the marketing quotas fixed by the Congress.
The development of byproducts has been undertaken by the Puerto Rico Reconstruction Administration to find an escape from this dilemma.
A wider use of its agricultural lands, which may make Puerto Rico a strong competitor with foreign countries in the production and marketing of vanilla, is included among our plans for conservation and economic rehabilitation.
A pilot plant to cure the vanilla bean will soon be completed and by 1942 it is expected that Puerto Rico will be in competition in the mainland markets with foreign countries which now produce vanilla oils.
Meantime the Puerto Rico Reconstruction Administration carried forward other phases of its program including rural rehabilitation, electrification, health and recreation projects.
Since the appointment of the Secretary of the Interior as Administrator of the Puerto Rico Reconstruction Administration the average overhead has been reduced from $140,000 to about $65,000 a month.
The rehabilitation program has also been sharply cut to keep within the reduced appropriation.
The Honorable Ebert K. Burlew, of Pennsylvania, was sworn in as First Assistant Secretary of the Interior on April 8, 1938, and the Honorable Harry Slattery took the oath of office as Under Secretary of the Interior on June 17.
Both Mr. Slattery and Mr. Burlew have been valued members of my staff and I wish to express to you, Mr, President, my appreciation of their appointment to ranking positions in this Department.
Mr. Slattery served in the Department under the administration of the late Franklin K. Lane and he returned to the Department in 1933 at the instance of the present Secretary of the Interior under whom he served as personal assistant.
The appointment of Mr. Burlew is especially significant because he is a career man with almost 30 vears of service in War, Post Office, and Interior.
He was brought to the Department of the Interior from the Post Office Department by Secretary Work.
He has been the chief administrative officer of the Department under the present administration and has had general supervision over personnel and budget matters.
In closing, I again renew my recommendation that the name of the Department of the Interior be changed to that of the Department of Conservation.
Legislation is now being prepared with the object of carrying forward our program of conservation.
From time to time drafts of these bills will be submitted to you for your consideration.
Secretary of the Interior.
The White House.
HE conservation program of the National Park Service made steady advances during the 1938 fiscal year.
Changes in the administrative set-up resulted in greater efficiency.
Cooperation with State and other local governments in park establishment and management emphasized the leadership of the Service in this field.
Developments and improvements marked all phases of the Service's conservation program.
New theories were tested, policies adjusted to changing conditions, and where necessary new methods adopted.
The full regionalization of all National Park Service activities, put into effect during the year, has functioned with marked success.
Land for Region Three headquarters at Santa Fe, N. Mex., was donated to the United States by the Laboratory of Anthropology, and the headquarters unit, of typical southwestern architecture, is now under construction.
The site of the headquarters adjoins the laboratory grounds, making the rich resources of that institution readily available to the research staff and other officials of the Service.
A conference of National Park Service executives, park operators, and representatives of cooperating Government agencies was held in Washington, January 17 to 22.
During the last 2 days of the conference joint sessions were held with the American Planning and Civic Association, with conservation and recreation the principal topics under consideration.
The President of the United States heads the list of American citizens enjoying their Federal parks.
He spoke at the ceremonies incident to the observance of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Civil War battle at Antietam, and at Roanoke Island, within the area of the proposed Cape Hatteras National Seashore, on the three hundred and fiftieth anniversary of the 'Lost Colony" Settlement.
The President also visited Yellowstone National Park, Mount Olympus National Monument (now included in the new Olympic National Park), and Fort Jefferson National Monument.
During the year ended September 30, 1937, total travel to the various units of the Federal park system reached an all-time high of 15,133,432.
The season ended September 30, 1938, saw 16,233,688 visitors to these areas; a new record.
Early summer touring of the national parks has not kept up this accelerated pace, although still above that for the corresponding period last vear.
An interesting commentary in this connection is that in several regions use of the Federal park areas held up well despite generally poor economic and travel conditions.
Historic areas continued to draw increasing numbers of visitors.
The establishment of the Olympic National Park was achieved in the closing hours of the Seventy-fifth Congress.
This major conservation achievement assures the preservation of an adequate representation of the magnificent rain-forests of the Olympic Peninsula and also protects the greater part of habitat necessary to maintain the rare Roosevelt elk.
An item of $743,265.29, appropriated through the Second Deficiency Act of 1938, makes possible the purchase of the lands still to be included within the authorized boundaries of the Great Smoky Mountains National Park.
It is hoped that these lands and those within boundaries approved for the Isle Royale and Olympic National Park projects may be acquired in time to dedicate the areas formally to public use within a year.
Through an appropriation of $2,005,000 made available in the Third Deficiency Act of 1937, the Service is in process of acquiring 7.730 acres of majestic sugar-pine forest adjacent to Yosemite National Park for addition thereto.
This is one of the finest sugarpine stands in the world, and its acquisition for addition to Yosemite National Park is of particular importance because America's acreage of giant sugar pines is fast dwindling.
The Jackson Shrine—the little frame house in which General Stonewall Jackson died after receiving a fatal wound at the Battle of Chancellorsville—was donated to the United States by the Richmond, Fredericksburg & Potomac Railroad Co., and added to the Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania County Battlefields Memorial National Military Park.
The Salem Maritime National Historic Site, established by designation of the Secretary of the Interior, is the first area of its type to be established under the national policy for historic preservation embodied in the Historic Sites Act of 1935.
Changes in the Federal park system brought the number of areas from 140 to 144 and the total acreage from 17,049,505.80 to 19,187,933 acres.
In addition to its administration of park areas, the Service maintained and operated 110 Federally owned and rented buildings and 7 memorials and other special structures in Washington.
Similar service was rendered in 11 Government-owned buildings in 9 cities other than Washington.
The Service continued development of 46 recreational demonstration areas: supervised plans and construction of the Blue Ridge and Natchez Trace Parkways, and extended work on the George Washington Memorial Parkway; supervised estimates and expenditures for the Mount Rushmore Memorial in Custer State Park, the George Rogers Clark Memorial in Indiana, and the Commission of Fine Arts; and cooperated in the Public Works, Civilian Conservation Corps, Works Progress, Emergency Relief, and other emergency programs.
As a result of extensive studies, a definite statement of the major objectives involved in planning for the Jefferson National Expansion Memorial at St. Louis was formulated and approved, and extensive research is under way to determine the form the memorial should take.
The Service is also the executive agent of the Thomas Jefferson Memorial Commission of Washington.
Plans were completed for the Government to acquire the historic Chesapeake and Ohio Canal, once a famous waterway between Washington and Cumberland, Md.
Plans include its restoration for recreational purposes in addition to the restoration of some of the historic lock houses, taverns, and other structures.
As a result of the Historic American Building Survey, information is now available ón more than 7,000 early American buildings.
During the past year 2,000 measured drawings and 1,800 architectural photographs of historic structures were added to the Survey's growing collection in the Fine Arts Division of the Library of Congress.
The historic sites survey is being prosecuted under 15 broad themes believed to be the most important and far-reaching phases in the social, economic, cultural, and political development of the American people.
Groundwork was laid last year for a similar survey in the field of archeological sites.
At the close of the year donations to the National Park Service Trust Fund amounted to a total of $12,000.
Cooperation with State governments in making a study of park, parkway, and recreationalarea needs was continued, advice and assistance furnished State and local planning and conservancy agencies, and development of State and other local park areas continued through the medium of the Civilian Conservation Corps.
The United States Travel Bureau continued to function with emergency funds.
Offices were maintained in New York and Washington.
Legislation to establish the Travel Bureau on a permanent basis unfortunately failed in the Seventy-fifth Congress, but its introduction early in the Seventy-sixth Congress will be requested.
Conservation study programs initiated and conducted in connection with the John Muir Centenary were widely acclaimed by conservationists and educational institutions.
A broad radio program also was carried on in Washington and in the field.
One weekly radio series initiated by the Service was piped into the high schools of New York City through the municipal station and also was used by a number of colleges and universities throughout the country, as well as by many commercial stations.
The Easter sunrise national broadcast, picked up from areas in each of the country's time zones, was unusually impressive.
The lecture series given in the Interior Department auditorium for the purpose of stimulating an interest in the Federal parks was most successful.
Beginning October 13, 1937, 19 lectures were given, attended by a total of 15,304 persons—an increase of more than 38 percent over the 1936-37 attendance record.
In addition to capacity audiences at a number of the talks, at times several hundred persons had to be turned away.
Winter sports enjoyed a phenomenal growth in popularity throughout the national parks during the winter of 1937–38.
Special advisory committees on camping, hiking, and skiing were appointed by the Secretary of the Interior to assist the Service in formulating policies and practices concerning these popular recreational activities.
Serious thought has been given to the problem of providing recreation for the heavy Negro population of the Deep South.
As a direct result of National Park Service activity in this regard, the public has become aware of this need, and steps have been planned and in some cases action consummated to provide for the leisure time of the southern Negro population.
The forest protection record through the Federal parks was unusually gratifying.
The number of forest fires reported in the western national parks was the lowest since 1930.
Through an intensive educational campaign, the cooperation of visitors was obtained in forest protection.
The Safety Division, established last year to reduce fire losses and accidents to visitors and employees, has proved a decided asset to the Service.
Radio communication service in the national parks and monuments proved invaluable in fire protection and other work.
Outstanding service was rendered in several flood and storm emergencies.
Mount McKinley National Park in Alaska was provided with radio communication facilities for the first time.
The Director of the National Park Service continued to act as a member of a wide range of commissions, in connection with his Federal park administration.
Washington, and ex officio of the Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania County Battlefields Memorial National Park Commission, and the Petersburg National Military Park Commission; and the representative of the United States on the International Commission on Historic Monuments.
The National Park Service reports with regret the death of Archibald M. McCrea.
The regionalization of all National Park Service activities approved during the 1937 fiscal vear went into effect August 1, 1937, and functioned efficiently and effectively.
Establishment of closer relationships with executives charged with various administrative units of the Federal park system and acceptance of a greater degree of responsibility for regular and emergency programs in those areas were the most marked results of the transition from the previously existing emergency regionalization to the present national park regional organization.
Roughly, Region One, with headquarters at Richmond, Va., covers the eastern seaboard and the Deep South.
Region Two, with headquarters at Omaha, Nebr., covers what are known as the Middle Western States and extends west to Yellowstone National Park.
Region Three, headquarters, Santa Fe, N. Mex., covers the Southwest.
Region Four, headquarters in San Francisco, covers the Pacific coast, extending eastward to include Glacier National Park.
A review of the first year of regionalization and an appraisal of its value to the areas of the Federal park system and to the Washington office indicate that the functioning of the four regions has wrought a definite improvement in the methods of handling certain phases of park work, particularly in the field of public contacts.
Personal contacts by regional officers with local public officials, influential groups, and representatives of other Government agencies engaged in allied work have been possible and continuous, resulting in a better understanding of the objectives of the Servcie in the scheme of Federal conservation.
Regional contacts with the public generally have led to a quickened interest in National Park Service affairs on the part of the public and to a growing appreciation of the ideals and objectives of the Service in matters dealing with the conservation of our scenic, scientific, and recreational resources.
In addition to achieving better coordination of field activities as a whole, regionalization greatly facilitates the investigation of the many areas proposed for inclusion in the Federal park system.
Yellowstone National Park, first of the national parks to be established, model of parks in this country and abroad, again is threatened with despoliation of its scenic beauty.
See Annual Report of 1920.)
Bills (S. 3925 and H. R. 10469) introduced in the last session of Congress had for their purpose the diversion of the water of Yellowstone Lake for commercial irrigation purposes.
Construction of a dam and tunnel within the park area is a part of the scheme.
This proposal, the latest in a series of attempted raids on the Yellowstone involving the use of its waters for irrigation purposes since 1919, met instant resistance in the Department of the Interior and aroused widespread alarm and indignation among conservationists.
In a period when the need for conservation of natural resources is widely recognized and methods to achieve it are receiving serious study and consideration, the idea of diverting the waters of the Yellowstone for commercial purposes is a backward movement, and one that, followed to its logical conclusion, would result in emasculation of the entire national park system.
Use of the waters of the Yellowstone for commercial purposes would be contrary to the basic laws and purposes of national park creation.
It would result in the eventual despoliation of that lake and other lakes, and eventually of a large part of the park itself.
It also might disrupt geyser and hot spring activity.
The precedent thus established would undoubtedly lead to enormous pressure for similar commercial concessions in other important areas of the Federal park system.
Such abuse of the parks not only would ruin their scenic beauty, but in the long-run would prove a boomerang to the communities which would receive immediate benefit were the the park waters tapped.
A recent survey of business conditions in the State of Wvoming, which, with the Department of the Interior, also is strongly opposed to the diversion, indicates that visitors to the Yellowstone and Grand Teton National Parks during the 1937 travel year spent $14,221,713 of "out State" money in Wyoming.
A Yellowstone used for commercial purposes would mean loss of much of that revenue.
From a strictly ethical standpoint, to permit the diversion of the waters of Yellowstone National Park for commercial purposes would break faith with the men who by their vision and generosity made possible its establishment.
It will be remembered that at the close of the 1870 exploration of the Yellowstone country, the various members of the party had plans for preempting certain sections of it for their own use, in accordance with current land practices.
At the suggestion of one of their number, these men gave up all idea of personal profit that the wonderland might be preserved for posterity as a public park.
They had the moral and legal right to claim the land and pass it on to their heirs or sell it to others who would so devise it.
Since they did not do so, it should remain inviolate for the purposes for which they gave it to the people.
The National Park Service is placed in the anomalous position of supervising the most spectacular scenery and the outstanding historic shrines of the country, of being besieged for information by many millions of people, and of being totally unable to meet the demand for such information through lack of adequate supplies of printed literature.
Last year more than 15,000,000 persons visited the various units of the Federal park system.
Millions more—prospective visitors, students of secondary and high schools and colleges, study groups, and travel organizations—wrote to the National Park Service headquarters in Washington, the regional offices, the parks themselves, and the Travel Bureau in New York City, requesting printed literature.
Unfortunately, the bulk of these requests had to be denied.
With approximately the same printing fund available as in 1932, but with nearly three times the number of areas to administer and with more than four times the number of annual visitors, increased printed costs made it possible to issue only 576,000 information circulars in 1938, as against 869,000 in 1932—and this despite the reduction in size of circulars.
The raising of the ban on multilithing of informal leaflets through the Department's facilities gave a small degree of relief, but in no way solved the problem.
In line with the policies of foreign governments, which recognize in their travel trade a tremendous source of revenue, the National Park Service should be in a position to issue sufficient free printed informational circulars on the Federal park areas of the United States, and of booklets grouping these areas by travel regions, to meet the demands of all prospective and actual visitors.
Not only should larger quantities of information circulars be printed for the older areas, for which scant supplies now are issued, but provision should be made to print informational booklets concerning the many areas transferred to the jurisdiction of the National Park Service in 1933, and new areas created in recent years by Presidential proclamation or act of Congress.
In this connection, it must be emphasized that adequate supplies of printed information on the national parks and monuments are a prime requisite of the Travel Bureau of this Service, if that new unit is to function efficiently.
The increasing observance of Conservation Week throughout the country, especially in schools and by study-groups, has resulted in an increased need for printed park material; and supplying such literature should be a part of the Federal participation in every international exposition.
In 1931, at the Overseas Colonial Exposition held at Paris, France, 100,000 copies of a national park booklet, prepared by the Service, were made available through the financial cooperation of the various transportation lines serving the parks.
Efforts to secure Federal or private funds for similar purposes since that time have failed.
Printed literature is not the only printing need of the Service.
Posters should be available, comparable to those issued by foreign governments to encourage tourist travel, for display and distribution not only in the regional offices, Travel Bureau offices, and other units of the National Park Service, but also through museums, educational institutions, travel organizations and industrial concerns, and at international expositions, in this country and abroad.
The issuance of a few posters under an emergency fund several years ago met with widespread approval and use.
Unfortunately, however, a demand was created which the Service no longer is able to meet, as emergency funds are not now available for this purpose.
Until provision is made for the printing of sufficient circulars and posters to meet the popular demand, a large amount of time must continue to be spent both in Washington and in the field answering the protests of disappointed applicants for circulars, of members of Congress whose constituents are unable to secure booklets, and of cooperating travel-encouraging organizations such as local chambers of commerce and automobile clubs.
The wilderness areas of the national parks and monuments are among America's finest laboratories for the study of conservation.
Within the park system all forms of life are protected.
The parks, therefore, are more than mere refuges for certain selected species.
They are complete sanctuaries designed to perpetuate a complete fauna and flora and to furnish evidence of the orderly way in which nature maintains her domain.
Species of animals and birds not found in abundance elsewhere are tame and viewable in the parks.
Examples of earth-building forces are vividly present.
More and more university scientists are finding these national areas, with their unspoiled, superlative lakes, forests, and mountains, to be the best possible places to which to take their classes for study.
In them questions and answers and demonstration come together.
One of the most interesting educational features of the Service's year was its part in the Nation-wide celebration of the one-hundredth anniversary of the birth of John Muir, great conservationist and "father" of many national parks.
Special programs including lectures and pageants were given in the parks, and in the Washington office a John Muir study program was prepared, providing important and new material which stimulated commemorative ceremonies and additional study in many schools and women's clubs.
Research studies carried on in the field by members of the National Park Service and by cooperating public and private institutions provided much new knowledge to be passed on to the visiting public.
Accumulation of data on many new species of birds, animals, and plants.
Collection of information on the interrelations of various organisms.
Cataloging of biological material, showing what each park affords.
Compilation of a mimeographed Check List of Birds of the National Parks, summarizing such information as now exists on the avifauna of 23 park areas in answer to a growing demand for information made by both administrators and visitors.
Collaboration with representatives of the Bureau of Biological Survey, Forest Service, Office of Indian Affairs and Coast Guard in the section on Wildlife Resources of the report Alaska, Its Resources and Developments, prepared under the direction of the National Resources Committee.
Continuation of range studies in Yellowstone, Zion, Hawaii, Wind Cave, and Rocky Mountain National Parks and at Lava Beds and Chaco Canyon National Monuments to determine the carrying capacities for big game and other species.
Continuation of investigations of bighorn at Rocky Mountain and Glacier National Parks, and conducting of field studies on mammals at Crater Lake National Park, Lava Beds, and Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Monuments, and in the proposed Big Bend National Park.
Collection of plant specimens and floral studies at Rocky Mountain, Mount Rainier, Great Smoky Mountains, Platt, Hawaii, Yosemite and Crater Lake National Parks, and Death Valley National Monument.
Collection of botanical and ethnobotanical specimens at Hawaii National Park and at six southwestern monuments.
Improvement in most parks in the status of scientific collections.
Initiation of a field study of evidence pointing to the origin of Crater Lake, financed by the Carnegie Institution of Washington and supervised by Dr. J. Howel Williams of the University of California.
Near completion of projects begun in Yosemite and Sequoia National Parks by Francois E. Matthes of the United States Geological Survey, including preparation of a series of illustrated albums with appropriate text to tell the geologic story of Sequoia and text for the key labels and statements designed to explain the geology of the Yosemite area to visitors.
Preparation of a text on the story of granite to be placed on top of Sentinel Dome in Yosemite National Park.
Inauguration of a study on the factors which control beach erosion and deposition of sand at Cape Hatteras National Seashore Project.
Completion of a year's field study of the coyote and its relationship to other wildlife species in Yellowstone and Grand Teton National Parks.
As yet predation on game mammals and birds has not been severe and no emergency has been found to exist.
There is evidence, from analysis of coyote food habits, of a favorable relationship of the coyote with other species.
Study of economic food habits of the coyote in Lava Beds National Monument, in order to determine the effect of this species on the game-bird population of the adjacent Tule Lake Migratory Waterfowl Refuge, revealed that destruction of ducks and eggs by coyotes during the nesting season was of slight importance and did not warrant covote control on the monument.
Continuation of studies of nesting Trumpeter Swans by park personnel at Yellowstone National Park.
The 1937 census of this rare species revealed a total of 69 swans within the park.
The number of cygnets was 50 percent greater than the number successfully reared in 1936.
Fish research study in several parks.
Studies on ecological and historical factors involved in trout distribution in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park culminated in a paper by a wildlife technician published in the Journal of the Tennessee Academy of Science, in October 1937.
A temporary ranger naturalist carried on studies of aquatic flora and fauna in Crater Lake, in connection with a survey of fish food and growth rates in trout.
Refinement of the geological map and preparation of a guide book of Mount Desert Island (Acadia National Park) based on field studies.
Discovery of fossils important to the interpretation of the geologic history of Great Smoky Mountains National Park in a limestone hitherto thought to be barren.
Discovery of new fossil plants in Petrified Forest National Monument.
Two discoveries of interesting prehistoric animals in Death Valley National Monument, one by the park naturalist and one by a representative of the Geological Survey.
In addition to these discoveries, much progress was made in unraveling the geologic history of the monument.
A study of the origin of the gypsum at White Sands National Monument and preparation of an interpretative exhibit for the monument museum.
Continuation of research at Boulder Dam and installation of material previously collected in the museum space assigned in the new administration building.
Completion of an areal geologic map covering the proposed Big Bend National Park.
Establishment of a research plot at Shelby Forest, Tenn., for study of the cycle of erosion in loess deposits.
Cooperation of park naturalists in five national parks with the National Geophysical Committee in measuring the advance or retreat of the ice front of critical glaciers.
Earthquake studies by the park naturalist at Lassen Volcanic National Park in cooperation with the University of California.
Continuation of volcanological studies in Hawaii National Park.
Revision of the technical circular, The Construction of Relief Models, so that it may be issued as a project training circular for the C. C. C.
Several natural history associations have aided the Service by publishing pamphlets and books containing information gained through research in the national parks.
Mammals of Zion-Bryce and Cedar Breaks was issued by the Zion-Bryce Natural History Association in January; Birds of Rocky Mountain National Park by the park naturalist of that park was published by the Rocky Mountain Nature Association in March; and Check List of Birds of Grand Canyon National Park, by an assistant wildlife technician was issued in July 1937 by the Grand Canyon Natural History Association.
In addition to these, the Government Printing Office published Fauna Series No. 3, Birds and Mammals of Mount McKinley National Park, by Joseph S. Dixon, Field Naturalist of the Service.
About 20 other papers, covering distribution, food habits, and behavior of mammals and birds and management of mammals and fish in National and State parks, were published.
The Service continued to expand its lecture, conducted trips and museum programs.
Public interest is attested by the very large attendance records of the year, individual guided trips in some of the larger parks averaging from 50 to 125 persons per trip and some of the auto caravans including from 25 to 85 cars, making organization and instruction difficult for the limited staffs.
Microphones were necessary at some campfire programs to enable large audiences to hear the speakers.
Only increased man-power will make it possible to handle the public in smaller groups as should be done.
With a total staff of 125 naturalists, 33 of whom are on the permanent staff and 92 on the temporary ranger-naturalist staff, the Service contacted 4,500,000 visitors through lectures and guided trips during the year.
Sixty percent of all visitors to parks maintaining such programs took part in the activities.
Recent surveys indicate that the public is most interested in trips and lectures designed to orient them with reference to the area they are visiting.
Demands for trips of longer duration indicate a growing desire for more specific knowledge and a greater appreciation of park features.
Wherever possible these longer trips have been added to the park programs, and several new amphitheaters have been constructed to facilitate campfire programs.
Two interesting new features are the rerouting of the famous Crater Lake boat trip to allow a naturalist to explain the scientific features in the walls of the crater as the boat passes, and the establishment of a Junior Nature School for Children in Rocky Mountain National Park.
The school is designed for voungsters unable to take the more strenuous nature hikes.
Numerous natural history subjects and the conservation of natural resources are taught.
A new type of self-guided trail known as the desert trail has been arranged at Casa Grande National Monument, so that interested visitors may see archeological and biological features not encountered on the regular guided trips.
During the past year successful experiments have been made in the use of natural color photography in the visual education programs sponsored by the Service.
Improvement has been made in service through the selection of better trained and more mature men to serve as ranger-naturalists during the summer season.
The Yosemite School of Field Natural History, a graduate school with a college degree as entrance prerequisite, operated again the past season, training prospective national park personnel qualified for naturalist positions, both permanent and seasonal.
The Secretary of the Interior has designated this school and the Yosemite Junior Nature School as nonprofit, scientific organizations engaged in a training enterprise helpful to the Service.
The 1938 session, the fourteenth class of the school, began courses on June 20 with the selection of 20 students (14 men and 6 women) from more than 100 applicants.
Yale University continued its cooperation, assisting in National Park Service personnel training through awarding two graduate fellowships to Service employees.
The fellowships are open to those interested in graduate studies bearing upon the educational or interpretative program of the Service and may include wildlife, forestry, geology, biology, history, archeology, physchology, and education.
Continuing a policy of portraying certain phases of the American scene in a correlated story rather than by case after case of irrelevant objects, the Service's museum development program made great progress in 1937–38.
Laboratories at Berkeley, Calif., Washington, D. C., and Fort Hunt.
Va., assisted by P. W. A., E. R. A., and C. C. C. funds.
In some instances, new exhibits have been prepared, in others old ones revised, and in many, new equipment and exhibit cases have been installed.
Fireproof housing for the priceless exhibits already accumulated in field museums is a primary objective in museum development.
Perhaps the foremost accomplishment in the museum field was the completion of the Department of the Interior Museum, which was opened to the public on March 9 and which portrays the history, organization, and functions of the various bureaus of the Department.
Noteworthy among the areas in the West which have been improved are Scotts Bluff National Monument, where the geology wing of the museum was completed for installation of a most interesting collection of extinct animal fossils found in the cliff on which the monument stands: Yosemite National Park, where exhibits for the Indian and geology rooms of the museum were revised and many physical improvements made including better housing for research collections; Crater Lake National Park, where the Sinnott Memorial was made waterproof and exhibits revised; and Tumacacori National Monument, where a new museum was opened to the public with exhibits telling the story of the coming of the Spanish to this region and the incidents connected with the mission.
Lack of funds prohibited the completion of the museum at Morristown National Historical Park, although the history room has been opened to the public.
Dioramas, photographs, paintings, and models were sent out for display at 15 expositions, a large quantity of material having been sent to Stockholm, Sweden, for the Swedish-American exhibit at A. B. Nordiska Kompaniet.
High recognition of the value of the museum work the National Park Service is doing was received in the award of Rockefeller fellowships to two of the personnel for study with the Buffalo Museum of Science.
Studies have been made in an effort to solve the troublesome problems of deer and bear management in certain parks, and fishcultural activities have been improved through cooperative projects.
Management of deer has received attention in parks where the feeding of animals by tourists has tended to pauperize them and in those parks where abnormal and unnatural concentrations of animals have resulted in serious reduction of natural food supply.
The problem has been attacked at Yosemite and Sequoia through discouragement of feeding and by moving deer to other portions of the respective parks.
Plans have been drafted for use of the same methods at Zion with possible additional control by hunting outside the park.
Improvements have been made in bear management in the larger parks where serious problems have resulted from too close contact between bears and the public.
Bear shows in Yellowstone, Yosemite, and Sequoia National Parks have been modified toward a less artificial presentation.
An educational campaign has been initiated to inform the public that bears should be let alone to prevent possibility of human injury.
As nearly all injuries inflicted by bears are directly or indirectly due to human interference, a new Service regulation, approved by the Secretary, prohibits all feeding of bears by the public and should aid in reducing injury hazard to a minimum.
In the past year, fish-cultural activities in the national parks have shown notable improvement.
Through the cooperation of the Service with the Bureau of Fisheries and State game departments, 22,330,000 fish, principally trout, were planted in the waters of various national parks and monuments.
This is an all-time record for fish planted in Federal park areas.
Almost 41,000,000 black-spotted and rainbow trout and grayling eggs were obtained last year from Yellowstone Park waters—another record.
There is evidence of improved fishing conditions in many park waters.
As the continued increase in park travel has resulted in the heavy utilization of fish resources, there is an increasing need for an enlarged planting program.
This need will be met in Glacier National Park through the operation of the Jessup Mill Fish Hatchery, soon to be constructed, and in Yosemite by a new spawn-taking development at Lake Eleanor.
An agreement among the National Park Service, the Bureau of Fisheries, Bureau of Biological Survey, Game Commissions of Nevada and Arizona, and interested sportsmen's organizations has been reached, placing the control of fish planting in Lake Mead and other waters of the Boulder Dam National Recreational Area in the hands of the National Park Service, with cooperation from the other agencies.
Elk reduction was carried on in Yellowstone National Park and vicinity in the winter of 1937–38, as in the past 3 years, in an effort to limit the herd to the carrying capacity of the winter range.
After the herd reduction, a census showed 10,976 animals still on the northern Yellowstone range.
Just as the scenic areas provide unparalleled laboratories for the study of natural sciences, so the historic and archeologic areas of the National Park Service are ideal classrooms for students of American history and prehistory.
Research and investigation designed to add new knowledge to its records and actual working information for restorations and repairs are among the principal duties of the staff.
Completion of a comprehensive study of the history of Fort Pulaski.
Near completion of a detailed study of the military operations culminating in the Battle of the Wilderness.
Completion of research study of the Oglethorpe Trail from Savannah to Augusta, Ga.
Compilation of a record of photographs taken by M. B. Brady during the War Between the States, a record expected to be extremely valuable in the development and interpretation of military areas of that period.
Copying of important manuscripts, including records of La Purisima Mission, which is being restored by the State of California with the assistance of the Service, and an extensive collection of Revolutionary manuscripts at Morristown National Historical Park.
The microcopying and projection equipment purchased last year was used for this.
Formulation of a statement of the major objectives to be incorporated in the planning and building of the Jefferson National Expansion Memorial in St. Louis, Mo.
The staff was assisted by the Advisory Board on National Parks, Historic Sites, Buildings, and Monuments and the statement has been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.
Extensive research is now being undertaken to determine the form of memorial best suited to portray events in and the far-reaching results of our national expansion.
On January 10 the Secretary approved the expenditure of $100,000 from funds allotted to the Jefferson National Expansion Memorial for the preparation of illustrative material concerning the project.
Preparation for inaugurating historical studies of the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal, interesting old waterway from Georgetown, D. C., to Cumberland, Md., as plans for its development are formulated.
The canal had close historical association with early movements sponsored by George Washington to open communications between the frontier and tidewater sections, and with the destinies of cities along the Potomac.
Completion of the extensive and long-awaited Schneider report.
In the fall of 1934, Mr. J. Thomas Schneider began, at the request of the Secretary of the Interior, a comprehensive study from funds furnished by the Rockefeller foundation, international in scope, entitled 'Report on the Preservation of Historic Sites and Buildings.
During the past year the Advisory Board approved its publication and copies will soon be available for distribution to Federal and State agencies interested in historical and archeological conservation.
Part I reviews Federal, State, local and private progress in this field in the United States: part II discusses the legislative history and administrative organization for the preservation of historic sites and buildings in Great Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Sweden, and other foreign countries: part III is a detailed analysis of the Historic Sites legislation enacted August 21, 1935, setting forth conclusions and recommendations for effectuating the broad national policy of historical and archeological conservation embodied in the legislation.
Accumulation of valuable data relating to the history of Fort Laramie.
Wvo.
Collection of information needed for base sheets in master plans showing physical aspects and historic points at the time of the greatest historic significance of an area.
Other major studies in progress, some completed, during the year, were concerned with the Battle of Manassas, Va.
Goliad Mission, Tex.
Civil War guns and gun carriages; and eighteenth century Spanish ordnance.
During the past vear, the desirability of increasing close cooperative relations with learned institutions in the fields of history, archeology, and architecture has become more than ever apparent as essential in research and scientific survey designed properly to evaluate historic sites.
The American Association of Museums in the museum field.
With the guidance of these institutions and the Advisory Board, considerable progress has been made in a Nation-wide survey of historic sites.
A total of 620 sites have been inventoried; 200 proposed areas have been investigated; and 600 sites have been classified as eligible for further study under the 15 broad themes believed to be the most important and far-reaching phases in the social, economic, cultural, and political development of the American people.
During the past 6 months special studies have been made of sites classified under Theme One, Spanish Exploration and Settlement, with particular reference to the sixteenth century.
In actual preservation activities, the Service has greatly extended the program for the development of Ocmulgee National Monument with a view toward eventual centralization of southeastern archeological studies at Macon, Ga.
It is contemplating the construction of a museum there to serve as a center of research activity.
Through its general program of State cooperation, the Service has contributed to the preservation of many sites on areas of primary historical or archeological interest throughout the country.
Fort Clinch State Park, Fla.
Fort Morgan State Park, Ala.
Columbus-Belmont State Park, Ky.
Longfellow-Evangeline State Park, La.
Fort Frederick State Park, Md.
Illinois-Michigan Canal, New Salem, Lincoln Log Cabin and Pere Marquette State Parks in Illinois; Spring Mill State Park, Ind.
Mackinac Island State Park, Mich.
Fort Ridgely State Park, Minn.
Fort Lincoln State Park, N. Dak.
Fort Sisseton and Custer State Parks, S. Dak.
Fort Parker and Big Bend State Parks, Tex.
Fort Lowell State Park, Ariz.
Fort Churchill State Park, Nev.
The Service also continued to review projects covering restoration of sites and structures under the W. P. A. and extended this cooperation to other departments which supervise C. C. C. projects of the same character.
The Advisory Board on National Parks, Historic Sites, Buildings, and Monuments suffered a grievous loss by the death of Mr. Archibald M. McCrea.
The National Park Service Trust Fund Board accepted donations of $3,000 from Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and $1,000 from Twentieth Century Fox moving picture corporations which took motion pictures in Zion and Mount Rainier National Parks.
These contributions brought the donations credited to the national park trust fund account to a total of $12,000.
No expenditures were made from the fund during the year.
Not only are trees an essential element in nearly every park of major scenic importance, but in themselves the magnificent virgin forest stands are an irreplaceable asset—sometimes the principal reason for park creation.
Protection of the park forests, therefore, is a vital part of park administration, and one to which increasing attention is being devoted.
Fire, the most serious enemy of the forest, is a two-headed foe.
Sometimes it strikes through lightning, but more often it is mancaused.
During the past year the Service was fortunate in having no serious forest fires.
The 1937 fire record, as shown on pages 42–45, is indeed gratifying, especially when taken in conjunction with the fact that of the approximately 19 million acres of land in the Federal park system, more than 8 million acres require fire protection.
For the western parks the number of man-caused fires was the lowest since 1930.
Gratifying as this record is, the field personnel is faced with a difficult task in combating the carelessness of visitors when handling fire in the out-of-doors, for 67 percent of all the park fires in 1937 were man-caused.
A concerted effort was made to cut down the number of man-caused fires by reduction of fire hazards and through public contact and educational efforts.
It was possible to give more intensive training in fire protection to park rangers, fire guards, and C. C. C. supervisory personnel and enrollees than in the past.
Participation by park protection personnel in fire prevention training given by cooperating protection agencies was also authorized by Congress.
The program for taking panoramic photographs from fire lookouts and observation stations, as a means of improving fire detection and fire dispatching within the national park system, was completed.
This program, initiated 4 years ago, envisioned the preparation of panoramic photographs from all existing, proposed, and emergency lookout points in all the national parks and monuments.
Copies of these panoramic photographs have now been placed in the hands of the proper fire protection personnel throughout the entire Service and cooperating agencies.
Additional work will of necessity be done in the future in new areas or where a review of present detection facilities indicates a need for restudy through the means of such photographs.
During the past year five 1½-ton fire trucks equipped with water tanks and pumpers were distributed to Acadia, Great Smoky Mountains, Mammoth Cave, Crater Lake, and Hot Springs National Parks as welcome additions to the fire suppression equipment.
Within the limited available appropriations every effort is being made to place adequate mobile fire apparatus in those areas where fire studies indicate a need.
Insect control.
Extensive surveys of forest insect conditions in the western national parks and monuments indicated an improvement over the preceding year as a result of the control program under way for a number of years.
The epidemic of the Black Hills and Douglas fir beetle in Bryce Canyon National Park made it necessary to continue control work, but on a greatly reduced scale, this year.
A serious epidemic of the Black Hills beetle in and adjacent to Rocky Mountain National Park was controlled by joint action with other Federal agencies.
In cooperation with the Forest Service and W. P. A. control operations for the Black Hills beetle on 70,000 acres of forest in and around the Denver Mountain Parks were initiated during the year.
Serious mountain pine beetle and Engelmann spruce beetle infestations exist in Yellowstone National Park, and the lodgepole needle miner still continues to menace the lodgepole pine stands in Yosemite National Park.
In the eastern national parks and monuments insect conditions were for the most part endemic during the year.
Shenandoah reported an unusual outbreak of the walking stick, on which very close observations will be maintained.
Control operations against the Japanese beetle at George Washington Birthplace National Monument were initiated last summer by spraying 12 acres of ground with lead arsenate.
The beech scale insect infestation was found to be epidemic in Acadia National Park and all beech trees were sprayed with lime sulphur.
Blister rust control.
The white pine blister rust disease, which has been moving from the Pacific Northwest southward into California, became so menacing during the year to the five-needle pines in Lassen Volcanic, Yosemite, General Grant, and Sequoia National Parks that plans were made to initiate control operations this summer.
Eradication of Ribes (currants and gooseberries), the alternate host of the white pine blister rust, was started in Yosemite National Park in June, and similar work will be initiated soon in the other three parks.
This threat to the white pines of California, including the sugar pine, the western white pine, and at the high elevations the white-bark and the foxtail pines, must be controlled if these species are to be conserved for posterity in the national parks of California.
Prompt and efficient control of the disease is without doubt one of the most important conservation measures demanding the attention of this Service at this time.
Blister rust control projects were continued in Mount Rainier, Crater Lake, Acadia, and Shenandoah National Parks.
Blister rust reconnaissance surveys were started in Yellowstone National Park, since the disease is known to be within a few miles northwest of the park.
Tree preservation and repair.
The C. C. C. itinerant tree preservation crew, which for 2½ years has provided the care necessary for the preservation and repair of important trees in the national cemeteries, national battlefield sites, national historical parks, and national military parks, was discontinued because of diminishing C. C. C. appropriations.
Type mapping.
The type mapping program for the purpose of obtaining a detailed inventory and map of the vegetative cover of the parks for use in planning protection, development, and use of the areas was materially curtailed during the year.
This work is now very largely completed.
The few exceptions are Acadia National Park and the more recent extensions to existing areas.
Approximately 6,913,000 acres have been mapped to date, and copies of the maps and of the inventories are being placed in the hands of the park superintendents for their use in protection and administration.
Much additional information has been provided by this work relating to the flora of the parks, and a project is under way to assemble in printed form a check list of the flora of the western national parks and monuments.
Forest nurseries and planting.
Forest nurseries are operated in Sequoia, Yellowstone, Great Smoky Mountains, Shenandoah, and Platt National Parks for the purpose of raising planting stock for reforestation of burns where natural reproduction is lacking, for landscape planting, for planting for erosion control, and for replacements of dying trees in and adjacent to public campgrounds and other developed areas.
Over 3 million seedlings obtained from the Soil Conservation Service were planted in recreational demonstration areas for the purpose of assisting in erosion control or to reforest cut-over or burned-over lands.
Emergency appropriations make forest protection possible.
As in the 3 preceding fiscal years, all forest protection improvements, insect and tree disease control, type mapping, and tree preservation activities were financed from the emergency appropriation.
The meager allotment for forest protection and fire prevention for the fiscal year 1938 under the regular appropriation provided funds only for the most essential needs for fire protection personnel and equipment which could not be supplied under the C. C. C. program.
The above forest protection accomplishments therefore are largely represented in the report of the C. C. C. program.
The ever increasing number of visitors to national park areas is making necessary the application of all the ability of the landscape architect, the architect, and the engineer to retain the primitive qualities of those areas while permitting intensive human use.
Apart from major road construction, approximately 600 job plans involving new areas, new buildings, and practically all types of park construction were studied.
A new edition of the comprehensive master plan for each national park area has been prepared to enable the National Park Service to program efficiently the necessary future development with as little violation of natural beauty and qualities as possible.
In addition, some 6,000 job plans for similar work in State park, recreational demonstration project, and work camp areas were reviewed, and technical engineering and landscape advice and assistance rendered to the State park authorities, especially on jobs involving major and difficult design.
Appropriations were considerably less than in recent years with consequent postponement of development of some individual areas.
A long-awaited building project in Alaska, the hotel at McKinley Park Station and auxiliary buildings was started and practically completed through a P. W.A. allocation of $350,000.
Although the hotel will be operated by the Alaska Railroad, planning and supervision of construction were handled by the National Park Service.
An attractive structure was erected at Tumacacori National Monument to serve museum and administrative purposes adjoining the ruins of the interesting Spanish mission.
Other P. W. A. funds provided for the restoration of historic buildings and wharf at the Salem Maritime National Historic Site and for the preparation of plans for a fish hatchery group to serve Glacier National Park.
Public Works funds were combined with C. C. C. labor for the reconstruction of a lodge at Petrified Forest National Monument, which is rapidly nearing completion.
The C. C. C. made an important building contribution with the completion of the cave elevator building at Wind Cave National Park.
A large and attractive development for the regional office at Sante Fe, N. Mex., is being built by the C. C. C. and E. R. A.
The Statue of Liberty National Monument will be beautified and its facilities greatly improved through the allotment of E. R. A. funds for planning and redevelopment.
Visitors to the New York Worlds Fair in 1939 will find that famous area more attractive and better able to care for them than ever before.
Through its engineering staff the Service coordinated with other bureaus matters pertaining to technical collaboration in connection with water utilization or control projects, both authorized and projected, where those projects may have some effect on an existing or proposed national park area.
Through the loan of its personnel and facilities, the Service cooperated with other agencies as consultant, particularly in connection with dam design and the soil mechanics work of the engineering laboratory.
One of the more important accomplishments of the year was the completion of a comprehensive road-maintenance study and report covering all Service areas with a tabulation of all roads as to class, type of construction, and maintenance estimates, including maintenance equipment mnventory and needed equipment to carry on the recommended maintenance program.
This is the first complete composite record of all roads in the park system, and a step toward more adequate maintenance and centralized control.
As in the past, the Bureau of Public Roads of the Department of Agriculture continued major road building for the Service.
Under the roads and trails appropriation of $4,500,000 for the 1938 fiscal vear a number of the larger road systems were improved, and the first major road in the new Boulder Dam area was started.
Construction was begun on the Fresno-General Grant approach road and on the Zion-Bryce Canyon approach road.
The Blue Ridge and Natchez Trace Parkway projects, pioneers in their respective fields of national recreational and historical motor travel, continued to develop under regular Federal appropriations.
The Blue Ridge project, with 115 miles graded and 50 miles additional under grading contract, is rapidly approaching a useful stage as far as the Roanoke-Asheville unit is concerned.
Development of recreational parks adjacent to the parkway continued, as well as construction of bridges and overpasses.
On the Natchez Trace project, grading continued on three sections, totaling 34 miles in Mississippi.
Survey and location work was carried on in Mississippi, Alabama, and Tennessee, in collaboration with the Bureau of Public Rads.
The city of Washington saw another step forward in the extension of the George Washington Memorial Parkway when work on the Columbia Island development was placed under contract.
Continuing its program of making a permanent graphic record of all important existing monuments of the builders' art erected in the United States and possessions before the last quarter of the nineteenth century, the survey of historic American buildings entered its fifth vear of continuous field work.
Under the supervision of the National Park Service a number of State W. P. A. projects and several university collaborative programs were organized or continued.
The master index of early American buildings being made by the Survey was considerably adyanced during the vear and now contains information on more than 7,000 structures.
All records deposited have been made available for public use and reproduction.
Advancing the program of a national plan sponsored by the Department of the Interior, through a three-party agreement between the National Park Service, the Library of Congress, and the American Institute of Architects, the Survey continued to function in the conservational capacity of recording first those historic structures in danger of destruction in the States where work relief projects for this purpose could be organized.
Working closely with the engineers of the National Park Service, sanitary engineers of the Public Health Service of the Treasury Department have assisted in protecting the health of the 15,000,000 park and monument visitors and that of the approximately 13,000 persons employed during the year by the National Park Service and of the thousands more working for the operators of concessions in the park supplying accommodations to visitors.
As always, great attention was given to providing adequate supplies of pure water and to the proper disposal of sewage.
Notable among the accomplishments in this field were the handling of the sanitation problem arising at the Gettysburg National Military Park during the commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Battle of Gettysburg, and the installation of a new sewage treatment plant at Mammoth Cave National Park.
Among the interesting plans submitted were those for sewage treatment plants at Mount McKinley National Park and for a general sewage disposal layout at the North Rim, Grand Canyon National Park.
A special investigation was made of the distribution and use of the reclaimed sewage water at the South Rim of the Grand Canyon, with particular reference to safeguards adopted.
Bacteriological analyses of samples of reclaimed sewage-water at the South Rim used for industrial purposes indicate that this water meets the Treasury standards for drinking water.
It is, however, never used for domestic purposes.
The water supply problem at Colonial National Historical Park continues to be urgent, through lack of funds to handle the situation adequately.
The long-established policy of granting concessions for the operation of accommodations for the public in the Federal park areas was continued.
Additional study was given to the plan of housing some of the smaller concession operations in Government-owned buildings.
The upward trend of the past three seasons was somewhat checked, the 1938 revenue being slightly less, in most instances, than that for 1937.
This was largely the effect of a lessening of business from organized rail tours.
Studies of the concession service of the past year compared with that of 10 years ago show an interesting trend.
Before the 1929 depression, substantially all profits of the park operators were earned from furnishing sightseeing transportation and first-class American plan hotel accommodations.
Revenue from other sources was immaterial, there being practically no cafeteria, coffee shop, or grill services.
Today the profit-producing facilities are the low-priced cabin accommodations, cafeteria, coffee shop, and grill services.
Although the transportation and first-class hotel accommodations still furnish the greater portion of the operators'’ revenues, they are less selfsupporting than the newer types of accommodation.
Under present policies, such items as gasoline and food supplies are sold at the same rate as in the nearest city to the park.
Wherever the volume of business made possible a reasonable profit, the same ruling has been applied to purchases at soda fountains and light lunch counters.
Although no unusual or especially large projects were undertaken by the park operators, continued general improvements were under way in all of the parks.
The Virginia Skyline Co., Inc., completed and put into operation the first section of a large cabin development at Big Meadows and opened a new roadside facility for meals and lodging at Dickey Ridge, in the Shenandoah National Park.
A lunchroom and gasoline station also were opened at Elk Wallow.
The demands for additional housing accommodations at Mammoth Cave National Park were so insistent that construction of 35 additional cabins is under way.
The development by the Federal Government of the landing field at the Boulder Dam recreational area was completed.
Arrangements were made by the park operator for the landing thereon of the cross-country planes of Transcontinental Western Air Lines.
Construction was started on the development, on an experimental basis, of a facility to provide inexpensive overnight accommodations in Sequoia National Park for groups of young people.
An interesting experiment in low-cost housing is under way in Yosemite National Park, where the park operating company (whose president is a member of the National Park Service Committee on Auto Camps and Housekeeping Cabins) is erecting a few cabins each of several types of minimum cost prefabricated housing units.
If satisfactory, this development should enable the park operators to provide cabins at a moderate investment and with resultant low charges and a fair rate of return earned.
Cooperation was continued with the Indian Arts and Crafts Board in the promotion of the sale of Indian handicraft in the western national parks and with the Southern Highland Handieraft Guild in the sale of mountaineer products in the eastern national parks.
Short-term contracts were entered into for the furnishing of limited transportation and saddle-horse services in Death Valley National Monument.
Several of the park operators, with the approval of the Department, made application to the Reconstruction Finance Corporation for loans for the construction of additional facilities.
The Mesa Verde Park Co. was successful in securing a loan, and the applications of other park operators are still under consideration.
As of June 30, 1938, there were 140 corporations, firms, or individuals in 49 national parks, national monuments, and other areas under the jurisdiction of the National Park Service operating under contract or permit to furnish accommodations to the public as compared with 131 such concerns as of the beginning of the fiscal year and 89 such concerns as of 10 years before.
Field studies of electric, telephone, water, and sanitation services furnished to the park operators were made at Lassen Volcanic, Mesa Verde, and Shenandoah National Parks and the Oregon Caves National Monument.
Rates to be charged for these services will result in new or increased revenue to the United States of approximately $3,600.
These services are furnished to the park operators at a cost which includes depreciation, maintenance, and operating charges.
Field inspections were made of both the park operators' and the Service's buildings in the larger parks.
As a result, the following improvements have been made or are in process: the relocation of large gas meters in the natural gas lines serving buildings at Hot Springs National Park; safeguards for oil tanks at Yellowstone National Park; and structural changes for the control of fire in the hotels at Glacier National Park.
Employee safety activities included the preparation and distribution of posters, the establishment of a park safety program which provides a systematic procedure for the reduction of accidents and for the investigation of serious accidents.
Progress has been made in the preparation of standards for safe practice to be followed by the Service in construction projects.
During the fiscal year 1938 numerous projects of great significance in the development of the ultimate plan for the park system were undertaken, and many events of national importance and interest were held in the National Capital Parks.
Rawlins Square, one of the important small parks of the northwest rectangle, redesigned along strictly formal lines, was completed under P. W. A. authorization.
Important progress was achieved on the roads and trails project for the extension of the George Washington Memorial Parkway, Memorial Avenue to Key Bridge, including the construction of the permanent bridge across Boundary Channel, the temporary bridge over Little River, and the Lee Boulevard connection.
Completion of the rough grade over the entire area, with the exception of a small section on Columbia Island, was recorded.
The W. P. A. project for the demolition of the old Brightwood Reservoir and the conversion of the adjacent area in Rock Creek Park into a major recreation center achieved important progress.
The road in the south grounds of the Executive Mansion was rerouted and reconstructed and the low iron fence enclosing the south grounds of the White House was replaced by a higher fence of copperbearing steel, designed to harmonize with the colonial iron fence enclosing the north grounds.
A permanent flood-control dike north of the Lincoln Memorial Reflecting Pool and in the Washington Monument grounds was constructed by the United States Engineer Office.
Work on the construction of a new modern four-lane steel and concrete single arch bridge to replace the old two-lane bridge over Rock Creek Park in section 4.
Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway, advanced beyond the 50-percent completed stage.
The equitation field in Rock Creek Park was redesigned, completely regraded, and equipped with new jumps.
A bridle path underpass at the Tilden Street Bridge was constructed to abolish the traffic hazard which existed previously at that point.
This project also involved the construction of minor bridges over the adjacent mill race.
Events.
An event of principal importance during the year was the National Boy Scout Jamboree, attended by more than 30,000 Scouts from each State of the Union and several foreign countries.
The Scouts were encamped in East and West Potomac Parks and the Washington Monument grounds and along the Mount Vernon Memorial Highway.
Other events held in the park system during the vear included the inauguration of the National Celebration of the Sesquicentennial of the Constitution, with President Roosevelt as principal speaker; the encampment of the Workers Alliance in West Potomac Park during August; the Japanese Cherry Blossom Festival; the President's Cup Regatta; and the National Conservation Rally of the Campfire Girls.
Administration.
During the year 1938 the total appropriations accounted for by National Capital Parks amounted to $2,555,456.72.
NP-6—Fort Hunt, Mount Vernon Memorial Highway.
NP-7—Fort Dupont.
NP-8—Theodore Roosevelt Memorial Island.
Attendance.
The total attendance in the National Capital Parks during the fiscal year was estimated to be approximately 50 million.
Establishment of new areas, boundary revisions, and changes in status of existing areas marked continued growth and development of the Federal park system during the 1938 fiscal year.
The system now comprises 27 national parks, 73 national monuments, 11 national military parks, 11 national cemeteries, 8 national battlefield sites, 8 national memorials, 1 national recreational area, 1 national historic site, 1 national parkway, 3 national parkway projects, 2 national historical parks, and the National Capital Parks unit, totaling 19,187,933 acres.
An act passed in the closing hours of the Seventy-fifth Congress gave the Nation the new Olympic National Park of approximately 624,000 acres, including the former Mount Olympus National Monument, Wash.
The President's approval of this measure (H. R. 10024 as amended) on June 29, 1938, fulfilled a 34-year dream of conservationists.
The measure authorizes the President to add to the park a maximum of 262,292 acres so that the final boundaries may include a total of 898,292 acres.
Three new national monuments were added to the system: Capitol Reef National Monument, Utah, established August 2, 1937, by Presidential proclamation; Pipestone National Monument, Minn., established by act of Congress, August 25, 1937 (50 Stat. 804); and Channel Islands National Monument, Calif., established by Presidential proclamation April 26, 1938.
Congress, by an act of June 20, 1938, extended the boundaries of Hawaii National Park to include, in the Kilauea-Mauna Loa section, an area to the southeast containing a shoreline and one of the few remaining unspoiled native villages on the archipelago.
The boundaries of Hot Springs National Park, Ark., were extended by an act of Congress approved June 23, 1938, making possible acquisition of land to protect the watershed for the probable source of the hot springs from the denudation regarded as inevitable if the West Mountain-Sugar Loaf Mountain extension remains in private hands.
Salem Maritime National Historic Site, Mass., established March 18, 1938, by designation by the Secretary of the Interior, is the first area of its type established under the important and far-reaching national policy for historic preservation embodied in an act of August 21, 1935 (49 Stat. 666).
Acadia National Park.
Donations of 706.137 acres iņereased the total area of the park to 16,646.227 acres.
Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Monument.
By proclamation of May 16, 1938, 100 acres were added to the monument, making a total of 11,197.76 acres.
Blue Ridge Parkway.
Donations of 1,469.69 acres of land, all in the State of North Carolina, and an accurate compilation of the area heretofore acquired resulted in a total area of 4,972.28 acres for this parkway.
Boulder Dam National Recreational Area.
By agreement with the Bureau of Reclamation, approved by the Secretary of the Interior, the National Park Service is charged with the development and supervision of the recreational facilities of this area containing approximately 1,699,573 acres.
Cape Hatteras National Seashore Project.
The War Department transferred 74 acres for this project.
Chickamauga and Chattanooga National Military Park.
Donation of 0.082 acre brought the total of this park to 8,629.212 acres.
Chiricahua National Monument.
By proclamation of June 10, 1938, 6,407 acres were added to the monument, making a total of 10,694.8 acres.
Colonial National Historical Park.
Acquisition of 23.805 acres through donation and purchase resulted in a total of 6,325.765 acres for this national historical park.
Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania County Battlefields Memorial National Military Park.
Donation of 42.811 acres resulted in a total area of 2,328.091 acres.
Great Smoky Mountains National Park.
Acquisition of 25,913.85 acres through donation and purchase brought the total area to 437,602.65 acres; 26,064 acres still to be acquired.
Hot Springs National Park.
Purchase of 5.815 acres increased the total area to 989.805 acres.
Isle Royale National Park project.
The purchase and donation of 73,605.04 acres brought the total Federally owned area to 112,681.59 acres, 20,723 acres still to be acquired.
Kennesaw Mountain National Battlefield Site.
The acquisition of 477.93 acres brought the total area to 648.03 acres.
Mammoth Cave National Park.
Acquisition of 3,984.85 acres through donation and purchase resulted in a total park area of 38,545.164 acres; 6,764.836 acres still to be acquired.
Petersburg National Military Park.
Purchase and donation of 88.734 acres increased the total area to 1,938.834 acres.
Acquisition of 8.04 acres as donation for headquarters site.
Salem Maritime National Historic Site.
Donation of 8.289 aeres increased the total area to 8.609 acres.
Statue of Liberty National Monument.
Transfer of 7.88 acres from the War Department increased the total area to 10.38 acres.
Vicksburg National Cemetery.
Acquisition of 80.03 acres by purchase resulted in a total area of 118.190 acres.
Wupatki National Monument.
By proclamation of July 9, 1937, 33,631.20 acres were added to the monument, making a total of 35,865.30 acres.
Yosemite National Park.
Acquisition of 160 acres by purchase increased the total area to 752,904.32 acres.
Pursuant to an act of August 24, 1937 (50 Stat. 746), the Secretary issued Patent No. 1096218, dated March 16, 1938, to the State of Montana, embracing 1,438.36 acres.
This patent includes the 160 acres of land formerly within Lewis and Clark Caverns National Monument, now abolished.
By resolution of June 7, 1938, the Senate authorized the Committee on Public Lands and Surveys to investigate, in the summer of 1938, the necessity, suitability, and feasibility of extending the boundaries of Grand Teton National Park, Wyo., to include the Jackson Hole country and an area within Teton National Forest which surrounds Jackson Lake.
This will be the second Senate investigation of the project.
Senate resolution agreed to on June 7 authorized and directed the Committee on Public Lands and Surveys of the Senate to conduct a thorough investigation of all questions relating to the suitability and feasibility of creating the Petrified Forest National Park of the area now set apart as Petrified Forest National Monument in Arizona.
The investigation is to be conducted during July and August.
The Service has undertaken the acquisition, largely by condemnation, of 7,730 acres of sugar-pine forest for inclusion in Yosemite National Park, Calif., for which money was appropriated in June 1937.
Through allocation of $705,000 of Federal emergency funds and appropriation of $100,000 by the State of Michigan, 102,567 acres have been purchased for the Isle Royale National Park project at a cost of $522,481.
The remaining funds make possible acquisition of 7.974 acres now under contract for $150,098 and 10,098 acres in course of condemnation.
The act of June 20, 1938, authorizes the addition to the park of lands acquired with emergency funds.
Largo and a portion of Florida Bay.
The project involves more than a million acres, of which 759,520 acres are State-owned and the remainder privately owned.
The State of Florida is conducting a campaign to raise funds for purchase of the private lands for donation to the Federal Government.
A civic campaign is under way in Texas to raise funds for the purchase of land necessary for establishment of Big Bend National Park, authorized by Congress by act of June 20, 1935.
An act of August 17, 1937 authorized the establishment of Cape Hatteras National Seashore when title to certain lands on the North Carolina coast within an area of approximately 100 square miles becomes vested in the United States.
The Department has designated the boundaries, and the State has undertaken through its department of conservation and development to acquire privately owned lands for transfer to the Federal Government.
Establishment of Saratoga National Historical Park, N. Y., when lands necessary therefor are acquired by donation or with donated funds, is authorized in an act of June 1, 1938.
The park would include that part of the Saratoga Battlefield now owned by the State of New York and any additional lands which the Secretary of the Interior may, within 6 months after approval of the act, designate as necessary or desirable.
A joint resolution, approved June 15, 1938, authorized the Secretary of War to transfer to the Department of the Interior the Cape Henry Memorial site in Fort Story Military Reservation, Cape Henry, Va., which commemorates the first landing on American soil, April 26, 1607.
A formal request for the transfer is being made to the Secretary of War.
If the transfer is made the site will be administered as part of Colonial National Historical Park.
The act of June 28, 1938 rerouted the Williamsburg-Jamestown section of the Colonial parkway described in Presidential proclamation of August 22, 1933 (48 Stat. 1708) in a more logical course to connect Governor Markeley's Green Springs Mansion, Carter's Grove Mansion, and the Roswell Mansion, which are proposed for addition to the park.
The exact location of the new route extending south from the City of Williamsburg to the James River and along the river and connecting waters to Jamestown Island, will be determined by the Secretary of the Interior.
The act also authorizes the Secretary to acquire by donation, purchase, or otherwise, for addition to the park, the Glass House Point area, The Hook, and an enlarged Gloucester Point area.
The Service is acquiring by condemnation 49.15 acres for Ackia Battleground National Monument, Miss., authorized by an act of August 27, 1935 (49 Stat. 897).
It is expected that the establishment of Badlands National Monument, S. Dak., authorized in 1929, will be consummated soon.
Only the exchange of State lands within the project for Federal lands outside the area delays establishment.
Twenty-four thousand dollars authorized in 1936 for purchase of lands for Homestead National Monument, Nebr., is being applied for purchase of 160.82 acres.
With an offer made by the Whitman Centennial, Inc., and the Walla Walla Foundation to donate land comprising the site of the Indian Mission established in 1836 by Marcus Whitman, there remains only formal acceptance of title by the Department for establishment of Whitman National Monument, Wash., authorized by an act of June 29,1936.
A bill.
H. R. 10435, was introduced in the Seventy-fifth Congress to authorize the establishment of the Kings Canyon National Park.
The Kings River region north of Sequoia National Park in California has been urged for inclusion in the national park system since 1890.
As a result of a careful study, the boundary lines have now been drawn so as to eliminate important power and irrigation dam sites without sacrificing the outstanding scenic features of the region.
Resolutions from more than 30 organizations and a great number from private individuals were received favoring the proposed park.
Now that there is no conflict between the proposed park and the power and irrigation advocates, it is hoped that a better understanding of the proposal may result in the establishment of the park during the next session of Congress.
A bill.
H. R. 6599, was introduced by Congressman Brewster to authorize the establishment of the Katahdin National Park in the State of Maine.
As a result of a very careful field investigation last fall.
Further studies of this region are now being made.
A bill, H. R. 10239, was introduced in Congress to establish the Green Mountain National Park in Vermont.
The proposed legislation, which received the approval of the Department, would preserve a section of typical New England landscape.
The Service has continued its study of approximately 20 areas along the Atlantic, Gulf, Pacific, and Great Lakes shores, which were given a preliminary survey in 1935, as possible national seashores.
Negotiations were continued for establishment of a section of the Escalante area along the Colorado River watershed in Utah as a national monument.
Only formal acceptance of title to certain privately owned property is delaying establishment of a national monument on the site of the Tuzigoot ruins near Clarksdale, Ariz.
Investigations by archeologists who supervised excavation and restoration of the ruins indicate three major southwestern cultures were present simultaneously in the prehistoric past.
A long, narrow strip of exceedingly white sand on Santa Rosa Island in Escambia County, Fla., which, in geologic terms, is illustrative of a process of aggradation, has been approved for establishment as Santa Rosa National Monument.
The major portion of the island, now owned by Escambia County, is in process of transfer to the Federal Government.
The proposed Indian Mounds National Monument, Iowa, containing extraordinary examples of Indian mounds, has been investigated and approved for establishment when the land has been acquired and donated to the Federal Government.
An area of approximately 27,450 acres in New Mexico and Arizona, containing archeological ruins of great scientific importance, has been approved by the Department for establishment as Puerco National Monument.
The acquisition of certain necessary lands by local people for donation to the Federal Government has been undertaken.
2. Columbia Gorge Recreational Area, Oreg.
3. Flathead National Park Area, Mont.
4. Fort Peck Recreational Area, Mont.
5. Gila National Park Area, N. Mex.
6. Glacial Grooves National Monument, Ohio.
7. Grand Coulee Recreational Area, Wash.
8. Grasslands National Monument, S. Dak.-Nebr.
9. Hart Mountain National Monument, Oreg.
10. Luquillo National Park, Puerto Rico.
11. Newberry Crater National Monument, Oreg.
12. Northern Cascades National Park Area, Wash.
13. Superior National Park, Minn.
14. Palmyra Island National Monument, Territory of Hawaii.
15. Palm Canyon National Monument, Calif.
16. Porcupine Mountains National Park, Mich.
17. Roosevelt Badlands National Monument, N. Dak.
18. San Juan National Park Area, Colo.
19. San Juan Islands National Monument, Wash.
20. San Juan National Monument, Puerto Rico.
21. Ship Island National Monument, Miss.
22. Waimea Canyon National Park, Territory of Hawaii.
23. Wind River National Park, Wyo.
24. Cumberland Gap National Historical Park, Tenn.-Ky.
Va.
The fiscal year closed with 294 C. C. C. camps operating under technical supervision of the Service, compared with 418 on July 1, 1937.
Camps in operation at the close of the year included 78 on continental national parks and 216 on State, county, and metropolitan parks and recreation areas and recreational demonstration areas.
During the vear the Corps carried on a general program of conservation and recreational development involving construction of such facilities as roads, trails, dams, cabins, and simple park structures, water and sanitary systems, for both extended and day use of areas.
Of the 5,000 enrollees authorized by the Civilian Conservation Corps Act of June 28, 1937, for projects in the Territories and insular possessions, 1,200 were allotted to the Department of the Interior.
In the Territory of Hawaii, 800 men are enrolled in the Corps, 200 of whom are at work in Hawaii National Park and 600 on lands of the Territorial government.
Wild sheep, goats, and boar, which destroyed vegetation and prevented natural regeneration were materially reduced in number, and important areas were fenced and planted.
At the end of the year, 10,725,000 trees had been planted on 21,450 acres since the program was started.
In the Virgin Islands, 300 enrollees were authorized for St. Thomas and 100 for St. Croix.
Old roads were widened, realined, and put in condition, and general conservation work was performed.
For the first time in the history of the C. C. C. enrollees were transported from the States to a Territorial possession.
Two hundred men selected from Oregon and Washington were organized for 1938 summer work in a camp established in Mount McKinley National Park, Alaska.
Development of 46 recreational demonstration projects on 62 areas in 24 States was continued with both E. R. A. and C. C. C. labor emploved.
Forty-eight of sixty-four organized camps under construction on 34 of these areas were scheduled to be completed and in use for the summer of 1938.
Thirty-one of these were finished before the end of the fiscal year.
These facilities, which received 100,000 camper-days use and provided recreation for 1,000,000 dayuse visitors in 1937, include adequate systems of control roads, water and sanitary systems, central administration and service groups, facilities for centralized feeding, decentralized camping, and such activities as swimming, boating, hiking, and picnicking.
General conservation treatment is also applied on each area, and in some instances certain portions are set aside as wildlife refuges.
The recreational demonstration area program also includes the laving out of 13 wayside parks contiguous to main highways in Virginia and South Carolina for the use of travelers.
These are being equipped with picnic tables and benches, water, and sanitary facilities.
Developments under this program have been carried on by 8,000 relief workers and 2,300 C. C. C. enrollees.
A total of 352,874 acres of land have been acquired for this purpose, title to 253,361 acres of which was cleared in the 1938 fiscal year.
E. R. A. Federal and non-Federal projects in operation by the Service totaled 65 at the close of the fiscal year, compared with 84 at the end of the 1937 fiscal year.
Curtailment of funds in the period July 1 to December 31, 1937, necessitated termination of operations on 34 non-Federal projects, and on June 30, 1938, only four non-Federal E. R. A. projects remained under Service supervision.
The Service received funds from the Emergency Relief Appropriation Act of 1937, and the Emergency Relief Supplementary Appropriation Act, approved March 2, 1938, for land acquisition and development and research projects in 9 national parks, 4 national military parks, 9 national monuments, 1 national historical park, 44 recreational demonstration areas, 2 parkways, 1 beach erosion control project, 20 State, 3 county, and 12 municipal park areas.
In addition, there were 7 nonconstruction projects in 3 States and the District of Columbia employing white-collar research workers.
These appropriations and projects gave employment to an average of 10,500 relief workers, of which 7,500 were local workers and 3,000 workers quartered in subsistence camps operated by the Service.
Relief workers were also employed by contractors on some of these Service projects.
A bill to promote travel in the United States through the United States Travel Bureau, H. R. 9212, failed to pass in the Seventyfifth Congress.
Passed by the Senate, the bill remained in the House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce at the hour of adjournment.
The Bureau continued to function on an emergency basis and extended its activities.
During the year the name was changed from Tourist to Travel Bureau.
Thirty-five hundred dollars donated by the American Express Co. for the work of the Bureau was accepted by the Department in July 1937.
During the year arrangements were completed in 43 States for the conduct of this study authorized under Public 770½, Seventy-fourth Congress, in cooperation with established State recreation and planning agencies.
Tentative final State reports were completed by Virginia, Illinois, Mississippi, Nevada, Louisiana, Tennessee, and Pennsylvania.
These reports, containing preliminary plans and recommendations for meeting the recreational needs of each State, were reviewed and concurred in by the Service as the basis for turther study and returned to the States with detailed suggestions for their completion.
Indiana also submitted its tentative final report, which is being studied.
The completed reports will constitute comprehensive plans to serve as a guide in coordinating all recreational areas and agencies as a complementing and supplementing recreation system for each State.
Later, regional and national studies will be based on these State plans.
Information on Federal lands and facilities available for recreation was received from other Federal agencies in response to this Department's requests.
During the year the Service has cooperated with the United States Corps of Engineers and State planning commissions and conservancy districts in planning proper recreational use of lakes and pools created by flood-control projects.
In addition to assisting in planning new parkway developments, the Service also has given advice to several States on interstate compacts relating to the establishment, development, and operation of interstate parks and parkways.
Three publications bearing on State and local park development work were issued by the Service in the 1938 fiscal year.
Park and Recreation Structures discusses and pictures by drawings and photographs structural undertakings appropriate to natural park and recreational area environments.
This 600-page publication was issued in three parts, subtitled "Administration and Basic Service Facilities," "Recreational and Cultural Facilities," and "Overnight and Organized Camp Facilities."
The 1937 Yearbook—Park and Recreation Progress—contains a report on the progress of State cooperative work in park and recreational development, and articles on various allied subjects.
Municipal and County Parks in the United States, 1935, was based upon an original study made by the Service in cooperation with the National Recreation Association.
At the close of the fiscal year, the National Park Service was responsible for the maintenance and operation of 21,122,615 square feet of floor space in the District of Columbia, of which 18,303,567 square feet was in 46 Government-owned buildings, and 2,819,048 square feet in 64 privately owned buildings.
Similar service was rendered in 11 Government-owned office buildings, having a total floor area of 1,267,561 square feet, located in 9 other cities.
Seven special structures are also maintained by the branch of the Service engaged in building maintenance.
The only noteworthy changes during the year were the acquisition of the Federal Trade Commission Building, transferred upon completion by the Treasury Department, effective March 1; and the demolition of Temporary Building F.
The White House continued to receive the most careful maintenance.
The act making appropriations for the Service authorized the expenditure of not to exceed $500,000 for major repairs and improvements.
Among the projects accomplished with this fund were the replacement of certain defective concrete flooring and the installation of new wiring in the Navy and Munitions Buildings; the replacement of a portion of the obsolete lighting fixtures in those buildings and in the building at 1300 E Street NW.
The service of the Central Heating Plant was extended to the Federal Trade Commission Building, the new Police Court Building in Judiciary Square, the National Gallery of Art, the new building of the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the Wilkins Building, and the building at 1510 H Street NW.
The addition of these buildings increased the potential connected load by 141,500 pounds of steam per hour.
Owing to the mild winter, only 95,472 tons of coal were consumed at the plant, the total steam generated being 2,056,099,000 pounds.
The operation of the guard school was continued, 20 hours of instruction being given each student.
Also, a course of instruction was instituted for elevator conductors, comprising five 1-hour lectures and demonstrations.
At the close of the fiscal year, space aggregating 14,354,352 net square feet was occupied by Government agencies in 110 Governmentowned buildings in the District of Columbia, housing 79,199 emplovees, under authorization from the National Park Service, the Service being responsible for allocation and proper utilization of space in nearly all of the Federal buildings in the District.
Also, a total of 3,245,775 net square feet of space in 118 privately owned buildings, housing 27,657 employees, was being leased at an annual rental of $2,906,654.37, by or with the approval of the National Park Service, making a total of 17,600,127 square feet of space occupied by 106,858 employees in 228 buildings.
Forty changes in space allocations in Government buildings were approved, and 507 moves were accomplished.
The dual function of the National Park Service as specified by law—that of conserving the intricate and involved inter-relationship of all the organisms that combine to make up the natural features of a national park and at the same time permitting man to come into and enjoy that park—presents one of the most complex biological problems known.
The conflict between complete preservation and wise use is always present, and to solve the problem in a manner that will give the best future results requires an unusual degree of sound judgment, administrative ability, and technical skill.
Since 1933, a prodigious amount of new work has come to the Service through consolidation of Federal park supervision, emergency activities, and natural growth.
As a result of a shortage of positions in technical lines in the industrial world, the Service fortunately was able to employ a number of excellently trained specialists of high ideals.
As the amount of emergency funds available to the Service has decreased, the Service has been forced to dispense with the services of many of these men and women and it has not been possible to secure a commensurate number of civil-service positions to carry on the work as effectively as desired.
One of the most serious problems facing the Service today, therefore, is the necessity of obtaining an adequate basic permanent personnel in all administrative, protective, and technical lines to carry on the administration, protection, maintenance, and improvement of the areas in the Federal park system in such a manner as to provide the greatest possible degree of use and enjoyment for the people, while preserving the areas for coming generations.
Not only should the personnel of long-established parks and monuments be increased to meet the needs incident to expanded popular use, but permanent personnel should replace emergency personnel in the administration and developing of the military and historical areas more newly assigned to Service supervision.
Unless the situation is taken care of in the near future, it may become acute, as already indicated by the contraction of the emergency personnel organizations begun 2 years ago.
HoME-MAKING opportunities created by the Bureau of Reclamation through its construction were eagerly sought during the 1938 fiscal year as migration westward into the arid and semiarid region continued from other areas, particularly the Great Plains.
Comparatively few farmsteads were made available, but those which were ready attracted great attention.
The construction program went forward rapidly with promise of new lands in larger amounts within 2 years.
Meanwhile, large numbers of migrants in the West, seeking homes but forced to subsist on temporary employment here and there in harvests, are presenting an increasingly serious problem.
Projects now being constructed by the Bureau eventually will add approximately 2,500,000 acres to the cultivated area of the arid and semiarid States, but this work constitutes a long-term program.
When completed, these new projects will make available more than 31.000 farmsteads, but, in the aggregate, this number, even if immediately available, would not be sufficient to take care of more than a part of the homeless farm families now in the West.
Gratifying results were obtained on the new land which has been settled in the last few years, in part by drought refugees.
For 69 farm units made available to homestead entry on the Tule Lake division of the Klamath project on September 9, 1937, more than 3,300 persons applied informally and a total of 1,280 formal applications were filed for consideration.
On the new Owyhee project almost 75,225 acres were irrigated principally in the Mitchell Butte and Dead Ox Flat divisions.
Much of this is land recently placed in cultivation.
Settlement and land development are keeping pace with the availability of water on the new lands.
The demand to purchase private land and to file on homesteads continues very high.
The 1937 crop value per acre of the lands in cultivation was $31.25.
Settlement and development of the Riverton project continued to show good progress.
Crops produced in 1937 were the best so far.
At the beginning of 1938 there was an increase of 5 percent in the number of settlers and in the area in cultivation.
At the close of the fiscal year the promise was for a better than average yield.
Demand for new land on the project was insistent by well-qualified home seekers.
The morale of the settlers continues excellent.
Virtually all available lands have been taken since 1934 on the Vale project, where now 410 settlers are established.
Diversified crops are produced on most farms, but sugar beets are rising in importance on the projeet.
The crop results in 1937 were very good.