There can be no question about the advances we have made upon the conservation front.
While other nations have to struggle to obtain necessary supplies, our problem is how best to utilize and at the same time to safeguard the rich resources with which we are blessed.
At this moment the greatest actual or potential danger with which we are faced are heedless attempts to break through our conservation laws and policies for the purpose of making quick war profits.
Evidence of an inclination to raid our resources, to be sure, exists more in the form of mutterings than in specific movements.
But if experience is any guide, we can expect open efforts more or less thinly disguised as patriotic enterprises.
As you know, the misuse of our resources in the World War was devastating.
We have not yet fully recovered from the damage wrought at that time.
Today logs can still be seen lying in the Ölympic National Park that were cut in a frenzy of anticipated use more than 20 years ago.
They never were used, but a profit was extracted notwithstanding.
Only lately have the years, at long last, obliterated the scars of reckless wartime grazing on national-park ranges which never were capable of supporting the great numbers of livestock that were turned loose upon them.
Other examples could be cited at length, all adding up to the fact that another "break-through" of the conservation front would cause perhaps irreparable damage.
This review of the accompanying detailed annual report of the bureaus and agencies of the Department of the Interior reveals clearly that the last fiscal year has produced tangible results in the field of conservation.
The accounts of the various bureaus of the Department have a single theme—their achievements in striving for a wise use of our natural resources.
Owing to the work that we have accomplished during the last 6 years, our country is in a much stronger position to withstand crises, particularly those of an international nature.
In the matter of timber, a system of sustained-yield production has been established within the forests of the publie lands, particularly the great timber reservoir of the Oregon and California revested land grants.
Our people have become vastly more aware of the necessity for intelligent use of our petroleum reserves.
The public ranges of the West are making an excellent comeback through the administration of the Taylor Grazing Act.
Effective protection measures have been undertaken upon the vast areas of Indian lands.
Strenuous efforts have been made to strengthen the economies of our territorial and island possessions.
Among the outstanding accomplishments recorded during the fiscal year was the discovery and development of the supply of potash on the public lands.
Because of this, our dependence upon foreign supplies of potash was materially lessened and the cost of fertilizer reduced.
Never before has the Bureau of Reclamation stored up such a vast amount of water for the arid sections.
Within 120 days of its completion, the Bureau's Bartlett Dam offset a serious water shortage in Arizona.
Transmission lines of the Bonneville project, already under construction, as well as the lines for which plans were completed during the year, will make Columbia River power available to many, of the population centers of Oregon and Washington, as well as to large rural areas.
Particularly notable was the work of the Bureau of Reclamation, which was faced with a growing and pressing demand for more irrigation in the West.
Despite the steady and swift progress being made by the Bureau of Reclamation in the largest construction program of its 37 years of existence, the demand for the Bureau's self-liquidating irrigation projects outran the capacity to supply them.
Even though water storage was at an all-time peak, the supply was inadequate to meet the demand.
In water storage, a fivefold increase within 6 years was recorded during the year.
No sooner were storage and diversion dams completed than they were called upon for service.
New lands opened for farm settlement on the Owyhee project in Oregon and Idaho were quickly taken up during the year.
On the last area opened for homestead entry, four times as many applications were received as there were farm units available.
Inquiries from other farm seekers are still coming in.
The record with respect to the hydroelectric power produced as an important byproduct of reclamation, was equally impressive.
Installation of the seventh great generator at Boulder Dam made this power plant the largest in operation in the world, with a capacity of 860,000 horsepower.
The gross income earned by Boulder Dam during the year totaled $4,321,000.
On June 1, 1939, the city of Los Angeles began paying at its contract rate for energy it received from Boulder.
For power used during that month, the last of the fiscal year, the city alone paid $157,105.
A milestone in the steady progress of the Bureau was passed with the enactment of the Reclamation Project Act of 1939.
This law, perhaps the most important in the field since the original Reclamation Act of June 17, 1902, will make it possible to adjust many difficulties of the water users, to draft new contracts gearing repayments to the ability of the farmers to pay, to reclassify lands from time to time, and to accomplish other needed reforms.
The Congress also heeded the Bureau's pleas for a more comprehensive investigation program, and appropriated $900,000 for studies of water resources and proposed developments.
Activities of the Bureau broadened on all fronts.
At the end of the year, preparations were under way, with the cooperation of the Farm Security Administration, to assist in placing needy but qualified home seekers on Federal Reclamation Projects.
An opportunity for former residents of the Dust Bowl to settle on reclamation developments was offered, and a number of such families was given a new start.
In Arizona, the Bureau was able to extend badly needed help in an emergency when its Parker Dam power was made available during a critical power shortage caused by drought.
In the Northwest, the Bureau joined with the Bureau of Fisheries to institute a major program for the control of migratory fish at Grand Coulee Dam, by establishing new spawning grounds, thus making possible the preservation of the fish.
Construction on Bureau projects forged ahead.
At the close of the year, work was in progress on 30 projects in 12 States.
Work was completed on eight dams.
At Grand Coulee Dam, the second major contract was 38 percent completed at the end of the year.
Construction work was started on the Shasta Dam and power plant on the Sacramento River, about 9 miles north of Redding, Calif.
This newest of the larger dams will be 3,500 feet in over-all length and will have an ultimate installed capacity of 375,000 kilovoltamperes.
The project will alleviate critical water shortage in three important agricultural areas in the State.
In size and importance, the Central Valley enterprise is without precedent among the remedial projects undertaken by the Bureau.
Progress was made on the All-American Canal system, the largest irrigation ditch in the Western Hemisphere.
The 80-mile canal from the Imperial Dam to the West Main Canal in the Imperial Valley was practically completed at the end of the fiscal year, except for certain structural work.
The first 43-mile section of the Coachella Canal, a branch of the All-American Canal to the Coachella Valley, was 55 percent finished.
In Colorado, work was put under way on the Colorado-Big Thompson project, which will provide a supplemental water supply for 615,000 acres of land now under cultivation east of the Rocky Mountains.
Other important dams under construction included Marshall Ford in Texas, Vallecito in Colorado, Grassy Lake in Idaho, Boca in Nevada and California, Seminoe in Wyoming, Fresno in Montana, Deer Creek in Utah, and Roza in Washington.
Several of these were nearing completion with the installation of power-plant machinery and equipment in progress.
The year's work brought the accomplishments of the Bureau to an impressive total.
In its 37 years of existence, the Bureau has completed construction on 156 storage and diversion dams, 48 powerhouses, 2,812 buildings, 20,101.4 miles of canals, ditches, and drains, 81.8 miles of tunnels, 4,661.6 miles of telephone lines, 285.4 miles of dikes, 6,337 flumes, 20,597 culverts, 13,738 bridges, and 198,521 other irrigation structures.
Reservoirs of the Bureau now have a combined capacity of 47,121,170 acre-feet of water.
This complete "plant" last year made possible the production of agricultural crops valued at $113,463,000.
The Reclamation Fund is decreasing.
By the close of the 1941 fiscal vear it will be so depleted that the Bureau will be unable to carry on the construction of its projects.
Either the Reclamation Fund should be increased by an advance from the general fund of the Treasury, or certain of the more costly projects now being constructed should be financed by appropriations from the general funds of the Treasury, or in other ways.
Additional areas, significant for their historic or scenic value, were brought into the Federal park system during the year.
Five national monuments and three national historic sites were established, increasing the system to a total of 154 units.
As the result of these additions, and boundary adjustments, the areas administered by the Service were increased by 1,623.295 acres, to a total of 20,817,228 acres.
More than 16,250,000 persons visited the parks during the travel year ending September 30, 1938.
Many effective conservation steps were taken by the Service during the vear.
Intensive training of and additions to fire-prevention personnel.
Active support for the proposed Kings Canyon National Park in California came from all directions.
Legislation to establish the park was passed by the House during the first session of the Seventysixth Congress and was reported favorably by the Senate Committee on Public Lands and Surveys.
Meanwhile, pending the establishment of the park, negotiations were begun for the acquisition of various additional tracts to be made part of the park area.
The long fight to acquire the Carl Inn tract of giant sugar pines for addition to Yosemite National Park culminated successfully.
In the field of historic conservation, the year was notable for the acquisition of the Subtreasury building on the site of the old Federal Hall in New York City.
Fort Laramie National Monument, Wyo., was another noteworthy historic acquisition.
As an outpost of military protection during the pioneer period in the West, Fort Laramie was important in frontier history.
In the continued effort to make improved service available to the travelling public, many steps were taken, including new accommodations in several parks and monuments.
The historic American Buildings Survey was continued and the long-planned catalogue of drawings and photographs included in the permanent graphic records, was compiled and published during the year.
Public Works Administration funds made possible construction of many longneeded building projects, among them the restoration and development of the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal.
Construction work on the Blue Ridge and Natchez Parkways continued.
During the year the Service noted a steadily increasing demand for information circulars and printed pamphlets containing general information about park areas and services.
Extensive work was accomplished under the park C. C. C. program.
The fiscal year closed with 311 C. C. C. Camps operating under the supervision of the Service, compared with 294 the year before.
This work followed a general program of conservation and recreation development.
This included construction of minor roads, trails, dams, cabins, and other park structures, as well as water and sanitary systems.
At the close of the fiscal year the activities of the Service's branch of buildings management were transferred to the Federal Works Agency in accordance with Reorganization Plan No. 1.
Between the time that the functions of building management were first placed under the Department of the Interior in 1933 and the transfer, the branch had grown in size and had greatly extended its scope.
In 1933 the unit operated 45 buildings and 5 memorials in Washington, D. C. At the time of the transfer it was the largest organization of its kind in any one city, operating 128 buildings and 7 memorials and monuments in the National Capital.
Two major problems face the Service in the years immediately to come.
One is to round out the Federal park system by the inclusion of those areas whose highest value is that of conservation or recreation.
The other problem is that of personnel.
There is a basic need for trained, permanent employees to operate the system.
The resources placed under the protection of the National Park Service are bound to suffer if an adequate protective and administrative force is not provided.
Replacement of the remaining temporary personnel by permanent Civil Service employees offers the only completely satisfactory solution.
The Petroleum Conservation Division continued its vigorous administration of the Connally "Hot Oil" Act.
Federal Tender Board No. 1, operating in the east Texas area, reviewed close to 5,000 applications for tenders during the year.
The Division reported that a total of 903 new wells was completed during the fiscal year in the east Texas area, where 25,858 producing oil wells were already in existence.
Eight refineries were operating on Federal tenders in the east Texas field at the beginning of the fiscal year.
Sixteen natural gasoline plants connected to 24,168 wells on June 30, 1939, reported operations to Federal Tender Board No. 1.
Several investigations were carried forward during the year outside of the east Texas area.
One examination surveyed the oil proration procedure in Arkansas, Kansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Texas to determine how such procedure affects administration of the Connally Act.
Operating conditions in several areas were scrutinized.
Staff members of the Division testified before legislative committees in California and Illinois in connection with proposed petroleum conservation legislation.
It is to be hoped that cooperative relationships can be established with those States and others to further the conservation and protection of our great natural resource of petroleum.
The fifth vear of administration of Federal range grazing districts found the conservation activities of the Division of Grazing far advanced.
While the first work of the division, following its establishment in 1934, was devoted to organization, the last year witnessed definite accomplishments along progressive conservation lines.
The collection of data on periods of grazing use, movements of stock from range to range, and the qualifications of present and prospective uses, was improved.
Agreements and cooperative arrangements with States and Federal agencies were continued.
A detailed system for more efficient management of Federal Iands was put into effect.
A 2-year study of the essential functions of the Division resulted in a new organization set-up.
During the year, grazing licenses and permits were issued to 19,342 stockmen, owning 11,032,642 head of livestock in 50 grazing districts.
In addition, under the cooperative Grazing Association plan in Montana, 28 grazing associations managed approximately 240,000 head of livestock on lands of all ownerships.
An increase from 45 to 90 C. C. C. camps assigned to the Division enabled more extensive improvement work on the range than theretofore was possible.
Major activities of the C. C. C. units included development of water supplies, fence construction, building of stock trails and corrals, rodent control, truck trails, bridges, check dams, and the like.
The opening of truck and stock trails will greatly facilitate the movement of animals from winter to summer range, or to market.
Effective coordination of conservation activities on the ranges was brought about by the appointment on each advisory board of a wildlife representative.
This will enable a clearer understanding between the stockmen and the State and national wildlife agencies in the matter of use and preservation of the natural resources on the range.
In addition to making possible vigorous enforcement of game laws within the grazing districts, it will also make easier the control of predatory animals and the redistribution of big game in the so-called critical big-game areas, where starvation has been the natural accompaniment of excessive concentration.
It is a pleasure to report that the Division collected a greater amount in fees than its regular appropriation.
Fee collections totaled $833,385, while the appropriation was $650,000.
It may be noted that Federal range regulation generally, including the assessment of nominal fees for use of the range, has met with support from virtually all of the 20,000 licensees engaged in the livestock industry.
Only a small isolated group of 40 individuals in one of the 53 Federal grazing districts has disputed the Secretary's authority to collect fees for the issuance of temporary licenses.
Notwithstanding the fact that they had received the benefit of range improvements made possible through the collection of fees from other licensees, these persons obtained an injunction from the State court, restraining the regional grazier from interfering with their free use of the range.
Appeal from this injunction was taken to the Nevada Supreme Čourt by the regional grazier.
As a further means of securing fair play for the 20,000 other licensees who have cooperated with the Division, the Attorney General, pursuant to my recommendation, directed the United States Attorney to institute suits in the Federal Court for the collection of all delinquent fees from this group, which constituted only a small percentage of all of the users of the range in this particular grazing district.
To the Office of Indian Affairs, the year brought the maturing of its program, a great quantitative increase in Indian participation in their own affairs and the consolidation of efforts to assure the future of the Indians.
Many of the most important results were, of course, in the field of intangibles.
Indian lands have ceased to dwindle; they are, in fact, slowly increasing.
Indian natural resources have ceased to disappear through wasteful over-use; instead, they are coming back.
Indians have ceased to be inactive while white men do their work; rather, more than half of the regular employees are Indians.
The Indian death rate is no longer menacing the survival of the race; in fact, the yearly increase of Indians is more than that of other groups.
Indians are no more the solitary element in the population of the country existing in a totally unorganized status; instead, political and industrial self-government is being achieved by an overwhelming preponderance of the tribes.
The process of assuring self-government to the Indians continued to make progress, although at a somewhat slower pace.
A total of 12 tribes adopted constitutions and bylaws and 8 became incorporated.
Added to the tribes which previously had adopted constitutions, this gaye a total of 93 tribes under constitution and bylaws and 64 under charters of incorporation.
A large number of physical improvements were brought about by the Indian Service during the year.
With the aid of Public Works Administration funds, 37 school buildings were erected and 5 hospitals remodeled.
A total of 43 cottages was built and 7 infirmaries and dispensaries added.
The total of new structures was 267.
The various technical Government agencies continued to supply specialized service to the Indians.
These included the Social Security Board, the Soil Conservation Service, the Civilian Conservation Corps, the Federal Security Agency, the Works Progress Administration, the National Youth Administration, the Public Works Administration, the Public Health Service, the Smithsonian Institution, and the Bureau of American Ethnology.
Bureau of Reclamation, the General Land Office, the Division of Grazing.
The activities of these agencies were coordinated with the program of the Indian Service for the general welfare of Indians.
A great human saga was written in the Indian country and in Indian life as the result of these efforts.
Notable progress was made in the fields of agriculture, conservation and social and economic welfare.
Rehabilitation in its broadest sense made a steady advance during the vear.
A just appraisal of the results in the field indicates substantial and heartening progress by the various divisions whose activities have been characterized by a steadily increasing cooperation between government representatives and the Indian people.
Of special importance was the work of the extension personnel, who perhaps more than other Service representatives, are in constant touch with the Indians.
Credit was supplied for various types of agricultural and industrial enterprises.
Additional lands, sorely needed, were purchased by many groups.
Irrigation projects enabled desert areas to be put into useful production.
Agricultural education was emphasized in the Indian schools and rehabilitation grants were made for housing, farm buildings and self-help enterprises.
Excellent progress was reported in the improvement of Indian health as a result of the work of the Indian medical service.
The Indian Service pushed forward through the year its efforts to explain and interpret the new policies which have been set in motion.
The very essence of a new day for Indians is a complete understanding of Indian and non-Indian problems as a basis for intelligent self-government.
On probably no subject in the history of the United States has there persisted a more dramatic and yet a more flagrant atmosphere of error than with respect to matters concerning the American Indian and his affairs.
From the heroic distortions of the James Fenimore Cooper school of fiction to the fantastic sensationalism of some modern movies; from the early exploitation by land-hungry Europeans to present day petty racketeering, the history of white-Indian relations has been a history of inaccuracy or ignorance, relieved only occasionally by rare and refreshing currents of factual illumination.
One of the important aims of present-day Indian administration has been to intensify, to amplify, and to spread the hitherto feeble light of fact.
Encouragingly, the public is beginning to learn that fact can be as interesting as fiction; that the unadorned truth about Indians and their affairs is more absorbing than misconception.
The Indian is no longer a vanishing race.
It is neither dying out nor is it rapidly merging into the white society.
Indians as Indians will apparently continue as a part of American life for a good many vears.The Indian population is still more than holding its own in numbers, both in the country as a whole and on most of the reservations.
The rate of increase is becoming accelerated.
Should the rate for the past quarter century continue for another 25 years, Indians in the United States will number well over 400,000.
While this is proportionately a very insignificant figure, it nevertheless presages a very serious pressure of Indian population upon existing reservation lands.
Already this pressure is being felt in the Navajo jurisdiction and in others where prospects of acquiring additional lands are not too hopeful.
The future of the Indian culture is brighter today than at any time since the advent of the white man.
Not only will it continue to give deep satisfaction to the Indians themselves, but, in its interaction with white culture, it will make fundamental contributions to general American civilization.
Through steady progress of the work undertaken at Bonneville, the opening of this region to sound and progressive development was brought closer during the year.
The harnessing of the vast power potentialities of the Columbia River will bring about far more significant benefits than the mere increase in the use of electricity in the home.
Abundant power at low rates will open the way to a sound use of the great resources of this region which at present lie untapped.
Additional activities in the Columbia River Basin, in accordance with the principles of progressive conservation, can provide new opportunities for thousands of marginal farmers and artisans who are looking for a chance to earn a livelihood in the traditional American way.
Essential to the opening of this region is the construction of necessary power lines.
Fortunately, the year saw the beginning of construction of the transmission network which will make Bonneville power a tractable, available force.
The lines under construction at the close of the fiscal year, together with extensions for which plans were completed, will make Columbia River power available to most of the population centers of Oregon and Washington.
The construction of the "backbone" line from the dam to the major substation at Vancouver was 65 percent completed at the close of the year.
From this line, power will be dispatched to communities in western Oregon and Washington.
The other major line, on which construction was started, is designed to serve Portland, Oregon City, Salem, Eugene, and the Willamette Valley.
Plans and specifications were completed for the circuit to connect Bonneville with Grand Coulee Dam.
The linking of these two projects will permit an interchange of approximately 100,000 kilowatts of energy over a single circuit.
Construction of the initial distribution network of the Bonneville system is being hastened to meet requests for power which have been received from public power districts, municipalities, irrigation systems, rural cooperative associations, and private utility companies.
Delivery of energy is awaiting the completion of necessary construction schedules, as the present lines in the area are either heavily loaded or inadequate to carry required quantities of power from the dam site.
At the direction of the Congress public and cooperative purchasers will be accorded preference in the sale of energy.
The death of J. D. Ross, first Administrator of the project, on March 14, 1939, created a major problem in the selection of a successor.
Pending an appointment of a permanent Administrator, Frank A. Banks, Construction Engineer of the Bureau of Reclamation, in charge of the erection of Grand Coulee Dam, was made Acting Administrator.
The Office of the Director of Forests reported progress with a pumber of fundamental conservation problems during the fiscal year.
These included the organization of the Oregon and California Revested and Reconveved Grant Lands Administration; the surveying of forest resources; the preparation of a report covering the administrative organization of forestry within the Department; the direction and control of departmental forestry business; the administrative direction of Indian forest and range lands, and the rendering of technical advisory service to the Department on forestry matters.
Including the land in the Territory of Alaska, the Department of the Interior is responsible for the management of 600,000,000 acres of public lands.
This represents approximately three-fourths of all the land now in Federal ownership and embraces a wide range of timber resources, including the productive forests of the O. and C. lands, the timber stands on Indian reservations, and the forests and wood-lands of the unappropriated and unreserved public domain.
During the vear, major steps were taken to establish a plan of sustained-yield forest management on the O. and C. lands under the Act of August 28, 1937.
Regulations providing for the sale of the timber under good forestry principles were placed in effect, and classification of the lands was started.
The entire business setup of the administration was brought under direct control, and a substantial volume of timber was advertised and sold.
Although the funds made available for the protection of the interior forests of Alaska were inadequate to perform a complete job, a foundation was laid for future effective protection and administration, Considerable progress was made possible by cooperation with the C. C. C. and other Federal and private organizations in Alaska.
At the end of the fiscal vear the Division of Territories and Island Possessions, under the Reorganization Act, was making plans for taking over the Bureau of Insular Affairs from the War Department.
The Division was also busy with the advance arrangements for the United States Antarctic Service, which is sending an expedition to the Antarctic regions under Admiral Byrd.
In the realm of its Pacific interests, a contract was executed between the Department and the Pan American Airways, whereby areas on Canton Island were leased to the Airways company in connection with its commercial trans-Pacific service.
During the year continuous transportation service was rendered by the Alaska Railroad between Seward and Fairbanks.
Although the railroad was operating at a deficit, the revenues for both freight and passenger service showed a considerable increase.
Rail line passengers numbered 27,436 with revenues of $259,452.
Freight amounted to 157,904 tons.
A new hotel, constructed with P. W. A. funds, was put in operation at the entrance to Mount MeKinley National Park.
The sugar business, basic industry of the island of St. Croix, suffered another serious set-back as the result of a drought which followed a severe water shortage in previous years.
Both the sugar and cattle business suffered heavy losses.
St. Thomas, on the other hand, continued to show improvement because of substantial increases in the shipping business and tourist trade.
Efforts made to secure a measure of relief for the sugar farmers through the repeal of the $6 per ton sugar export tax and the granting of benefit payments to sugar growers failed.
Approximately 750 persons in St. Thomas were engaged in the production of goods sold through the Virgin Island Cooperatives.
Sales of the three units totaled $60,752 during the year.
Extensive activities were reported by the Virgin Islands Co.
Its operations included the production of sugarcane and the manufacture of raw sugar; the manufacture and sale of rum, distillates and alcohol; the management of a poultry farm, and the operation of a rock-crushing establishment.
It also rented tractors and farm equipment to the farmers of St. Croix, performed general repair work and sold cattle and milk products.
In its activities the company has employed directly a thousand persons and brought extensive improvements in pay, housing, sanitation, and general social conditions to the workers of the islands.
The finances of the insular government made a very satisfactory showing during the year.
The tourist business showed an increase.
The year was marked by tangible military recognition of the strategic importance of Puerto Rico in the defense of the Panama Canal, the South Atlantic and Gulf States, and trade routes of the Carribean.
The island was made a separate military department and the establishment of naval and military air bases and a submarine base was authorized.
The dredging of San Juan harbor was virtually completed.
This will provide a safe and convenient anchorage for heavy warcraft.
A large graving dock of the most modern type, which will be at the disposition of the Navy as well as of commercial vessels, also was under construction at San Juan.
Encouraging progress was made by the Puerto Rico Reconstruction Administration during the year, and a number of programs were put under way in cooperation with other agencies of the Federal Government.
The United States Forestry Service and the Insular Forestry Service joined with the P. R. R. A. Forestry Division in pushing forward a general forestry program.
The P. R. R. A. Rural Electrification program was coordinated with the efforts of the insular government to develop the island's natural resources.
The Bureau of Animal Husbandry and the insular government cooperated in the P. R. R. A. cattle tick eradication program.
Roads, waterworks, public buildings, and other works were projected by the P. R. R. A. after deliberation with insular and municipal officials.
As an outgrowth of a series of conferences sponsored by the P. R. R. A. and attended by representatives of various insular and Government agencies a program of coordinated activities in connection with agricultural development was worked out, which shows promise of excellent results.
It calls for the expansion of 4-H Club work, soil conservation, commercial crops, livestock and poultry farming.
It provides for better farm management and home activities.
Among its objectives is the improvement of animal husbandry.
It also provides for the establishment of small plots upon which subsistence crops can be grown by needy and idle persons.
A large number of far-reaching experiments to bolster the agriculture of the island were undertaken.
Extensive activities were reported by the various cooperatives which are operating under the P. R. R. A. program.
The Lafayette sugar cooperative, during its crop season, produced a total of 225,843 bags.
The organization of the Los Canos sugar cooperative was completed during the year and improvements started.
Other cooperative groups are successfully reviving old industries as well as stimulating new ones.
The growing of cotton in Puerto Rico came to a halt some time ago, but, with the reestablishment of mill and marketing facilities, the island is growing more cotton than ever before.
Although the marketing of Puerto Rican wild oranges in the United States was stopped by an embargo because of the fruit fly, during the fiscal year a cooperative began to market these oranges in the form of canned juice.
In an effort to achieve a more stable economy for Puerto Rican farmers, efforts are being developed to find new uses for their products.
The Lafayette sugar cooperative is attempting to increase the growing of sugar cane for the extraction of byproducts, such as butyl alcohol.
For the manufacturing of this product, a $500,000 plant has been built at Lafayette in which alcohol will be extracted from sugarcane residue by a fermentation process developed in Puerto Rico.
As the marketing of solvents increases, it is planned to step up the production of the plant.
A number of solvents, which may be obtained from sugarcane residue, namely acetone and glycerine, are valuable war materials.
In the field of rural rehabilitation the P. R. R. A. achieved worthwhile accomplishments during the fiscal year.
Land utilization was carried forward and the working knowledge of resettlement farmers improved in the direction of more modern agricultural practices.
Good seed was provided, as well as swine and poultry.
In 8 large rural resettlement projects 2,598 houses were built and a total of 541 were under construction at the end of the year.
In the general forestry program for Puerto Rico one of the most promising rehabilitation activities was the establishment of forest homesteads.
The system is aimed at making each forest unit selfsupporting and at providing permanent homes and living for several thousand families.
The settled forest homesteads at the end of the year took care of 700 farmers on 2,148 acres of forest land.
However, it is apparent that Puerto Rico faces a long and difficult pull.
There is evidence on every hand of a splendid beginning in reconstruction and rehabilitation.
There are more signs of success and happiness and fewer signs of destitution.
It must be remembered that centuries went into the making of the conditions which the P. R. R. A. is attempting to rectify.
When the situation is examined realistically it is apparent that it will take many more years to put the island back on its feet economically.
The immediate need is serious.
Thousands have been deprived of employment through the establishment of quotas in the sugar industry.
The application of the Fair Labor Standards Act to Puerto Rico disrupted its industries, notably needlework.
The reexamination of this legislation, as it affects the economy of Puerto Rico, might go a long way toward aiding the island in the solution of its own economic problems.
Funđamentally, the basie problem of Puerto Rico is that of finding a way to make possible an increased income to support its people on the basis of their American citizenship.
It would be helpful if there could be a full utilization of its tropical agricultural and industrial resources in such a manner as to supplement and complement, rather than to compete with agriculture and industry on the mainland.
Only in part can this be accomplished by a program of relief spending.
Something more fundamental would be the coordination of an agricultural and industrial development and provision of proper credit facilities for Puerto Rico's farmers and tradesmen.
If capital can be made available to these deserving Puerto Rican farmers and businessmen for the next few years, it is reasonable to believe that Puerto Rico's economy will reach a more stable level.
No solution of the island's economie difficulties, however, will avail that does not take into account its startling overpopulation.
The end of a 70-year association as a member of the Department of the Interior marked the close of the fiscal year 1939 for the Office of Education.
At the beginning of the new fiscal year of 1940 the Office was transferred to the newly created Federal Security Agency under the Reorganization Plan.
During the year the Office of Education undertook many comprehensive studies and cooperative arrangements for the promotion of educational activities.
Study discussion outlines were provided, radio educational programs were presented, and study guidance and allied activities were carried on.
The radio project went into its fifth year of demonstration and service with a growing interest in radio education by schools and colleges, civic groups and mass audiences in general.
A large number of studies of a variety of educational problems was carried forward by the Office during the year.
Publication of reports and studies by the Office continued.
A total of 61 new publications was delivered from the Government Printing Office during the year, and 69 new manuscripts were completed and sent to the Printing Óffice.
Approximately 100,000 copies of School Life, the journal of the Office, were distributed to libraries and universities as well as to college and school administrators, teachers, and other citizens.
During the year the Office continued its educational work in the C. C. C. camps.
A total of 91.5 percent of all enrollees attended organized classes.
Thirty-seven percent of all C. C. C. enrollees participated in academic classes, and 47 percent attended vocational classes.
Job-training instruction was taken by 65 percent of the corps members, and classes in first aid, safety, health, and related subjects were attended by 59 percent.
A total of 8,445 youths who entered the corps illiterate were taught to read and write during the vear.
Approximately 5,000 enrollees completed the elementary grades and received eighth-grade diplomas, while 1,049 qualified for high-school diplomas.
Ninety-six were given college degrees.
During the fiscal year five agencies of the Department continued to utilize C. C. C. camps that were assigned to various types of conservation projects throughout the country.
These agencies were the General Land Office, the Office of Indian Affairs, the Bureau of Reclamation, the National Park Service, and the Division of Grazing.
In addition to its C. C. C. work to control Federal coal-depositoutcrop fires in Wyoming with which it has been occupied since 1933, the General Land Office assumed technical supervision of four new camps established on the O. and C. lands in Oregon.
These camps were engaged in general forest conservation work, assisting the O. and C. Administration to administer the lands on the sustained-yield basis.
A total of 27 miles of truck trails was constructed during the year and the camps worked on 72 forest fires which covered a total of 39,000 acres.
One lookout tower was constructed and a total of 27 miles of forest-protection telephone line was strung, in addition to which 40 miles of line were maintained and improved.
Some 400,000 trees were planted on 500 acres of cut-over land.
C. C. C. projects were carried forward on 71 Indian reservations.
The construction of basic structures for the conservation of land and water and the preservation of forest stands and forage cover was continued.
A number of dams were erected to supply water for range stock and also for subsistence gardens.
Land heretofore open and exposed to trespass was protected by new and rebuilt fences.
During the year 500 springs, small reservoirs and well-development jobs were completed.
One hundred and fifteen impounding and large diversion dams were erected; 950 miles of fence were installed; 900 miles of truck and horse trails were put in, and insect- and treepest control was established over 100,000 acres.
On reclamation projects, C. C. C. camps continued their work of rehabilitation by the development of supplemental water supplies, the construction of new projects and the establishment of recreational facilities at irrigation reservoirs.
Excellent progress was reported in the replacement of deteriorated water-control structures, in the lining of porous sections of canals and in the checking of canal erosion.
The better physical condition of reclamation projects resulting from these permanent improvements was reflected in increased savings of irrigation water.
The National Park Service continued its cooperation with the States and directed C. C. C. projects for the protection, conservation and development of park and recreational areas in all parts of the country.
During the year operations were carried on by an average of 54,410 enrollees in 311 camps, including 91 in continental national parks and 220 in State, county, and metropolitan parks and areas.
The Department was assigned 1,600 corps members for projects in the Territories and insular possessions, and their operations covered a wide range of permanent improvements and rehabilitation work.
A record of accomplishment was marked up in the spring of 1939 by camps assigned to the grazing service for conservation projects on the Nation's public range lands.
The work included spring developments, wells for water storage, rodent control, and construction of range fences, cattle guards, stock driveways, and the like.
Under the Division of Grazing the C. C.C. has constructed projects far beyond the scope or resources of any individual or group and consequently has made possible steady improvement of the range.
This program has proven of inestimable value to livestock owners and doubtless has gone a long way to assist in the stabilization of the industry.
Effective measures to guard the valuable resources on the public domain against unwise use resulted from the work of the General Land Office during the fiscal year.
Efficient administration of the conservation program was insured through the establishment within the Office of a branch of planning, use, and protection.
This branch will handle range problems, including the analysis and classification of the public lands.
In spite of its increased responsibilities, the activities of the General Land Office were conducted at a profit.
The total receipts during the fiscal year amounted to $7,756,288.
This was nearly four times the amount of expenditures for its operation.
The discovéry and development of a supply of potash on the public lands was an outstanding accomplishment of the conservation work of the General Land Office during the year.
The domestic potash industry is now drawing heavily on these deposits.
This essential plant food can now be produced without dependence upon foreign sources of supply.
Another result of this development has been to bring down the price of fertilizers.
Important steps were taken by the General Land Office during the year for the protection of forest resources on 2,500,000 acres of public lands.
This work was carried forward by the Land Office in cooperation with the office of the Director of Forests.
Under this program an adequate supply of timber will be provided to insure continued operation of the lumbering industry upon which many communities in Oregon depend.
The conservation of the forage and water supply facilities on approximately 50.000.000 acres of public domain outside of Federal grazing districts was advanced through the issuance of limited grazing leases.
A new range improvement program was inaugurated in some areas.
The Geological Survey completed its sixtieth year with notable achievements and discoveries.
Among the more unusual investigations was one of geologic factors that might have a bearing on the prevalence of tuberculosis in certain areas.
A new mineral, shortite, was discovered in Wyoming and its nature and occurrence are being investigated.
A two volume lexicon of geologic names, long in preparation, was published during the year.
Topographic surveys, Federal and cooperative, covered more than 27,000 square miles in 45 States and in Puerto Rico.
A feature of the work was the increased use of stereophotogrammetric equipment, by which mapping is accomplished through the use of aerial photographs—a method in which the Geological Survey was a pioneer.
In the administration of the land classification and mineral leasing activities of the Geological Survey more than 9,500 reports were made regarding the mineral resources, water power, or storage possibilities of the public land, and the Government's ownership of reserves of coal, oil, gas, potash, phosphate, and other minerals.
Technical supervision was given to more than 8,500 properties containing oil and gas and to more than 600 containing coal and 100 containing other minerals.
On Indian lands more than 4,900 oil and gas leases were supervised.
Mineral production during the year from public and Indian lands and naval petroleum reserves under the supervision of the Survey had an estimated value of $83,000,000.
The revenue received by the Government as a result of this production amounted to about $9,500,000.
Water investigations were successfully prosecuted.
As the result of a succession of alternating droughtsand disastrous floods, the Nation has become more water-conscious and the problem of water conservation and protection has increased in public importance.
Necessary planning is dependent upon adequate information on the flow of streams and the amount of underground water.
During the vear the funds made available for this work, including Federal and State and municipal contributions, were greater than ever before, and further increases are in prospect.
The last fiscal vear brought tangible results from the long efforts that have gone into the safety and investigational activities of the Bureau of Mines.
Two remarkable records were achieved.
The vear was the first since mining became an important economic enterprise in the United States in which not a single major disaster occurred.
When the long list of disasters which had occurred in American mines is considered, this result is memorable.
The second record was made when 120,733 persons in the mineral and allied industries earned certificates to show that they had completed Bureau of Mines courses in first-aid and mine rescue.
This is the largest number ever trained in a 12-month period, and brings to more than 1,265,000 the total of those who have received such training.
As a result of the Bureau's work, more than 1,000,000 coal miners have completed safety and rescue courses.
The relative immunity from mine fires and explosion disasters now enjoyed in the United States can be traced to the activities of the Bureau.
Practically all of the accepted reforms in mining practices now in use in the minerals and allied industries can be attributed to the development of better methods by the Bureau.
The Bureau completed many special studies during the year on other health and safety problems of the minerals industry.
The Health Division continued its investigations of the effect of the work on the health of employees in the mineral industries.
In cooperation with the United States Public Health Service and the Port of New York Authority a study of compressed-air illness was completed.
Valuable data and experience were gained that should be helpful in combating hazardous conditions incident to work in compressed air.
In production fields, the record was equally impressive.
The Amarillo helium plant 'of the Bureau produced 6,301,000 cubic feet of helium during the fiscal year, of which the Army and Navy purchased 72 percent.
Other shipments went to the Bureau of Standards, the Bureau of Entomology and Plant Quarantine, the Geological Survey, and the Weather Bureau for various experiments, researches, and uses.
Approximately 1,022,000 cubic feet of helium were delivered for non-Government use, mainly for lighter-than-air craft and for treatment of respiratory diseases.
Deliveries for non-Government use increased more than fourteenfold over those of the previous year.
The first sale of a substantial amount of helium ever made to a foreign government was effected at the end of the fiscal year after other previous offers to purchase were refused.
A contract was executed in June for the sale of 220,000 cubic feet of the gas to Poland, and it left the Amarillo plant shortly afterwards.
The helium was to be used for experimental stratosphere flights in Poland.
One phase of the Bureau's technological work during the past year, which bore promise for the future, consisted of comparative tests by the coal-hydrogenation laboratory on various types of low-rank coals from the West.
It never has been profitable to market some of the western coals, but the reserves of them are so prodigious that they offer a potential source of motor fuel in spite of the relatively low recovery of liquid hydrocarbon from them.
Excellent work was accomplished in these studies.
As a component part of the Government's broad conservation plans, the Bureau studied various mineral deposits which occur in areas which will be served by large hydroelectric projects now under construction.
Promising opportunities for new domestic industries were indicated.
The ceramics industry, for example, shows possibilities of becoming more self-sufficient as a result of Bureau investigations in regions served by the Tennessee Valley Authority, Boulder Dam and Grand Coulee Dam.
A steady and persistent advance in hitherto unexplored fields of petroleum and natural gas technology marked the activities of the Petroleum and Natural-Gas Division.
The results of the Bureau's investigations in the field of petroleum and natural gas technology have been so cordially received by the industry that the Bureau's engineers are in great demand for the study of problems applicable, not only to the whole industry, but also to individual deposits and fields.
Studies were continued on well-spacing and related activities.
The vital importance of strategic minerals, made even more pressing by world conditions, received considerable attention from the Bureau.
The Bureau was represented on the Mineral Advisory Committee to the Army and Navy Munitions Board, and upon commodity subcommittees investigating the national defense aspects of our mineral supply.
As a part of this work, extensive reports were prepared on various phases of the deficient mineral problem for the use of the military branch of the Government.
In addition, the Bureau did extensive work with regard to strategic minerals for the Congress, other Government agencies, industry, and the public.
The accomplishments which I have briefly outlined tell the story of the progress that we have made in safeguarding our storehouses of natural wealth.
Conservation, however, should not be a static thing.
It must be a dynamic, growing thing.
We must work ceaselessly.
The vitalization of our conservation drive and the expansion of its front was given enormous help at the close of the fiscal year by your Reorganization Plan No. 2.
This brought about changes that had long been desirable and which went far to consolidate the conservation activities of the Federal Government in this Department.
The changes referred to resulted in placing within the Department of the Interior the Bureau of Biological Survey and the Bureau of Fisheries.
The inclusion of these two great natural-resource agencies, together with a third, the Bituminous Coal Division, has made possible a blending of effort which will result in imparting the strength of unity to the many component parts that go to make up physical conservation as we know it.
In my estimation, no other single step for many years has so effectively forwarded the conservation movement.
As the result of these changes, this Department is in a better position than ever before effectively to continue and to improve upon real conservation as applied to our lands, range, minerals, forests, water power, wildlife, and the many other constituents which make up that body of basic wealth which we term our natural resources.
Secretary of the Interior.
MARKED progress in the safeguarding from unwise use of valuable resources on the public domain of the United States resulted from the work of the General Land Office during the fiscal year.
Keeping pace with the national conservation program, this Office, which for 150 years has served as the real-estate agency of the Government, successfully effected the important transition from previous activities involving disposal of the public lands, to operations designed to bring about their management and prudent use.
Efficient administration of the vital conservation program was insured through the establishment within the General Land Office of a Branch of Planning, Use, and Protection, to handle problems of research and surveys, improvements of the range, and analysis and classification of the public lands.
Office reorganization also included the establishment of a Branch of Adjudication and an Administrative Division.
Despite its increased responsibilities, activities of the General Land Office were conducted at a profit, the total receipts during the fiscal year amounting to $7,756,288.71.
This was nearly four times the amount of expenditures for its operation.
Popular interest in the conservation activities of the Office was met with the issuance of a new series of informational bulletins, describing its work.
By direction of Congress, the General Land Office during the year compiled and issued the 1938 edition of the Official Map of the United States.
Regulation of grazing on the vacant and unreserved public lands, in order to prevent soil erosion and damage to valuable forage and water resources, formed an important feature of the conservation work.
This regulation was accomplished by the issuance of leases under section 15 of the Taylor Grazing Act of 1934.
While the primary objective sought by the issuance of the leases was the control of grazing for the purpose mentioned, the leases during the fiscal year produced a revenue of $137,365.13, an increase of $89,433.06 over the receipts of the previous year.
The transition from the oil and gas permit-lease system to an exclusive system of leasing under the act of August 21, 1935 (49 Stat. 674), a conservation measure, was advanced well on its way to completion during the year.
Four thousand eight hundred and fifty-four prospecting permits terminated, approximately one-half of which were exchanged for leases, leaving only 2,015 permits outstanding, which will terminate during the forthcoming year.
In addition to the large number of oil and gas leases which were issued, initial steps have been taken, because of threatened drainage, to sell at public auction leases on numerous tracts of known oil lands.
The domestic potash industry, largely dependent on federally owned potash deposits, continues to draw more heavily on these deposits to meet foreign competition and to supply the farmers with this essential plant food.
One notable result of its discovery in and production from public lands has been to bring the price of fertilizers more nearly within the means of the consumer.
Due to the application of scientifie principles to agriculture and to the industries, many minerals in the public lands heretofore considered of slight value are now being generally exploited.
Among these, vermiculite is in great demand for insulation against heat and cold, gypsum and limestone for the conditioning of soils, and several species of clays for refining both vegetable and mineral oils.
Increased activity in connection with these minerals, particularly those found near the surface, will result in erosional and other problems which will require study.
Conservation of valuable timber resources on 2,500,000 acres of revested Oregon and California Railroad and Coos Bay Wagon Road grant lands, in Oregon, was advanced by the activities of the General Land Office.
Placing the lumbering operations in the area on a sustained-yield basis for the first time, administration of the tracts is being carried forward to insure the economic stability of the communities dependent upon the industry.
The Cadastral Engineer Service of the General Land Office executes cadastral surveys and resurveys of the public lands in the United States and Alaska; supervises mineral surveys for patent purposes; prepares the field notes and plats for such surveys; and acts as custodian of the records.
111 of which in 17 States were resurvey projects.
A total of 36,249 miles was surveyed and resurveyed, embracing 5,992,000 acres, in addition to engineering investigations, miscellaneous surveys, and special projects which are not measurable on a quantity basis.
The preparation of plats and field notes of surveys is practically current.
There were constructed 248 township base plats, 124 color overlay sheets, 124 supplemental plats, 115 special plats of miscellaneous surveys, and field notes were prepared in final form for the permanent record for these surveys.
In addition, 116 mineral surveys, embracing 419 locations, were examined, platted, and approved.
Cooperative surveys and resurveys in response to requests from other Federal agencies were made for the Division of Grazing, Bureau of Reclamation, National Park Service, Geological Survey, and Office of Indian Affairs of the Department of the Interior, the Forest Service of the Department of Agriculture, and the Department of Justice.
Accepted surveys and resurveys.
There were accepted and placed on file plats representing 1,444,180 acres of original surveys of public lands, and, in addition, 1,914,355 acres of lands resurveyed, comprising an aggregate area of 3,358,535 acres.
Maps, plats, and diagrams.
The wall map of the United States was revised and the 1938 edition printed and delivered.
There have been prepared 204 miscellaneous maps, plats, diagrams, and tracings.
Photolithographic copies, etc.
There were sold 6,421 photolithographic copies of township plats, for which $3,210.50 was received; and 9,756 copies were furnished other Bureaus for official use.
There were 2,882 maps mounted and distributed for official use, and distribution was made of 5,133 map publications and 126,259 circulars.
Under the supervision of the Oregon and California Administration, General Land Office, the C. C. C. is providing facilities for the proper protection, reforestation, and utilization of the forests on approximately 2,500,000 acres of Oregon and California revested lands.
In addition to fire-suppression and fire-protection improvements, a permanent transportation system is being developed in order that the most efficient conservation of the timber resources can be realized through the carrying out of a planned sustained-yield program.
By having a road system in existence the young and thrifty forest can be left to reach maturity, while the older and more decadent timber can be utilized to supply the demands of industry.
The work of the Oregon and California C. C. C. camps is a sound financial undertaking, as the cost of operation of the camps eventually will be realized many times by the country through increased timber values and more efficient utilization.
Under the supervision of the General Land Office, the C. C. C. has done work of inestimable value in controlling underground coal fires which have been destroying valuable Federal coal beds in public lands in the vicinity of Little Thunder Basin, Wyo.
To the close of the fiscal year, 19 separate coal-bed fires had been worked upon, 12 of which are reported extinguished or under control.On the remaining 7 work is progressing satisfactorily, giving promise that eventually they will be extinguished.
In addition, there are 10 other coal-bed fires in the vicinity of Gillette, Wyo., upon which work must be done for several years, if these irreplaceable natural resources are to be saved from complete destruction.
The act of August 28, 1937 (50 Stat. 874), provided a comprehensive land-use conservation program, requiring extensive field examination and classification of all the revested Oregon and California Railroad and reconveyed Coos Bay Wagon Road grant lands.
Pending completion of such classification and determination of the annual sustained-yield capacity of the timber-growing area, and in order to prevent the shutting down of operating lumbering concerns with resultant unemployment and hardship to a large number of persons, timber cutting proceeded under temporary regulations.
On July 7, 1938, however, permanent regulations governing the sale of the timber, were approved.
Regulations governing the issuance of temporary 1-year grazing leases were approved July 6, 1939.
Transactions concerning the revested and reconveyed lands follow: Timber sales.
During the fiscal year 151 sales of timber on the revested Oregon and California railroad grant lands were made, involving 16,151.17 acres of land, containing 319,178,000 feet, board measure, of timber, with a value of $609,595.16.
30, 1939, aggregated 1,369, involving 160,702.30 acres, containing 4,412,428,000 feet, board measure, of timber, with a total value of $8,539,778.01.
Nine sales of timber on the reconveyed Coos Bay Wagon Road grant lands were made during the year, involving 727.30 acres of land, containing 24,348,000 feet, board measure, of timber, for which the sum of $48,776.46 has been or will be received.
Total sales to June 30, 1939, 138, involving 21,582.08 acres, containing 854,138,000 feet, board measure, of timber, with a total value of $1,993,078.50.
Timber-cutting permits.
Seventy-eight timber-cutting permits were issued under the act of August 28, 1937, involving 1,566,000 feet of timber for which $3,362.00 has been received.
Extensions of time.
Three extensions of time within which to cut and remove the remaining timber on 240 acres of revested land were granted under the act of May 19, 1930 (46 Stat. 369).
Total extensions granted, 71.
Timber rigħts terminated.
Rights under timber patents or sales were terminated in 124 cases.
The total cash receipts from leases, sales, and other disposals of public lands (including receipts from copies of records, sales of Government property, etc.) were $7,719,579.53, and from Indian lands $36,709.18, an aggregate of $7,756,288.71, all of which was deposited in the Treasury.
The total expenditures from appropriations made for the conduct of the Bureau were $2,046,201.
The excess of receipts over expenditures was $5,710,087.71.
The receipts were $691,086.26 less than for the year 1938, but were larger than for any other year since 1927.
Receipts under mineral leasing acts.
Receipts from bonuses, royalties, and rentals under laws providing for the leasing rights on the public domain (including royalties and rentals on potash deposits and royalties on coal leases in Alaska) aggregated $5,932,- 492.14 of which $5,741,333.35 was received under.
The largest receipts under this act were from lands in California, the amount being $2,705,140.39.
Wyoming was second with $1,715,298.60.
Receipts from other States follow: New Mexico, $832,717.91; Colorado, $135,168.12; Utah, $130,739.66; Montana, $112,744.13; Louisiana, $77,242.65; North Dakota, $23,591.22; Alabama, $5,838.97; South Dakota, $1,366.31; Arizona, $480; Washington, $358.61; Idaho, $326.25; Kansas, $180; Nebraska, $140; and Nevada, 53 cents.
Under the provisions of the mineral leasing act cited, each State receives 371 percent of the receipts from the public lands within its borders, the reclamation fund receives 521/2 percent, and the other 10 percent remains in the Treasury of the United States as a part of the general fund.
Receipts under the T'aylor Grazing Act.
Fees for grazing within grazing districts, by districts and by States, and fees and rentals for leases issued under section 15 of the act.
Distribution of receipts.
Receipts from all sources, aggregating $7,756,288.71, as shown above, are distributed under the law approximately as follows: Reclamation fund, $3,373,636; for range improvements, $243,851; to public-land States and certain counties within such States, $3,003,118; to various Indian tribes, $41,640; and to the general fund of the Treasury, $1,094,044.
Under the provisions of the Taylor Grazing Act, the States within which the lands are situated receive 50 percent of the receipts from public lands and 25 percent of the receipts from ceded Indian lands; 25 percent of the receipts from both public and ceded Indian lands is available, when appropriated by Congress, for range improvements; 50 percent of the receipts from ceded Indian lands is credited to the Indians; and the balance is credited to the general fund in the Treasury.
Five percent of the net proceeds from cash sales of public lands is paid to the public-land States within which such sales were made, and the balance of such receipts from States named in the Reclamation Act is credited to the reclamation fund; the reclamation fund and the States involved receive 90 percent (521/ percent and 371/ percent, respectively) of the receipts under the Mineral Leasing Act and of receipts from potash deposits leased under the act of February 7, 1927; receipts from sales of reclamation townsites and camp sites and from royalties and rentals from potash deposits leased under the act of October 2, 1917, are credited to the reclamation fund; 75 percent of the receipts from the Oregon and California Railroad grant lands is paid to the counties within which the lands are situated and 25 percent is credited to the general fund of the Treasury.
Twenty-five percent of the proceeds of land and timber in the forfeited Coos Bay Wagon Road grant will be paid to Coos County, Oreg.
The receipts from Indian lands (except 371/2 percent of royalties from Red River oil lands which is paid to the State of Oklahoma in lieu of taxes) are deposited in the Treasury to the credit of the various Indian tribes.
All other moneys are deposited in the Treasury to the credit of the general fund.
The act of June 16, 1880 (21 Stat, 287), and the act of March 26, 1908 (35 Stat. 48), as amended by the act of December 11, 1919 (41 Stat. 366), provide for the return of moneys received in connection with the disposal of the public lands and covered into the United States Treasury.
Repayment may be made to the land applicant or his heirs or assigns in all cases where lands have been erroneously sold, where payments have been made in excess of lawful requirement, and where applications, entries and proofs have been rejected, in the absence of fraud or attempted fraud.
Under the above cited laws there were stated during the fiscal year 49 accounts allowing repayment of $6,513.19, and 19 claims were denied.
The number of claims allowed includes five accounts granting repayment of $715.75 received in connection with sales of Indian reservation lands and repaid from Indian trust funds.
The number of letters and reports received for consideration or answer from all sources was 137,804 and 79,467 letters and decisions were written.
The latter figure, an increase of 7,258 over the number of letters and decisions written during the preceding year, does not include letters prepared for signature in the Department.
There were outstanding on June 30, 1939, 5,051 mineral leases, permits, and licenses covering 5,780,701 acres.
The number outstanding at the close of the preceding year was 9,350, embracing 12,227,111 acres.
The decrease to a large extent is accounted for by the conservation measures which have been put into effect, by reason of which many oil and gas, permits were terminated.
There also were outstanding on June 30, 1939, 4,190 leases other than mineral, embracing 6,916,900 acres.
The number outstanding at the close of the preceding year was 1,682, for 3,585,977 acres.
The increase to a large extent is due to the issuance of additional grazing leases under section 15 of the Taylor Grazing Act.
There were made during the year 686 original entries and selections, covering 301,740 acres.
This figure includes 150,748.81 acres selected for the California State park system, under the act of June 29, 1936 (49 Stat. 2026).
There also were made 3,948 final entries and selections for 1,198,080 acres.
Many of these entries were made prior to the general withdrawal of the public lands from entry, or subsequent thereto but based on rights initiated prior to such withdrawal.
Patents and certifieates issued for 5,687 entries and selections having a total area of 3,281,224 acres.
This amount includes 1,298,790 acres of school section land, patented to the State of Montana under the act of June 21, 1934 (48 Stat. 1185).
A total of 1,441,472 acres was patented during the year with a reservation of mineral in some form to the United States.
The total area patented, as of the close of the fiscal year, in which mineral in some form was reserved aggregates 45,087,270 acres.
On June 30, 1939, 5,098,829 acres were embraced in unperfected entries upon which proof of compliance with the law was not due or had not been presented.
In addition, there were pending applications for exchange under section 8 of the Taylor Grazing Act involying about 2,476,000 acres of privately owned and state school land and about the same area of public land.
Exchanges of national forest lands required the examination of abstracts of title involving 177,273 acres.
There were furnished during the year 43,744 certified and uncertified copies of papers, plats, field notes, patents, etc., for which there were received amounts aggregating $12,348.25.
In addition, there were furnished for official use, by this and other departments and agencies, 27,938 copies of such items.
Five hundred and eighty-three letters were written in connection with pending and proposed suits, applications of attorneys for admission to practice before the Department, and charges preferred against patentees and others.
Thirty-two civil suits were recommended to cancel leases for oil, gas, and coal, to cancel patents issued through fraud, to cancel a right-of-way; and to recover damages for loss of property in connection with timber and grazing trespasses.
Twenty-three cases were won and one was lost.
Judgments and compromises were obtained in the amount of $73,819.54.
Payments in the amount of $30,946.37 were collected.
Twenty applications of attorneys for admission to practice before this Department were received.
Favorable recommendations were made in connection with 18, and unfavorable recommendations in connection with 2.
Recommendation was made that 1 agent be dropped from the roll.
There were decided on principles of equity and referred to the Board of Equitable Adjudication and confirmed 1,392 homestead entries of public lands, 41 homestead entries of revested and reconveyed lands in Oregon, 39 homestead entries of ceded Indian lands, 19 reclamation homesteads, and 55 desert-land entries.
Reports were submitted on 117 Senate and House bills, and necessary orders and instructions have been prepared or are in course of preparation in connectionwith bills, public and private, affecting the public lands, which were enacted into law.
Reports were made on 7 enrolled bills.
On June 30, 1939, there were 309 permanent employees of the General Land Office in Washington, 76 in the district land offices, 16 in the Oregon and California Administration, 1 in the Range Development Service, and 158 in the Public Survey offices.
The Range Development Service of the General Land Office was established pursuant to the provisions of the Taylor Grazing Act of June 28, 1934 (48 Stat. 1269), as amended by the act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1976), and as supplemented by the Second Deficiency Appropriation Act, fiscal year 1938 (52 Stat. 1129).
The act last cited appropriated $60,000 for this work, with the limitation that the expenditures should not exceed 25 percent of the receipts during the fiscal years 1938 and 1939.
The receipts for these years were $185,297.20.
The act which made the funds available does not contain any restriction as to the distribution thereof by States.
It is deemed appropriate, however, that the distribution be made in an equitable manner.
The funds available from receipts for the fiscal years 1938 and 1939 were apportioned for equal expenditures in the States of Arizona, Montana, and Wyoming, which contributed approximately 79 percent of the receipts.
As additional funds become available, it is the intention to make proper proportionate distribution thereof.
The range improvement program was put into operation toward the latter part of January 1939 in the State of Arizona.
The type of improvement necessary varies with the locality and local conditions.
In Arizona, the development of water for stock driveways and the erection of drift fences were the principal types of improvements which were made.
As a general rule, range improvements which would benefit several stockmen were given preference and improvements on the public domain inuring to the benefit of individual lessees were secondary in consideration.
To eliminate maintenance charges of range improvements, cooperative agreements were entered into between the United States and individual lessees, whereby the lessees agreed to contribute toward the construction of the improvements, either in money, labor, or material, or part or all of these items, whenever such agreements were acceptable to the lessees, and the lessees agreed to maintain the improvements.
This permitted a more comprehensive program to be undertaken with the available funds than otherwise would have been possible.
Between January 17, 1939, the date of approval of the range program by the Secretary of the Interior, and June 30, 1939, 23 range improvements benefiting 437,342 acres were constructed in the State of Arizona, at a total cost of $10,516.84.
The United States expended $8,676.11 and the individual lessees contributed $1,840.73.
Oil and gas leases and permits.
At the end of the fiscal year 1938, there were outstanding, 1,070 leases, issued as rewards upon discoveries, area 451,821.81 acres; 167 new leases, embracing 93,324.29 acres, were issued.
Exclusive of 22 naval-reserve leases for 9,627.99 acres, there were outstanding on June 30, 1939, 1,237 leases, embracing 545,- 146 10 acres.
One hundred sixty-eight noncompetitive leases, issued under the amendatory act of August 21, 1935, embracing 184,008.28 acres, and outstanding on June 30, 1938, were increased by the issuance of 235 new leases, area 117,675.91 acres and 723 leases issued through exchanges for oil and gas prospecting permits, on an area of 1,443,- 257.12 acres: of the entire total, 10 leases were canceled, involving 4,385.85 acres, leaving on June 30, 1939, 1,116 leases, embracing 1,740,555.46 acres.
The 7,370 oil and gas prospecting permits, embracing 11,221,621 acres, and outstanding on June 30, 1938, decreased when 723 permits, embracing 1,443,257.12 acres, were exchanged for noncompetitive leases and 5,386 were canceled and terminated by operation of law on an area of 8,084,427.68 acres, while 16 new permits were issued and 15 were reinstated on a combined area of 57,499.13 acres, leaving outstanding on June 30, 1939, 2,015 permits embracing 3,185,692.45 acres.
Coal, potash, sodium, phosphate, and sulphur, permits and leases, and coal licenses.
On June 30, 1938, 374 coal leases, covering 71,698.44 acres, were outstanding: 27 new leases issued for 4,755.86 acres and 32 were canceled on an area of 7,892.10 acres, thereby decreasing the coal leases to 369, covering 68,552.20 acres.
On the date named.
160 coal permits embraced 126,926.13 acres; 21 new permits on 9.243.80 acres were issued and 60 permits embracing 43,602.45 acres were canceled and terminated by operation of law, leaving outstanding 121 permits containing 92,566.48 acres.
Also outstandingon June 30, 1938, were 92 coal licenses, embracing 3,599.26 acres, 8 were issued for 717.55 acres and 15 area 1,015.10 acres, were canceled and expired by limitation, leaving 85 licenses embracing 3,301.71 acres.
Potash leases on June 30, 1938, numbered 10 and covered 25,505.49 acres; 6 were issued for 15,377.17 acres, thereby increasing the leases to 16 and the area to 40,882.66 acres.
Twenty-three potash permits also outstanding and covering 54,696.47 acres, decreased, when 10 permits expired and 1 was canceled on a combined area of 39,421.98 acres, to 12 permits, embracing 15,274.49 acres.
The 7 phosphate leases, embracing 3,292.90 acres, outstanding on June 30, 1938, were not affected by any changes.
Two sodium leases, area 801.70 acres, were outstanding on June 30, 1938; 1, involving 390.16 acres, was issued, bringing the total to 3, embracing 1,191.88 acres.
On June 30, 1939, there were 47 sodium permits embracing 65,586.36 acres; 21 sodium permits embracing 31,699.29 acres were issued and 25, involving 30,543.28 acres, were canceled or expired by limitation, leaving 43 sodium permits covering 66,742.37 acres.
There was no change in the status of the 27 sulphur permits, embracing 17,508.01 acres, which were outstanding on June 30, 1938.
Mineral applications and entries.
One hundred and twenty-one mineral applications were disposed of during the year, leaving on hand 85 for approximately 4,936.80 acres.
Five hundred and eightyone mineral entries were disposed of, of which 152, embracing 8,829.23 acres, were patented, leaving on hand on June 30, 1939, 105 mineral entries embracing approximately 6,098.40 acres.
Mineral contests.
Eighty-two mineral contests were disposed of during the year, leaving 35 contests pending on June 30, 1939.
Three hundred and five right-of-way applications were approved and 25 stock-raising reservoir applications were disposed of.
In addition, 29 right-of-way applications were rejected, and 39 other actions were taken.
There are 45 Federal reclamation projects in 14 western States, 35 of which are operated in whole or in part by the water users.
There are, in addition, 5 Indian reclamation projects, the irrigation features of which are under the supervision of the Office of Indian Affairs.
Two hundred and seventy-nine original reclamation homestead entries and 141 assignments of such entries were received; and 185 reclamation entries, containing 17,277.78 acres, were patented.
Ninety-three entries, involving 11,662.50 acres, were patented under the Desert-Land Act.
Carey Act segregations amounting to 29,062.76 acres were considered.
One application under the act of March 15, 1910 (36 Stat. 237), involving 601,445.20 acres, was rejected.
Twenty cases were received under the Pittman Acts of October 22, 1919 (41 Stat. 293), and September 22, 1922 (42 Stat. 1012).
Action was taken in 19 cases.
Under the Swamp-land acts, there were approved and patented to the States 4,205.25 acres and claims for 393.30 acres were finally rejected.
New claims were asserted for 1,928.43 acres.
New indemnity school-land selections embracing 25,418.19 acres were received and selections amounting to 226,498.55 acres were approved and title conveyed to the States.
Such selections involving 9.558.24 acres were canceled.
Pending selections under quantity grants to States, for specific purposes, embracing 28,143.28 acres, were approved and title conveyed to the States.
Applications for patents for granted school sections under the provisions of the act of June 21, 1934 (48 Stat. 1185), were patented during the year to the extent of 1,298,789.83 acres.
New applications were received, embracing 972,803.51 acres.
Such applications pending at the end of the year embrace 1,486,394.65 acres.
New applications by the various States, under the Taylor Grazing Act, for exchanges of lands were received, embracing 141,227.93 acres.
Sixty-two patents were issued, containing 109,269.02 acres, with a reservation of all minerals to the United States, excepting two patents embracing 240 acres.
The rejected and relinquished applications involved 163,323.76 acres.
Three new railroad selections were received, embracing 11,969.96 acres, and 2,403.04 acres were certified or patented in lieu of such grants.
On June 30, 1939, there were 34 fur-farm leases outstanding, covering approximately 172,650 acres, the annual rental of which is $1,- 052.56.
Two new leases and 2 renewal leases were issued, 12 renewal leases await execution by the applicants, 1 application for lease awaits a field report, and 5 applications for new leases await further evidence to be supplied by the applicants.
Twelve grazing leases, covering approximately 884,633 acres, from which the sum of $1,523.65 was received, were outstanding on June 30, 1939.
One new lease was issued, two leases were canceled, three applications await field reports, two were suspended, two were held for rejection, and three were rejected.
The sale of 5-acre tracts in Alaska for homesites or headquarters was considered in 132 cases and 7 patents issued for a total of 20.10 acres, from which the sum of $237.95 was received.
On June 30, 1939, 26 aviation leases covering 13,122.63 acres and five beacon light permits covering 954.84 acres were outstanding.
Two leases were canceled, one lease was issued, and five applications for lease await evidence to be supplied by the applicant.
General color-of-title claims were considered in 182 instances, and 7 patents issued for a total of 386.32 acres, from which the sum of $1,709.82 was realized.
One patent issued for a Texas-New Mexico color-of-title claim involving 16.90 acres, from which the sum of $133.10 was received.
One case under a special act involving lands in Utah claimed under color of title awaits the survey of the land involved.
The extinguishment of private holdings within various Government reservations is accomplished through the medium of various exchange laws enacted by Congress.
Forest exchanges were considered in 905 instances and 15 patents issued.
The Secretary of Agriculture was notified in 72 cases that permits could issue for timber selected in exchange and title to 177,273.22 acres was accepted for inclusion in national forests.
Two applications involving the exchange of privately owned land in forests for public domain land in New Mexico failed of consummation pursuant to a decree of the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia.
Two applications for exchange in the interest of establishing the Bear River Migratory Bird Refuge in Utah are in the process of consummation, after being involved in the Federal courts for several years.
A total of 247 cases of private exchanges under section 8 of the Taylor Grazing Act have been received and six of these were consummated during the year and title on behalf of the United States was accepted to 6,963.63 acres.
On June 30, 1939, there were pending 183 applications involving 364,567.03 acres of public land and 371,932.12 acres of privately owned land.
During the year 2,341 offers of grazing lease were made under section 15 of the Taylor Grazing Act, involving approximately 3,647,130.16 acres of land with an annual rental of $61,259.54.
On June 30, 1939, there were 2,106 applications for lease pending, the majority of which await reports from the Division of Investigations.
Seventy-one term leases were renewed during the year, in which the acreage totaled 67,271.56 and the rental total was $1,503.95.
Entries and sales of ceded Indian lands were considered in 855 instances and 67 patents issued for 12,032.58 acres, from which the sum of $21,583.96 was realized.
Under the various exchange laws affecting Indian reservations, four exchanges were consummated and 640 acres were added to various Indian reservations.
The matter of fee and trust patents was considered in 750 instances and 48 fee patents issued for 4,918.48 acres and 32 trust patents for 4,499.35 acres.
There were 239 reissue patents involving 42,283.45 acres.
Homesteads by Indians were considered in 104 instances and 63 patents issued for 12,543.31 acres.
One contract involving the sale of pine timber on Chippewa Indian lands in Minnesota was canceled and the deposit therewith was forfeited, while the timber on the other two contracts was cut and removed and the contracts completed.
Ninety-one patents embracing 13,291.90 acres were issued on non-Indian claims.
Private land claims derived under foreign sovereignties were considered in 203 instances and 49 patents issued for a total of 41,207.69 acres.
Sales of dead, down, or damaged timber were considered in 76 instances and the sum of $7,475.55 was received therefrom.
Twentyfour actions were taken involving free-use timber permits.
Three hundred and seven actions were taken in town-site cases and 127 town-lot and town-site patents issued, from which was received the sum of $6,404.
Trespass cases on public lands required actions as follows: Timber 423, the sum of $8,027.68 being accepted in settlement; coal 76, the sum of $101.87 being accepted in settlement; grazing, four; gravel, four; gypsum, six; stone, four.
Actions were taken and patents issued as follows: Abandoned military reservations 58, with eight patents issuing; military bounty land warrants 12, with three patents issuing; cash and credit entries 35, with 21 patents issuing; Arkansas drainage 208, with one patent issuing; forest lieu selections 44, with two patents issuing, donation claims one, with one patent issuing; parks six; preemptions 10, with three patents issuing; quitclaims 27, with 12 quitclaim deeds issuing; riparian rights three; scrip 17, with one patent issuing; small holding 16, with seven patents issuing; soldiers' additional homestead entries 288, with 22 patents issuing, and trade and manufacturing sites 32, with one patent issuing.
Actions were taken in homestead cases as follows: On final and commuted homesteads, 5,545, of which 3,734 were patented; on second-entry applications, 100; on applications to amend, 48; on applications for leaves of absence and for extensions of time to establish residence, 563; on original entries, 4,077; and on appeals, 6,906.
Six hundred sixty-five actions were taken on public-sale applications, 139 of which were patented; and 44 actions were taken on timber and stone applications, seven of which were patented.
Letters of instruction were issued for the filing of 355 plats of survey for lands in States in which there are district land offices.
Fifty plats were directly filed by this office in connection with which 13 public notices were prepared for lands in States in which there are no district land offices.
Three thousand seven hundred thirteen acres in national forests which had been listed for homestead entry under the act of June 11, 1906 (34 Stat. 233), were returned to national forests by revocation of the listing orders and 197 acres were restored to homestead entry under the act.
Four hundred thirty-one contests, including both Government and private, were considered.
Approximately 111 hearings were held in Government cases.
At the close of the year about 37 contest cases were pending.
More than 100,000 notations were made on the tract books.
This includes 13,735 homestead applications and other miscellaneous cases, 2,710 grazing applications, 3,469 final and cash certificates, 2,185 oil and gas lease applications, 118 coal lease applications, 272 original entries and 455 plats.
Withdrawals and classifications.
Six hundred and eleven Executive and other orders were noted.
These include withdrawals for stock driveways, national forests, restored lists, power-site reserves and classifications, grazing districts, and mineral and other classifications and revocations thereof.
Relinquishments.
Entries numbering 462 were relinquished and noted.
Status cases.
Township diagrams.
Diagrams showing disposals and status, in 1,181 townships and fractional townships, were made for this and other bureaus.
The area of existing public water reserves was increased by 2,585 acres, the lands classified as valuable for hydro-electric power purposes were increased by 15,135 acres, and the areas in reclamation projects under the act of June 17, 1902, were decreased by 121,360 acres.
The Carlsbad Caverns National Park in New Mexico was enlarged by the addition of 39,488 acres.
Five new national monuments were created, four were enlarged and one was reduced in the public-land States and the Glacier Bay National Monument in Alaska was enlarged, the total increase amounting to 393,177 acres in the States and 1,134,720 acres in Alaska.
The area of the national forests was increased by 2,521,351 acres.
Fifty-one new wildlife refuges were established and seven were enlarged, while two new cooperative game ranges were created within a grazing district in Arizona, resulting in a total increase of 1,874,184 acres.
Withdrawals amounting to 1,560 acres were made for air-navigation sites for the Department of Commerce and 215 acres were released from former withdrawals for such use.
Three tracts of public land aggregating 280 acres were sold under the recreation law, two to the State of Oregon and one to the State of Minnesota; one petition was denied in part, one lease was issued, one canceled and one expired, and 200 acres were released from a recreational withdrawal.
Two new stock driveways were created and seven enlarged.
All stock driveways within grazing districts in Oregon and Utah and driveway withdrawals within certain grazing districts in Arizona, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, and New Mexico, and other driveways outside of grazing districts were reduced or revoked, resulting in a net decrease of 2,242,275 acres.
All projects of the Resettlement Administration, or the Farm Security Administration have been transferred to the Department of Agriculture for administration under the Bankhead-Jones Farm Tenant Act.
A withdrawal of 480 acres was made at the request of that Department for use in connection with a project in New Mexico, and 1,104 acres of purchased lands were transferred by Executive order from its jurisdiction to the jurisdiction of this Department.
One withdrawal previously made in aid of such projects was enlarged, two reduced, and one revoked, resulting in a net increase of 738 acres.
A withdrawal of 640 acres in California was made for the use of the Navy Department and a tract of 20 acres was withdrawn for the use of the State of Arkansas in cooperative forest-protection work.
Other reservations for various purposes were increased by 59,604 acres.
Withdrawals for lighthouse purposes were reduced by 4,239 acres, and a withdrawal for classification and use as a grazing project of all public lands in four counties in South Dakota was reduced as to 32,592 acres reserved for the Badlands National Monument.
General withdrawals for classification were reduced by 1,477,790 acres through the placing of the lands involved in withdrawals for specific purposes.
HE program of Indian Service is, as it has been, to help the Indians, racially and individually, to survive, to support themselves economically, and to determine their own future.
This program is not of one uniform pattern.
It is manifold and various, because the situation of Indians is extremely various.
Indian life in these recent years has become a rich and intense drama.
The striving of the will of individuals and of tribes is the moving force in this drama.
Indians have turned from anticipated death to anticipated life, from fatalism to action, from inferiority to healthful pride.
Thousands of Indians now are consciously aware that prosperity and greatness can come to them, but only through the things they themselves may do.
Indian lands have ceased to dwindle; they are slowly increasing.
Indian natural resources have ceased to disappear through wasteful overuse; instead they are coming back, in some cases very slowly, toward primal efficiency and adequacy.
Indians have ceased to be inactive while white men do their work; instead, 4,491, or more than half of the regular employees of the Indian Service, and more than 70 percent of the emergency employees, are Indians.
The Indian death rate is no longer menacing the survival of the race; instead, the yearly increase of Indians exceeds that of any other population group.
Indians no longer are the solitary element in the country's population existing in a totally unorganized status; instead, political and industrial self-government is being achieved by an overwhelming preponderance of the tribes.
The last fiscal year witnessed a maturing of program, a great quantitative increase of Indian participation, the correction of many errors of detail in organization and procedure, the solidification of that program which holds the future of the Indians.
Indian Service and the Indians alike became more consciously the possessors of a new goal, of the technics appropriate to the new goal, and of a spirit of victory.
How far off that goal is, how many the shortcomings, how baffling and, indeed, as yet wholly unsolved, are some of the central problems this report will tell in more or less of detail.
But its main message is the true one, that Indians, physically and spiritually, are coming into their own.
Indian self-government has continued to be a major interest of the Indian Service—to restore tribal government where it had become inoperative or ineffective, and to give it a broader basis in law.
Functioning self-government is the end we are seeking, whatever we attempt in the Indian Service; and the degree to which the Indians achieve self-government is the measure of success of Indian administration itself.
The problem, then, is service-wide.
The Indian Reorganization Act provided machinery for facilitating tribal organization and it gave impetus to the program, but if there had been no Indian Reorganization Act, we would still have been concerned with the development of self-government.
We would have been challenged by the situation in which one-third of a million United States citizens found themselves, of having too little voice in the management of their lives and their resources.
And after all our effort, however wise and benevolent, we would still have had to put the question to ourselves, how effectively do Indians now manage their affairs?
Indian self-government, if it is effective and if it is all we expect it to be, will not be stereotyped.
It may not be as varied as, historically, tribal governments were in their original growth, but it should be at least as varied in form and content as the needs of the Indian people, acted upon by their living traditions, require, and that will permit of considerable range.
Thus far there have been numerous instances in which Indian tribes have written constitutions establishing a representative form of government and have added to the model ideas and methods which derive directly from their own background.
Papago, with a council composed of representatives of its historic villages, and with the representatives of those villages directly and immediately accountable to the local electorate, is such a bridging of tradition and modern democratic practice.
The Pawnee Indians in Oklahoma achieved a similar coupling of old and new by setting up in their tribal organization two councils, one a council of old headmen, who were given full authority to act within certain areas of tribal interest, while a representative business committee was set up to carry on the routine business of government.
The Sioux Indians of the Rosebud Reservation have endeavored to bring to the surface of everyday affairs the half-buried and half-forgotten tiospaye, which in the past was a natural unit of social action.
Those are cases in which native pattern added to modern representative government has made the modern type of government effective.
There are other instances in which representative government has kept a native form from collapse and distintegration.
At Santa Clara Pueblo, for example, a 50 years' history of factionalism had reduced the Pueblo to a state of dangerous inaction.
In the circumstances, a written constitution was perhaps the only method by which the factional stand-off could be ended and control of community affairs restored to the people.
At Hopi, likewise, a written constitution was the beginning of bridging chasms of jealous separatism which had been growing between the nine villages over years and centuries.
As against these instances, there are groups whose native pattern, archaic though it be, is self-contained and capable of adjusting the needs of its people to the pressures of today.
The Pueblo of Acoma exists under an archaic political form, which yet is resilient enough to carry through on schedule an involved program of stock-reduction, involving sacrifices to individual members of the Pueblo.
The actual process of organizing Indian tribes, of drafting and voting on constitutions and charters, went at a slower pace this last fiscal year, as compared with other years.
This statement does not apply to Alaska, as will be pointed out later.
Betweeen July 1, 1938, and June 30, 1939, a total of 12 tribes, including 5 Oklahoma tribes, adopted constitutions and bylaws, and in the same period 8 tribes, including 4 Oklahoma tribes, incorporated.
At the close of the fiscal year 93 tribes (including 17 Oklahoma tribes) had constitutions, and 64 (including 8 Oklahoma tribes) had charters of incorporation.
The Alaska amendment to the Indian Reorganization Act permits native groups "not heretofore recognized as tribes or bands" to organize on the basis of a community of interest, whether of residence, association, or occupation.
This means that native villages in Alaska may organize.
The Indian Service maintains schools in about 100 villages, and it is possible to count on organizing about that number.
The task of initiating the Alaska work has been slow and timeconsuming, but it is expected that another fiscal year will show a rapid rise in accomplishment.
The volume of organization work in Alaska should be increasing for several years.
The mere drafting and adopting of organization documents is only a preliminary to a much larger task of getting Indians acquainted with the possibilities opened up to them and of getting Indians to take full advantage of these opportunities.
Therefore, it is most emphatically true to say that the work of organizing Indian tribes is hardly started, and that the amount of persistent and patient effort required is greater today than it was two years ago, when, in one year, 56 tribal elections were held in connection with the ratification of constitutions and charters (fiscal year 1937).
The emphasis now is directed to the effective Indian use of the organization tools, to the drafting of law and order codes, the correction of census rolls, the enactment of land-management laws, the development of systems of tribal revenue, including the making of budgets, and the enactment of numerous miscellaneous ordinances and resolutions covering hunting and fishing, the adoption of new members, the leasing of tribal lands.
It is apparent also that as the Indian tribes begin to function under their constitutions and charters, they will discover deficiencies in constitutional provisions.
A number of elections on constitutional amendments have already been called, and it may be expected that elections of this sort will increase in the future.
Formal tribal organization has brought to the surface many of the grievances and maladjustments which have existed in past years but which have been only imperfectly expressed.
Factions have existed for many years on some reservations, without coming seriously to the fore.
With the establishment of tribal governments, this factionalism has burst forth rather vociferously at times.
Some of the critics of tribal government have pointed to this fact as damning evidence of the failure of the whole plan of reorganization.
Such criticism hardly merits comment, since it is based on a rather shallow conception of Indian character.
Indians, it assumes, are incapable of managing wisely and, when given an opportunity to manage, make a muddle of their affairs.
The fact is that responsibility cannot be learned without assuming responsibility.
Progress is never made without facing a good chance for failure.
The Indians, for the first time, have the opportunity either of failing or of succeeding, and, in any case, of learning to succeed through failing.
There is a widespread conviction throughout the Service that the economic rehabilitation of the Indian and his future welfare depends more largely upon the ability of the personnel of the Indian Service and the Indians themselves to engender indigenous leadership and machinery for an efficient and orderly self-government than upon any other factor.
Ten years ago the Meriam report 1 on Indians and Indian administration stated that "an overwhelming majority of the Indians are poor, even extremely poor."
Today Indians are still poor, and many of them live just above the minimum of subsistence.
A very few are wealthy; many are in great poverty.
It is always difficult to obtain accurate data on income of individuals and families even of white people living largely on earned cash income.
It is particularly difficult, therefore, to secure reliable data on the money value of the income of Indians, much of whose support takes the form of goods and services obtained without a direct expenditure of cash, and whose money receipts come from a variety of sources, both earned and unearned.
Accordingly, efforts to obtain such information for Indians living on reservations have been only partly successful, and the results up to the present time are not deemed of sufficient accuracy to warrant their presentation in detail.
A few generalizations can be made, however, concerning the relative importance of the various sources of Indian income, and their significance in relation to the stability of Indian economy.
Over one-fifth of all Indian income is unearned income from nonrelief sources, such as leases, rentals, and royalties.
More than another fifth of their entire income during the calendar year 1938 was from relief sources, indicating that Indian income depends to a considerable extent on the uncertain availability of funds from emergency governmental agencies.
Less than a third of the total income was obtained by the Indians through their own individual operations, primarily agricultural pursuits, which constitute about 22 percent of total income.
Indian economy is, in general, still very insecure, and still largely dependent upon sources other than the Indians' own efforts.
The major task of the Indian Service for many years must be to increase, and especially through education in land use and the providing of opportunities for further economic development by their own labor, the Indians' income and to improve their living conditions.
Many of them are located in areas where the natural resources are meager.
Somehow these resources must be augmented.
Additional lands must be provided, overgrazed ranges must be restored, flocks and herds must be improved, and arts and crafts and other sources of supplemental income must be developed.
Irrigation projects must reclaim desert lands, and Indians must be taught to make more effective use of all existing resources.
Rehabilitation in its broadest sense of reestablishment on a firm basis has made a steady advance during the past fiscal year.
Appraisal of the records in the field indicates substantial and heartening progress.
Over 54,800,000 acres of farming and grazing land are the main assets of a people whose inherent love for land is unquestioned.
The Extension Division by its carefully planned programs has demonstrated the possibility of translating these acres into cattle, sheep, and other livestock which will provide the necessities for a livelihood.
This involves, of course, in addition to material and practical assistance, the awakening of the individual and tribal consciousness to the potentialities of their present resources, the future results predicated by consistent and honest labor and the obligation for loan repayments.
Patience, kindliness, tolerance, and appreciation of racial characteristics, are part of the equipment of the successful Indian Service worker.
At the close of the fiscal year 1939, loans totaling $4,938,365.20 had been granted to chartered corporations, credit associations, cooperatives, and individual Indians, from the revolving credit fund established by the Indian Reorganization Act.
Of this amount, $2,656,869 had actually been advanced for use of Indians to aid them in their various business enterprises.
In addition, allotments amounting to $150,068 were made on 22 reservations not operating under the Reorganization Act, from gratuity funds appropriated by Congress.
Also, there was allotted $465,207.71 from tribal funds to 31 reservations.
In the local administration of revolving credit funds a superintendent, in a recent report, states his belief that Indians have actually learned more about credit and doing business on a business basis during the last 2 years than in any 25 years hitherto.
Cooperative associations of many types, such as lumber mills, livestock associations, fisheries, etc., which have gained in number and members during the last 3 years are exercising a marked influence not only on the reservations immediately served but on others which have kept a most observant eye on their economic progress.
Due to the particular trust status of Indian resources and the consequent inability to offer these as security to regular credit agencies, the revolving credit fund affords the only means by which many sound enterprises may be developed over such widely separated sections as the Lakes States, the Plains, the Pacific Northwest, southeast Alaska, and several of the Southern States.
Outside of Oklahoma and Alaska, loans from the revolving fund are made only to chartered tribal corporations whose loan applications must be accompanied by a statement of a sound economic program, including security or other guarantees of repayment, terms of repayment, and plans for managing the credit business of the tribe.
The tribes in turn re-lend to individual Indians.
In Oklahoma the Government makes direct loans to cooperatives, to credit associations, to individuals, as well as to chartered tribal corporations.
The general attitude on the part of the Indians has improved and the Apaches are well on the road to permanent economie stability.
Health conditions have improved greatly and there has been a 25-percent reduction in hospital cases on the reservation.
This improved morale can be traced at least in part to the fact that the earned income per family rose from $450 in 1935, to $1,056 in 1937, indicating something of the achievement of a people who have gained confidence in their ability to do something for themselves.
Again, in 1920, over 1,000,000 acres of the total of 1,610,000 acres which constitute the San Carlos Reservation were leased to white cattlemen.
The San Carlos Indians owned very few cattle, and by 1925 their inventory was 1,995 cows with a branding of 775 calves.
The culling of this small herd, introduction of purebred sires, controlled breeding, improved range practices and the withdrawal of the range from white permittees has made possible the expansion of the cattle industry.
The entire reservation is now stocked with Indian-owned cattle.
At the close of the calendar year 1938, the Indians owned 32,018 head of beef cattle of excellent grade and quality.
During 1938 the Indians sold 11,620 head of live animals and 210,540 pounds of dressed meat which brought a total of $356,- 000, while the Indians themselves consumed more than 105,400 pounds of dressed meat.
The San Carlos reservation has 15 grazing districts, eight of which are now under the management of an Indian cattle growers’ association.
The other districts are to be consolidated with those under association management or reserved for breeding purposes and maintenance of the tribal herds.
The tribe itself maintains two herds.
One of these consists of some twelve hundred head of registered Herefords.
Each vear Indians of good character desirous of entering the cattle business are permitted by the tribal council to purchase choice yearling heifers from this herd for which they are given ample time to repay.
The cooperative livestock associations have encouraged individual initiative and participation and as a result, the Indians, through these associations, are managing the round-ups, sales, introducing improved range practices, and other matters affecting their livestock enterprises.
Management and other necessary expenses are met by assessing a grazing fee of $5 per head for each animal sold.
Isleta Pueblo in New Mexico has furnished another example.
Four years ago the Pueblo's range was largely leased to whites.
Droughtrelief cattle were supplied the Isletas.
In the spring of 1936, 864 grade Hereford cows, 65 registered Hereford bulls, and 247 heifer calves were turned over to the Pueblo of Isleta under a trust agreement which provided for the operation of the herd by a board of trustees.
This agreement also provided for repayment to the United States for these animals within 3 years of one yearling heifer of like quality for each of the 864 cows and 65 bulls turned over to the Pueblo.
A board of trustees, composed of three Isleta Indians, handled this enterprise from the start and began making repayments in 1936.
Payment for the entire herd was completed in accordance with the terms of the trust agreement in November 1938.
According to the report of the board of trustees as of March 1, 1939, the Pueblo had a total of 598 cows, 62 bulls, 136 yearling heifers, 6 yearling steers, and 38 calves, valued at approximately $40,960 and a cash bank balance of $10,322.03.
In other words, these Indians fulfilled their contract within the time specified and still retained about two-thirds of the number of the basic herd, had all debts paid and had a cash balance of $10,322.03.
The cattle trusteeship has been extended and at the present time the management of the entire range of Isleta is in process of being vested in the trustees by the Pueblo.
Conservative management is assured.
Other types of cooperatives are also being undertaken by the Indians, one of which is the Lyons Cooperative Association in Oklahoma.
A number of full-blood Cherokee Indians living in the hilly eastern part of Oklahoma, where the land is ill adapted to general agriculture, decided to band together for the production of strawberries which can be grown in their section.
An Indian was chosen to supervise the work and a loan of $2,800 was made to the organization to enable the members to clear land and purchase the necessary plants.
The members have now worked together for 2 years and their first rop was sold this past spring for over $1,200.
A payment was made on the loan and the balance distributed to members on the basis of their participation in the activity.
Another type of economic enterprise being generally undertaken is that known as a "corporate enterprise."
Such enterprises are those which the tribe, as a corporation, can best undertake and perform.
Commitments totaling $769,756.30 had been made to such enterprises as of June 30.
The purposes of these enterprises are varied.
A salmon cannery has been built in Alaska, a tourist-cabin enterprise is being operated in Wisconsin, a community dairy and farm are being conducted in California, an oyster culture enterprise in Washington, and a municipal water project in the Pacific Northwest.
Several Indian tribal corporations are producing hay on tribal lands.
An example of such a corporation haying enterprise is that being conducted by the Fort McDermitt Paiute and Shoshone Indians in Nevada.
Hay land, which was purchased with funds provided under the Indian Reorganization Act, is being operated on a community basis, every family sharing in the proceeds in proportion to the services rendered to the project.
This enterprise has now been operated successfully for 3 years.
Individually owned cattle on this reservation increased from 200 head in 1935 to 1,200 head on January 1, 1939.
Another illustration of tribal corporate enterprise is a store being conducted by the Jicarilla Indians in New Mexico, where $85,000 was loaned to this tribe for the purchase and operation of the store.
The economic life of these Indians centers around sheep.
The store supplies credit to carry the members through the year and markets the lambs and wool for them.
The store has been in operation since November 1, 1937, and to December 31, 1938, sales of over $135,000 had been made.
The enterprise was operated very conservatively, overhead expenses being kept down to 6.7 percent and the stock turned approximately 5.4 times.
A per capita distribution of profits of over $2,500 and a patronage distribution of over $2,500 were made to members of the corporation.
A payment on the loan of $8,500 plus carrying charges was made to the United States.
Of equal importance in the task of economic rehabilitation has been the aid extended in recent years by the purchase of additional lands.
Under the Reorganization Act, Congress has appropriated $3,450,000 for the purchase of lands for those Indians who have little or none.
With this money, there has been acquired to date a total of 228,517.16 acres at a cost of $2,774,625.06.
In addition to the lands purchased under the Indian Reorganization Act, a number of purchases have been made under special legislation, and several with tribal funds.
Under the Arizona-Navajo Boundary Act of June 14, 1934, 480 acres were purchased during the fiscal year bringing the total of lands purchased under this act to 318,615.46 acres at a cost of $462,615.22.
Under another specific act the Indian Office is completing a purchase program for the Goshute Indians of Nevada which will provide approximately 4,400 acres and which will automatically reserve for their use 65,000 acres of surrounding public-domain lands.
Other important land purchases during the year under specific legislation included 91 acres on the Wind River Reservation, 3,200 acres within the boundaries of the Navajo Reservation, 2,639 acres for the various Pueblos in New Mexico from tribal funds awarded pursuant to the Pueblo Lands Board Act, and approximately 5,000 acres for various tribes from their own tribal funds.
The irrigation projects operated by the Indian Office vary in size from a few acres, such as purely subsistence garden tracts, to projects containing 140,000 acres.
Irrigation construction projects vary in magnitude from the construction of small diversion dams and ditches and installation of small pumps to the building of large dams, extensive distribution systems, and power plants.
During the past several years, the use of irrigated lands by Indians has increased greatly and the Indians as tribes and individuals are showing a constantly growing interest in the development of their land resources.
In addition to its regular operating and construction activities, the Irrigation Division has provided very essential support to the protection for Indian water rights.
Among the outstanding achievements of this Division during the past year have been the 70 projects on the Navajo Reservation where hundreds of Navajos are working with Government engineers to bring water to parched desert lands where the livestock industry can po longer support one of the fastest growing population groups in the Nation.
The Navajos are not only working but donating labor to such an éxtent that on many projects only supervision and materials are furnished by the Government.
From reservation irrigation projects during 1937, the Navajos realized a crop income of $270,661.
A total of 1,142 families took part in farming operations.
Alfalfa and corn were the chief crops produced.
The importance of these figures lies in the fact that the Navajos spent $1,400,000 for food last year which indicated that they are dependent to a great extent on commercial items in their diet.
It opens up the possibility of supplementing their present production by increasing their farm acreage to supply the hay, grain, vegetables, and fruit which they now must buy.
It is estimated that an additional 5,500 acres under cultivation will produce all unprocessed agricultural products now imported.
This would be equal in value to the $225,000 worth of such products now purchased each year.
An additional 14,000 acres would produce enough wheat to supply the $325,000 worth of flour which Navajos now buy every year.
A significant forward step in the advancement of the Indian rehabilitation program was taken when the Bureau of the Budget and Congress approved the recommendation of the Indian Office that hereafter rehabilitation funds be made directly available to the Office of Indian Affairs.
By this direct appropriation, there is assured a more positive measure of administrative control and expeditious handling of allotments.
Such allotments by supplementing the activities of land acquisition, irrigation, extension, forestry, and education have enabled the Service to concentrate upon the integration of all activities, personnel, and allocated funds, and have thus consummated a more complete use of Indian resources.
The major projects have involved the construction and repair of Indian homes and auxiliary farm buildings, and the construction of community buildings to house self-help activities.
Successful settlement of Indian families on the land included not only the construction of buildings but water development, fencing, and other types of land improvement.
Other projects included enterprises for canning, sewing, arts and crafts, and community and individual gardens.
In these gardens, many thousands of pounds of foodstuffs were raised for immediate consumption and for preserving and drying.
The following report furnishes definite proof of the desire of Indian women to provide a normal mother's care for their families.
During the year 1938 a total of 10,871 meetings was held by Indian Service home-economies workers with Indian women, on canning, drying, clothing, home improvement, nutrition, child care, and other subjects.
The Civilian Conservation Corps has not only maintained its excellent work of the preceding years, but has perhaps surpassed it through the force of the momentum gained by past experience and the growing appreciation of all who were its beneficiaries.
The work of the enrollees operating at 71 agencies is followed with the keenest interest by the Indian people.
Improved transportation, communication, and detection for forestfire suppression, by the construction of truck trails, telephone lines, lookout towers, protection of timber stands, development of stock water facilities, fence construction to define range boundaries, and erosion-control projects are of far-reaching value.
Indian leadership is encouraged.
The enrollee training courses are worked out locally at each agency and embrace a wide variety of subjects.
The training offered has been of such high character as to enable many enrollees to secure and hold remunerative positions in the business field.
In no section of the country has the attitude of Indian wards become more responsive than among the Seminoles, who have steadfastly resisted all attempts at assimilation, and until very recently have even refused to permit their children to attend schools.
During the past 3 years, 45,000 acres of fine grazing land have been acquired and are now in productive use, improved methods of agriculture have been established, 1,000 head of high-grade cattle have been added to the livestock inventory of the tribe, and a school has been opened where there is the heartiest response to the Government's educational program.
Today the descendants of the great Osceola are utilizing their new lands to the fullest extent, roads in the Big Cypress country are being built largely by means of Indian labor, fences are being erected to take care of cattle and hogs, citrus orchards have been planted, and more than 1,000 palmetto houses have been built for them in the past 2 years.
These measures are at last meeting with the most enthusiastic cooperation from those Seminoles, about one-half of the tribe, who have established themselves on the two new reservations.
Indians have always been a rural people.
In spite of efforts to urbanize large numbers of Indians and to assimilate them into white city and town life, the great majority of Indians remain in home communities.
The Indian's land is his greatest economic asset and his most precious heritage.
His land problems must be solved, or the Indian will go down to extinction.
The allotment of Indian lands met with sturdy resistance.
The Menominees in Wisconsin kept their 200,000 acres, richly forested, in tribal ownership, as did the Red Lake Chippewas in Minnesota, with over 400,000 acres.
A good many reservations, such as the Wind River in Wyoming and the Klamath in Oregon were only in part allotted, and the surplus, or a portion of the surplus, saved in tribal ownership.
Only in the Southwest, in Arizona and New Mexico, did the Indians generally escape the march of allotment, though the irrigable lands of a few tribes were allotted.
Today, the New Mexico Pueblos still retain their unallotted Spanish grants along the Rio Grande; the Mescalero Apaches in New Mexico, their 470,000 acres; the Fort Apache and San Carlos Apaches in Arizona, their 3,200,000 acres; the Hualpai in Arizona, their 900,000 acres; the Papago, their 2,600,000 acres; and the Navajos, their 16,000,000 acres.
On the unallotted reservations problems of land conservation are often acute.
Already, overgrazing and misuse have seriously deteriorated the ranges and agricultural lands of Indians.
The problems of conservation are further complicated by two basic factors affecting the present and future fate of Indians: (1) Rapidly increasing populations, and (2) fixed boundary limits, within which there is a steadily diminishing productivity of the land base.
The operation of these two factors can be illustrated by the situation to be found on the large unallotted reservation of the Papago Tribe in southern Arizona.
The early habitat of the Papago was in southern Arizona, stretching from the city of Tucson across the Mexican border into the State of Sonora.
On the reservation in the United States, around 6,200 Papago are now living.
Originally they resided in 10 or 12 villages, but today, with their expansion helped by water developments throughout the reservation, they have 55 permanent and 34 seasonal villages.
Originally, the reservation area was one of well-vegetated ranges, perennial grasses, desert shrubs, cacti and desert trees.
Due to overgrazing, the ground cover has been depleted and accelerated erosion is active on most of the range.
The digging of deep wells and construction of other water developments have enabled the population to spread out over the entire area, putting greater pressure everywhere.
12,000 to 25,000, while the Soil Conservation Service has, after careful study, estimated the carrying capacity of the range at 9,675 cows year long.
The economy of the Papago today involves three elements: agriculture, livestock raising, and earned wages.
As with the numbers of livestock, accurate figures of the relative proportion of these three sources of income are lacking.
Studies made in 1936 would indicate that there was in that year an average family income of about $530.
Of a total income, $775,000, about 16 percent came from domestic crops and wild food gathering and 24 percent from livestock, sold and consumed; in other words, less than half of the income came from the land.
On the other hand, 52 percent of the total income was attributed to wage work (17 percent from Government wages in CCC-ID, 9 percent from private wages, and 18 percent from wages earned in the copper mines at Ajo, Ariz., located just off the reservation).
For the Papago and for all other Indians confronted with a like problem of resource conservation, the Government has the difficult task of education in sound land-use practices, and also of inaugurating practical conservation programs to save the soil from further exhaustion, to build it up, and to stabilize it on a permanent utilization basis.
The problem takes in the whole complex of anthropology, sociology, economics, administration, and the technical disciplines related to soils science, agronomy, range vegetation, livestock management, and agricultural engineering.
Whereas there is real hope and expectation that the resource problems of the unallotted lands can and will be solved, there is no such optimism in the United States that the tenure problem of the allotted reservations can or will be solved in time to rescue the land base for these Indians.
To the tenure problem on such reservations are added acute problems of land use and conservation as well, making the total problem indescribably difficult.
Since 1933, a deceptive economic recovery has been realized through the expenditure of large amounts of Government relief funds, evidenced to the Indians in wages, but aside from the construction of numerous conservation and other projects of great importance and value, the basic land use situation remains acute.
The inheritance and reinheritance of the original allotments has fractionated the interests of the heirs into smaller and smaller equities.
As physical partition of an average trust allotment of 160 acres into legal shares is impractical in most cases, the heirs have naturally preferred to secure the benefit of their equities in lease moneys.
The Government has had to face increasingly the alternative of selling the land and dividing the proceeds among the heirs, or of retaining it in trust status—and going into the real estate leasing business.
In 1937 a study of the land pattern at the Lower Brule Reservation (South Dakota) showed that of an original area of 234,850 acres, 40 percent (94,000 acres) had been alienated to whites through the sale of fee-patented land; only 1 percent (1,450 acres) remained feepatented in Indian ownership.
Twenty-three percent (52,500 acres) of the total acreage was in “original" allotments and 25 percent (59,000 acres) in "heirship" status.
The remainder was made up of one-tenth of 1 percent (240 acres) in tribal status; four-tenths of 1 percent (1,200 acres) set aside for agency and administrative purposes; and 10 percent (26,800 acres) of alienated fee-patent land repurchased for the Indians by the Government since 1934.
Of the land in Indian ownership approximately 16,000,000 acres, or somewhat less than one-third, is forest land.
Indian forests not only contribute millions of dollars annually to the Indians' income, but also serve a valuable protective function in regulating run-off, preventing erosion, and conserving water supplies.
The income from the forests constitutes the principal income for several thousand Indians.
On the basis of these estimates of volume the total stumpage value of the timber in Indian ownership amounts to $87,462,597.
The commercial timber represents about 82 percent of this amount while the reserve timber on the cut-over lands and the noncommercial timber represent 4 percent and 14 percent, respectively, of the balance.
Although in most respects the management of the Indian forests is directed toward the same objectives sought in the management of a public forest, there are certain fundamental differences which give rise to radically different management problems.
Indian lands are private property held in trust for the Indians by the United States and must be managed for the best benefit of the Indian owners and in -accordance with specific statutes laid down by Congress.
Moreover, by reason of the fact that the Indian forest property is so elosely involved with the welfare of the Indian people, any plan of forest management which may be devised must take cognizance of the general Indian problem and be coordinated with the whole Indian Service program of social and economic betterment.
This necessitates a far greater flexibility in long-term forest management plans than is ordinarily required or considered ideal from a purely technical standpoint.
Constant adjustments must be made to meet the immediate pecuniary needs of individual Indians or to facilitate the educational and industrial advancement of the tribes.
The management of Indian forests has always been conducted well within income.
In fact, the record discloses that during the past 29 vears, namely from 1910 to 1938, inclusive, a cash return of $44,- 169.940 was realized.
The cost of administration during the same period totaled $7,105,690, approximately 40 percent of which was borne by the Indians and the balance from Treasury funds.
The total income includes $5,346,108 received from the sale of grazing privileges for the fiscal years 1931 to 1938, inclusive, but does not include several million dollars of free-use grazing enjoyed by the Indians during this period.
1. That the practice of conservation on Indian lands for the period 1910 to 1938, inclusive, reflects a ratio of costs to income of approximately 16 percent.
2. That the average annual cost of administration when compared with the area under management reflects a cost per acre of about 1 cent.
3. That the average annual income when considered with the capital value of the property under management reflects a ratio of income to capital value of about 2 percent per annum.
During the fiscal year just ended the Indians realized a cash income of $1,168,235 from their forests in addition to their own free-use valued at $273,610, thereby reflecting a grand total income from timber of $1,441,845.
Grazing resources during the same period produced a cash revenue of $678,720 plus free grazing by the Indians valued at $794,680 or a total return from grazing resources of $1,473,400.
These receipts from grazing when considered with the income from timber show a total gross revenue from forest and range resources of $2,915,245.
Of this total cost of administration $111,993 was paid from Indian funds and the balance from Treasury funds, thereby indicating a net cost to the Government of $330,487 for the practice of conservation on 46,000,000 acres of Indian land under management in the continental United States, or somewhat less than 1 cent per acre.
Generally speaking the forest and range business of the Indian Service during 1939 exceeded that of the preceding year.
A comparatively large number of small timber sales were approved and completed.
The degree of Indian participation in forest development increased somewhat, especially on the Quinault Indian Reservation and the Mescalero Indian Reservation.
The use of the ranges by Indian stockmen increased substantially in practically all of the western range States.
Five new major timber sale contracts were approved during the year covering the sale of timber on the Colville and Klamath Indian Reservations.
These sales involve a total volume of 152,609,000 feet board measure and have an estimated stumpage value of $503,370.
The average price received for the timber was $3.30 per thousand.
Two major timber sales were completed during 1939 and 13 others are due to terminate in 1940.
Hence the new sales approved will replace to some extent those which have expired and which will expire during the coming year.
For many years sawmills on Indian reservations have furnished employment and building materials to the Indians.
In a treaty of De cember 2, 1797, with the Oneida, Tuscarora, and Stockbridge Indians, residing in New York State, the United States agreed to erect a complete gristmill and sawmill to serve those nations and, if one convenient location could not be found, to erect two such sawmills.
It was further agreed that the United States would provide, during 3 years after the mills were completed, one or more suitable persons to manage the mills, keep them in repair, instruct some of the young men of the three nations in the arts of miller and sawyer, and provide teams and utensils for carrying on the work of the mills.
A treaty of September 29, 1817, with the Wyandot and six other tribes, provided for the erection of a sawmill and gristmill on the Wyandot Reservation, and the treaty of October 6, 1818, with the Miami contained a similar provision.
Many subsequent treaties made like provisions for sawmills and gristmills and small sawmills were constructed on practically all reservations having forests suitable for saw timber.
In subsequent years sawmills were provided under special appropriations or by special departmental action.
Most of the Indian sawmills constructed during the earlier periods were operated mainly to produce building materials for the Indians rather than as commercial enterprises.
However, in two notable instances, namely, the Menominee Reservation sawmill at Neopit, Wis., and the Red Lake Reservation sawmill at Redby, Minn., commercial logging and milling operations were initiated for the purpose of furnishing the Indians with employment.
The Menominee Indian Mills were authorized by the act of March 28, 1908; a large double-band sawmill with an annual capacity of 20,000,000 board feet was established; the plant was destroyed by fire in 1925 but was rebuilt and has continued to operate through the years.
The mills have produced a substantial profit since the beginning of operations and have provided the Menominee Indians with self-sustaining labor and the means of a healthful livelihood.
The Red Lake Indian sawmill was authorized by the Appropriation Aet of June 5, 1924.
This is a single-band sawmill with an annual capacity of between 4,000,000 and 5,000,000 feet board measure.
It furnishes the Red Lake Indians considerable employment each year and provides them with cheap building materials.
Several other sawmills operated by the Indian Service gave employment and training to a large number of Indians during 1939.
Notable among these smaller units is the sawmill on the Navajo Indian Reservation.
Production at this plant is still comparatively limited.
However, profits have been reasonable, the operations of the unit have been effectively conducted, and the enterprise bids fair to assist the Navajo Indians materially in establishing themselves on a self-sustaining basis.
Consistent with its declared policy of conservation covering the management of Indian forest and range resources, the Indian Service seeks a high degree of protection against the ravages of fire, insects, and disease.
Fire still constitutes the principal problem on Indian lands, and although major forward steps have been taken toward its solution during recent years, losses continue to occur annually.
The protection organization of the Indian Service was reorganized during the year and revised regulations were issued in a handbook of fire control.
This new set-up definitely fixes the responsibility of field officers and has materially increased the efficiency of the organization.
Considerable improvement in the fire record has taken place as a result, and although 145,000 acres of forest and range land of the total 46,000,000 acres under protection was burned over during 1939, two-thirds of the area burned was confined to a single reservation,' namely, the Warm Springs Reservation of Oregon which sustained a serious loss because a large number of fires caused by lightning occurred at one time.
With the exception of this reservation, the fire record of the Indian Service for the year 1939 was outstanding, the damage comparatively reasonable and the cost of suppression low.
The damage has been estimated at approximately $100,000 and the cost of suppression at $62,000, or a unit cost of controlling the area burned of 6.2 cents per acre.
The range lands in Indian ownership, including the forested area suitable for grazing, aggregate about 42,000,000 acres and constitute approximately 80 percent of the total Indian land resource.
Within the well-known livestock producing regions of these western range states, Indian range lands form an important part of the total national range resource and exert a considerable influence upon the livestock industry generally.
The importance of Indian grazing lands to the Indians in particular and to the livestock industry generally is revealed in the fact that a total of 988.194 Indian-owned sheep and goats, 262,630 Indianowned beef cattle, and 124,719 Indian-owned horses and mules were grazed on Indian lands during the fiscal year 1939.
A large number of livestock owned by whites also grazed on Indian lands.
The use of Indian ranges by Indian livestock owners has increased materially during recent years and it is the aim of the Indian Service that all livestock grazed on Indian reservations will ultimately be in Indian ownership.
Considerable progress has been made in the conservation of Indian range resources during recent vears, although much remains to be accomplished.