T T IS FORTUNATE that when the fighting broke out in Korea on June 25, 1950, the people of the United States found themselves advancing steadily along the road to increased production.
The World War II peak output of military and civilian goods and services, once viewed by some observers as an emergency economic phenomenon, has been followed by record-breaking production for peacetime living.
Since the end of hostilities in 1945, the production spiral has continued swiftly upward.
The period has been marked by an unequaled advance in the standard of living of the American people.
In addition, our citizens have extended substantial and effective assistance to the people of other free nations who are striving to reestablish sound economic foundations.
Convincing and satisfying evidence of this achievement is reflected in our consumer goods-our houses and household conveniences, our food, our cars, our clothes—as well as in the great expansion of our industrial plant.
In the year ending June 30, 1950, our national output exceeded 260 billion dollars and we achieved a national income of close to 220 billion dollars.
The number of people working reached 61.5 million.
The pay of working men and women increased substantially.
While farm income was slightly down from the peak war years, it continued to reflect a high standard of prosperity.
The steel industry, a generally accepted gage of the Nation's economic well-being, was operating close to 100 percent of capacity in June 1950.
During the year we built about 838,000 single family houses and 216,000 multifamily dwelling units—far exceeding construction records for any previous period.
In the attainment of this gigantic production, never remotely approached anywhere in the world, we have been expanding not only our industrial plant but our civic horizons.
Our determination to establish and secure more abundant living for ourselves and our children is clearly reflected in the plans currently being made to push production still higher in the next 10 years.
We are coming rapidly to realize that we need accept no narrow limits for our production goals.
Along with this conclusion is the growing conviction that the products of an expanding economy, fashioned by the collective skills of the people from their own natural resources, should be used for enriching the living of the people.
We are, in fact, growing in our awareness that our greatest resource as a Nation is the people themselves and that whatever we do with our material resources must be done for the people's welfare.
Spurred by this growing awareness, we need to take stock of the economic factors that underlie the advances we have made.
It is vital that we should recognize both our weaknesses and our strengths if we are to succeed in directing the Nation toward the bold produetion goals we have established.
It is today of exceptional importance that there be a full understanding of our capacities for maintaining abundance in peacetime and for meeting the emergency requirements of defense.
The growth in America's economic strength could not have come about without intensive utilization of all our country's resources—our minerals, soils, forests—our lands and waters.
These resources have, up to now, met our major needs in peace and war.
Nature has supported us almost without stint as we became the greatest industrial Nation in the world, the producers of almost half the world's industrial goods.
These natural resources, however, are not inexhaustible and the step-up of our industrial production has meant their systematic depletion at an increasingly rapid rate.
We need, therefore, to reappraise our resources of minerals, power, water, and land.
These resources must provide the foundation for the dramatic program of economic expansion which has been called for by the President.
If we are to achieve the goal of lifting our annual output of goods to the new levels demanded by our defense program and the needs of our people, we must plan our efforts carefully, in order to stretch our limited resources as far as possible.
There is abundant evidence that this appraisal of our natural resources is going forward with increased understanding by the American people of the problems they may have to face before our goals for economic expansion can reach full fruition.
As the year covered by this report ended, our activities in all areas of natural resource development were being rapidly mobilized to meet the needs of our expanding economy.
While these activities were directed toward harnessing our resources for maximum service to the people in peace, their bearing upon America's security in war was also a foremost consideration.
Americans generally understand the historie importance of our natural resources in building this country's strength.
As the Nation grew, we moved into the vast interior of the continent, claiming large tracts of public land, cutting magnificent stands of timber, planting the rich soil, and extracting the plentiful minerals from the earth.
With the advent of the new industrial age and the internal combustion engine, we pumped deeply into our oil reserves, issued huge demands on industry for products of steel and aluminum, plowed ever more intensively the lands of our plains, and built new communities to care for our fast-growing population.
We were both slow and reluctant to recognize that the demands we were making on our resources were stupendous, even when considered in relation to the abundance provided by nature.
We are finally coming to appreciate, however, that our resources are limited, and that the bottom of the barrel has nearly been reached in some instances.
We have too often wasted our soil by mining it without rebuilding its fertility, or by leaving it uncovered to be ravaged by wind and rain.
The loss of enough soil each year to cover 21 million acres to a depth of 7 inches is evidence of our failure to protect the basic source of our food and fibers.
We have wasted our forests by failing to replant trees when vast areas were depleted by careless cutting, or by permitting fire and disease to wreak unchecked destruction.
We are beginning to realize the extent of the drain on minerals created by our industrial usages throughout the years.
Extracted minerals are an irreplaceable resource, and it is not surprising that we should begin to experience mineral shortages as the price we are forced to pay for our past industrial achievements.
Our rich iron ore is seriously depleted, and careful study and bold action are needed if new sources are to be made available for continued and expanded steel production.
It is possible that the consumption of petroleum in the next decade will exceed domestic discoveries.
And there are some strategic minerals which we must now obtain from other nations if our economic expansion goals are to be attained.
Our water resources are a matter of considerable concern in some areas.
We have paid scant attention to water because of its great abundance.
We are now aware that we have too long permitted stream pollution, and the wasted flow of waters that might be stored in reservoirs for man's use.
Many communities are now facing tremendous problems because they failed to plan for adequate local water supplies.
A realistic appraisal of our resources, in relation to the growing needs of a dynamic industrial economy, must lead to a rejection both of continued waste and the kind of conservation that consists of unsound and unnecessary hoarding.
Our resources can be of value to us only if they are used.
But we can never again afford to gorge and waste.
Our remaining resources can serve most of our needs adequately, but only if we direet their devlopment and exploitation wisely.
Our program of conservation and mobilization of national resources to provide the underpinnings for continued economic expansion will demand intelligent management in a score of vital areas.
Management of our soil will entail the employment of the most modern scientific techniques in soil enrichment, protection, rebuilding, and use.
Management of our mineral resources calls for continuous geological surveys for new deposits, experimentation for more economical usage, the development of substitutes and synthetics, the devising of techniques for utilizing low-grade deposits, and continuous efforts to make foreign ores accessible.
Management of our water resources must be directed toward securing accurate and extensive knowledge of water availability everywhere in the Nation, along with comprehensive information about the water needs of our communities and farmlands.
Fully effective management will look toward the necessary steps to meet water needs, whether by restoration of underground water levels, storage by diversion into reservoirs for later use, or the elimination of pollution.
Management of our public lands will carry such socially and economically important responsibilities as the preservation of watersheds by reseeding and reforestation, the careful administration of permits for stock grazing, and diligent sapervision of mineral leases on the publie domain.
The people of our country are recognizing the vast wealth they possess in the great river basins.
For generations we watched our rivers rise and fall with the melting of the winter's ice and the rapid runoff of rain the earth could not absorb, seeing only that this was the course of nature throughout the world's history.
These rivers today supply great new strengths to our economy and to the lives of the people.
Combining imaginative boldness and high technical skill, we have begun to put our rivers to many productive uses.
We are bringing water to once arid lands and to other areas where water has been insufficient.
The constantly pressing problem of energy for our industrial economy and our daily living is being met increasingly by the production of hydroelectric power made possible by river control.
In no area of our natural resources is efficient and careful management so urgently required as in our river-basin developments.
The Department of the Interior is directed to safeguard and to manage the vast resources which we need to maintain and expand our economy.
During the last year, the Department has focused attention on programs designed to make these resources more valuable.
In the current period of world tension, we must work aggressively to mobilize our resources intelligently to meet any test which may confront us.
The present crisis demands that we be prepared to expand our production of minerals, raw materials, food, and energy with the same dynamic vitality that we displayed in World War II.
Expanding population and defense needs will place a burden of peak production on our mineral industries.
Production of mineral commodities to satisfy our growing demands can be met by a wise and foresighted conservation policy based upon an adequate knowledge of our mineral resources and aided by maximum productive efficiency.
What mineral resources do we possess?
We still lack adequate information as to the extent and kinds of minerals in the United States.
The major goal of the Geological Survey's program of geologic and mineral resource surveys and mapping is to provide this information.
The search for this essential knowledge must be carried forward with intensified zeal.
Geological and geophysical investigations must be expanded during the next 10 years.
Many of our essential minerals are being consumed faster than they can be produced from our known domestic deposits.
Further, the rate at which we are using up some of them is increasing in the face of a growing difficulty in discovering new deposits.
Geologic mapping, now progressing at a rate of about 1 percent of the country's area per year, is expected to increase shortly to a rate of at least 5 percent per year.
Concurrently, the Geological Survey plans to continue expansion of its program so that the search for needed minerals and fuels may be carried to greater depths and into hitherto unproductive areas.
The Department has a major responsibility in the formulation of a national minerals policy, which will have as its basic objective an adequate supply of all mineral raw materials needed to support an expanding industrial economy, a rising standard of living, and the requirements of national security.
For those raw materials in abundant reserve, special attention is being given to the development of technologies which will make them available at the lowest possible costs consistent with sound conservation procedures.
For those minerals which are less abundant, on the other hand, the need is for stimulation of searches for new deposits, improved utilization technologies and development of more efficient methods.
As domestic minerals decline, the review of foreign sources must be continued.
We are developing an inventory of our mineral resources, together with necessary information and plans for their most effective utilization.
Such a program will comprise three closely coordinated types of activity: (1) The examination and development of mineral deposits; (2) laboratory investigations to develop economical methods for recovery of usable products; and (3) translation of this information mnto programs to meet the foreseeable needs of industry.
An outstanding example of the type of planning now required is found in the problem of supply currently faced by the steel industry.
Steel is the most important metal industry in terms both of its size and its influence on the well-being of the Nation.
The possibility of providing a continued supply of raw materials for this industry is a matter for urgent attention.
The steel industry has always been dependent on imports of manganese and chromite.
During the past vear, Soviet Russia, chief supplier of manganese, has sharply reduced exports to this country.
The Bureau of Mines is devoting intensive efforts to a search for economical methods of extraction from low-grade domestic deposits.
It is also seeking to develop a process for recovering manganese from slag deposits at the mill.
Since World War II it has become necessary to take stock of our supply of iron ores.
We are rapidly using up our best ores in the Mesabi Range of the Lake Superior region.
We are currently using more than 114 million tons of ore to produce about 100 million tons of steel, and peacetime expansion would be expected to raise this drain to 125 million tons of ore within a relatively short time.
Accelerated expansion of the steel industry as the result of defense requirements may lead shortly to demands for 136 million tons of ore.
A real gap now exists between both our immediate and future needs for iron ore and the supply that is being produced.
We should act promptly to close this gap.
There are immense deposits of low-grade silicious iron ores called taconites in the Lake Superior iron region.
One of the technological problems to which we must give increased attention is the economic mining and concentration of these ores and the preparation of the concentrate for use in iron blast furnaces.
This is so despite the fact that the industry, now seeking to attain an annual output of taconite concentrates amounting to 13 million tons by the end of 1960 and 25 million tons by 1970, is probably devoting more research effort to this than to any other metallurgical problem.
We can also augment our supply of iron ores through increased imports which we can expect as our steel companies develop supplies from other areas.
If the rich ores of Labrador are to be made readily available to the great steel centers of the Midwest, the development of the St. Lawrence Seaway is needed and should not be underestimated in any appraisal of an expanding steel industry.d.
We have other pressing metal and minerals problems which have been accentuated by the national emergency.
Development of new metals and alloys and new metallurgical processes offers bright promise for extended use of our common minerals and the conservation of those in short supply.
Raw materials from which to make aluminum and magnesium are abundant and facilities for expanding production of these two useful metals must be readily available when needed.
Titanium and zirconium, new metals, the ultimate uses of which can only be guessed, are already of extreme importance for specialized uses.
As we view the prospect of a continuously expanding population, it is significant to note that our rate of consumption of mineral fuels has outstripped the rate of population growth during the first half of this century.
This fact bespeaks both technological development and a rising standard of living.
Consumption of petroleum products is expected to reach 2.3 billion barrels in 1950.
By the end of the next 10-year period, it may exceed 3.1 billion barrels, an increase of 38 percent over the present rate of consumption.
Viewed on the basis of annual per capita consumption, the increase is even more startling—4.3 barrels in 1920; 7,6 in 1930: 10.1 in 1940; and 15.2 in 1950.
The year 1960 should find us using 18 barrels of petroleum for each citizen of America—for heating, for transportation, for chemicals, and for other purposes.
This dramatic increase calls for careful scrutiny of our reserves.
Except for the depression vears of 1930–34, the supply of petroleum has increased vearly without significant interruption.
Growth in natural gas production has been similar, and the increase since World War II has been greatly accelerated by construction of great pipelines.
There is no way of knowing the quantity of these fuels ultimately to be recovered from the earth, but the estimated proved reserves of petroleum on December 31, 1949, were 28.4 billion barrels, equal to 14 times recent annual production rates.
Similar reserves of natural gas amounted to 180.4 trillion cubic feet, or 29 times eurrent yearly rates of depletion.
It is possible that the consumption of petroleum will exceed domestic discoveries during the next decade, particularly if defense needs should increase the drain greatly.
Should this situation develop, there will be a period of several years in which the discrepancy between current consumption and new discoveries will be met by withdrawal from reserves, increased imports from abroad, synthesis from oil shale, or a combination of these sources.
We are forging a research and development program to furnish the scientific, engineering, and economic information required for the production of synthetic liquid and gaseous fuels from our abundant reserves of oil shale and coal.
In the laboratories and pilot plants of the Bureau of Mines, scientists and engineers are developing the processes for industrial use which will assure ample supplies when the need arises.
We are also engaged in petroleum research designed to improve current production methods and to increase the efficient utilization of oil produced.
The application of secondary recovery methods in older oil fields illustrates the finest type of conservation activity: In many instances, the injection of gas, air, or water into underground oil sands has made it possible to harvest a second crop of oil which, in some cases, equalled or exceeded the first recovery.
There are even greater opportunities for improvement in primary production practices.
While the economic position of the coal industry is complex, the supply of coal continues abundant.
Published estimates of coal reserves, based largely on work done a half-century or more ago, are not sufficiently accurate for current use, and investigations now in progress will be continued to supply exact information on our coal resources.
Essentially all of the growth in the total energy requirements of our economy in the past 30 years has been absorbed by petroleum and natural gas.
The coal industry has expanded only in time of war or in the immediate postwar period.
In spite of this trend and the current highly competitive state of fuels, the increasing energy markets of the future will probably require large supplies of coal.
There are at least three recognizable channels into which coal will be directed: The continued expansion of electric power facilities, probably at the mine; synthetic oil production; and underground gasification of coal for the generation of electric power at the mine.
We intend to press the study and evaluation of the complex factors that influence production and consumption of fuels.
The health of our fuel industries is essential to the Nation's economic welfare, and from these studies and evaluations there must evolve a broad national fuel policy designed to bulwark a strong economy.
The inereasingly troublesome problem of air and stream pollution in many of our communities is closely related to the continuous expansion of industries processing minerals and mineral fuels.
Expansion of industry, which will continue, means that more airborne wastes are constantly being produced and that in many communities objectionable levels of contamination are being reached for the first time.
The serious results of air pollution in Donora, Pa., in 1948 brought the question of air pollution forcibly to our attention.
Discharge of wastes into streams, likewise a serious problem, incréases the costs of municipal water purification, destroys recreational facilities, and, in congested mill areas, can raise water temperatures to the point where reuse becomes difficult.
Through the Bureau of Mines, we are continuing our research in waste disposal with the dual objective of conserving resources and maintaining the maximum benefits of pure air and water supplies.
It is important that the human resources in mine and industry be protected and that conditions favorable to efficient production be maintained.
Chief hazards in coal mining are in roof and coal falls and in haulage operations.
The mining industry has responded favorably to the Bureau of Mines' program of investigation, research, and service.
Approximately 43 million square feet of mine roof have now been supported by the new bolting method which has decreased the accident rate appreciably.
Special attention is now being given to finding means to eliminate death and injury in haulage operations.
In addition, investigations and recommendations on industrial hygiene in the mineral industries will be made to eliminate serious hazards to workers from the effects of gases, dusts, or toxic mineral compounds.
The growth in these hazards requires new methods of engineering and medical control.
There is strong reason to believe that continuation of health and safety programs can reduce the 1949 mineral industry fatality rate of 0.66 to 0.25 per million manhours of exposure by 1960.
Two activities closely associated with inspection and safety programs in our mines are directed toward the conservation of unused coal deposits.
One of these is the current program to control fires on the public domain and on private lands which have destroyed many millions of tons of coal.
The other, which aims to make avail.
It is anticipated that the studies and plans bearing on this tunnel construction will be finished within 2 or 3 years.
The vital need for integrated water and power development has become increasingly apparent in the postwar period.
Our requirements for new land and for electric power are growing steadily in peace.
As a result of the international erisis, these requirements may increase drastically.
If our population approaches the estimated 175 million within the next decade, current land and power requirements will mount substantially.
In 1950, our 150 million people were supported by the products of about 353 million acres of cultivated land, or approximately 2½ acres per person.
The ratio a few years ago was about three acres per person, and only improvements in agricultural science and in the sound use of cropland prevented a reduction in living standards as the ratio fell.
There are signs that we are nearing the ceiling to which we can push the average productivity of our presently cultivated soil.
We are also warned that about 180 million acres of farm land are subject to continuing damage from erosion and soil exhaustion.
Here is a challenge to our citizens as they plan the expansion of our economy in the next 10 years.
To a considerable extent, the needed new land can be found in the 17 Western States where many millions of potentially fertile acres lie unused or nearly unused as a result of irrigation problems that are too vast to be solved by unaided local units.
Aware of this vital resource, Congress has directed that we undertake to reclaim this western land and develop more fully the power of western rivers.
The Bureau of Reclamation has continued during the past year a record peacetime construction program designed to add many acres and many kilowatts to our national productive potential.
The amount of farm land whieh ean be brought into production in the West is limited by the amount of water available.
Total average runoff in the 17 States is estimated at about 393 million acre-feet of water a year.
At present, about 75 million acre-feet are being put to use.
Through careful reclamation, nearly 60 million additional acre-feet can be used yearly—about 11 million for household and industrial purposes, and the balance for irrigation.
About 21 million acres of land are now under irrigation in the Western States, but nearly 9 million of these have inadequate water supplies to permit intensive farming or to maintain a stabilized regional economy.
By further resource development, these water-short acres can be provided adequate supplementary water.
In addition, néarly 7 million acres of new land can be brought into production.
Current experiments with rain-making and the recovery of fresh water from the sea may provide, in time, means of increasing these estimates of potential new acreage.
As great as are our needs for increased farm acreage, they are apt to be exceeded in urgency during the next 10 years by our requirements for electric energy to meet the huge demands created by our industrial expansion and our rising living standards.
To meet these demands, while conserving our exhaustible supplies of fuels, hydroelectric power development is a foremost priority.
In 1947, we produced about $430 worth of manufactured goods per person.
Total industrial activity, transportation and other industrial services, amounted to $1,222 per person.
The maintenance of such standards for even 20 million more persons in 1960 requires a 24- billion-dollar inerease in annual production—without allowance for added defense production or for expansion of living standards.
The national energy requirements to power this necessary industrial expansion in the next decade are tremendous.
In the last quarter of a century we have made marked progress in enlarging our electric power plant, but at the same time the insatiable appetite of American enterprise for power has created phenomenal demands.
While the capacity of the United States power plant tripled over the past 25 years and doubled between 1940 and 1948, the output of electric energy from generators has multiplied five times.
As rates for electricity have gone down, the use of electricity has gone up.
Per capita use more than quadrupled between 1924 and 1948.
Notwithstanding the steady expansion of generating capacity and the increase in output, the supply of electric power in the United States has barely kept up with demand.
World War II caused power demands to skyrocket.
Brown-outs and other stringent conservation measures were necessary in many parts of the country.
Since the war, power demands have continued their upward spiral.
The economic growth of the Pacific Northwest and some other areas has been stunted by lack of sufficient low-cost energy.
It is now estimated that the demand for power will have doubled again by 1960 under a growing peacetime economy.
In addition, we must recognize that emergeney demands are being created by our defense needs for energy to produce ships, tanks, planes, aluminum, and minerals.
Privately owned electric utilities are now in the midst of a large expansion program.
They are planning substantial additions to the generating capacity of their plants within the next few years, and are looking ahead to spectacular expansion in the future.
The publiely owned segment of the electric utility industry likewise envisages substantial additions to the national power plant in the near future.
In carrying out presently authorized river basin development programs, in connection with federally constructed projects for which the Department of the Interior is the marketing agency, the Federal Government plans to install in plants, now under construction, generating capacity of about 4.5 million kilowatts in hydroelectric facilities, and to add another 3.3 million kilowatts of capacity in the ultimate development of these same projects.
Other authorized projects, on which construction has not yet started, will provide another 10 million kilowatts of capacity.
It is estimated that the rivers of the United States can be harnessed to provide nearly 77 million kilowatts of additional hydroelectric capacity, substantially more than the total capacity of our power plant today.
Western streams alone can provide nearly 50 million kilowatts of capacity and generate about 270 billion kilowatt-hours a year.
For the most part, these streams can generate this power through the use of the same reclamation structures that will control them for irrigation.
The fact that approximately 800 million barrels of precious and irreplaceable oil would be required each year to produce as much electricity as the United States can develop by tapping its unused hydroelectric resources dramatically underlines the importance of water power development as a conservation measure.
Our water and power developments have already paid rich dividends in the economic and social development of our country.
In the Pacific Northwest, for example, the availability of low-cost power as the result of river basin developments has inspired extraordinary economic growth.
Whereas the average income of the United States increased 129 percent between 1929 and 1947, the average income of the Pacific Northwest increased 202 percent.
The Bonneville Power Administration, which markets power from the Federal plants in operation at Bonneville Dam and at Grand Coulee Dam, indicates sales in the Pacific Northwest area of 13,033,- 000,000 kilowatt-hours during the 1950 fiscal year.
The total generation of energy by the Columbia River system was exceeded only slightly by the Tennessee Valley Authority, the largest system, public or private, in the world.
The wartime and postwar growth of population and industry in the Pacific Northwest has already absorbed the entire developed power resources of the area and created a power shortage which will continue for several years.
Present construction schedules to provide additions to the power supply, including all private and public projects now in progress, cannot meet the deficiency.
The prospect of new and additional demands for power for defense production assures that electric power supply will remain a critical issue to both the economic development of the Pacific Northwest and the security of the Nation for some years to come.
The economic advance of the Southwest is being spurred by the activities of the Southwestern Power Administration, which is now maintaining over 500 miles of high-voltage lines and in the past year marketed over 441 million kilowatt-hours of eleetric energy.
In the Southeast, a new regional power agency was established during the past fiscal year.
The Southeastern Power Administration was created in March 1950 to market electric power generated at Army Corps of Engineers flood control projects in a 10-State area: Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia.
In New England, where power generating capacity increased only 48 percent in the 1929–47 period, as compared to 77 percent for the country as a whole and 146 percent for the Pacific Northwest, income growth has lagged behind the national average.
A new record of achievement in hydroelectric power capacity and production was set on Federal reclamation projects during the 1950 fiscal year when total installed capacity reached 3,218,400 kilowatts, and nearly 20 billion kilowatt-hours of energy were generated.
If generated from fuel, this output would have required about 40 million barrels of oil a year.
The total cost of 18 multipurpose projects, including the Missouri River Basin project, now being undertaken is estimated at about 6.3 billion dollars.
Total gross revenue from sales of power on these projects, over the period during which repayment of costs is scheduled, will be about 7.2 billion dollars.
The net return will be nearly a billion dollars.
Further indication of the sound financial foundation of these resource developments is the fact that more than twothirds of the cost of irrigation facilities is paid for by the returns from the sale of generated power, and the balance by water users.
Crops produced on Federal reclamation projects in 1949 were worth over one-half billion dollars—an average of $105 an acre.
The cumulative total gross crop value since 1903 is 6.9 billion dollars, more than three times the investment in the projects to date.
The vast contribution the multipurpose development of our river resources has made to our national strength is high-lighted by many record-making achievements.
The water stored in Boulder Canyon, besides watering a half-million acres for growing fruits and vegetables, is also providing power to help make Los Angeles the Nation's first city in the manufacture of aircraft and oil field equipment, and the second in the production of rubber goods and tires.
During World War II, Hoover Dam powered shipyards, airplane factories, mines, rubber factories, and the great basic magnesium plant; its capacity to contribute more power for such purposes is being increased.
Water stored by Grand Coulee Dam, eventually designed to irrigate a new agricultural realm three-quarters the size of Delaware, is producing power which is building a new industrial empire in the Pacific Northwest.
With less than half of its generators on the line during the war, Grand Coulee turned out power equivalent to the labor of a million men working 8 hours a day for 78 years.
It helped make ships, planes, tanks, and the atomic bomb.
Its capacity is already at least 60 percent greater than it was during the war.
More that 140 million dollars has been invested in factories dependent upon Grand Coulee power—10 of them had produced over 700 million dollars' worth of aluminum products by June 1949.
The expanding agriculture, industry, population, and income which are the natural outgrowth of river development projects are clear testimony as to their value to the regional and national economy.
They are the fruits of our movement into a new frontier and a harbinger of the greater America that our citizens are building.
They are a promise that the needs of coming generations can be met, and that our Nation can continue to lead the world's people toward the kind of living that free men and women can achieve by their united efforts.
The future contribution of river basin development to the progress of our growing Nation will depend upon the decisions the people make today.
At present rates of progress, about 50 years will be required to develop fully the West's available irrigation and hydroelectric power potentialities alone.
In some regions, a full century will be required.
In order to meet anticipated loads at any particular time in the future it is essential that planning and construction be initiated early enough so that these projects may be completed and be in operation when the loads materialize.
It necessarily follows that our present plans for meeting the needs of 1960, for example, must be based mainly on work initiated early in the 1950's.
The Bureau of Reclamation is in the process of developing a 7-year construction program, subject to congressional approval, of projects costing about 3.9 billion dollars—an average of about 550 million dollars per year.
Part of this money would be used to complete projects already authorized and the remainder for new projects.
If this program is carried out, full irrigation would be provided for about 1.8 million acres of land, or enough for 18,000 new family-size farms, and supplemental irrigation for 3.1 million acres, comprising about 53,000 farms.
Land thus brought into stable production would constitute an area equal to that of the State of New Jersey.
This proposed program would add about 3.2 million kilowatts to the generating capacity of the Bureau’s plants, almost doubling present capacity, which would reach 6.4 million kilowatts.
These totals inelude estimates of the output of plants built by the Army Corps of Engineers, and marketed by the Bureau.
Demand for Reclamation power will be outstripping even these enormous proposed increases, however.
The planned increase of 3.2 million kilowatts will fall short by almost 1.5 million kilowatts of estimated peacetime needs.
Besides pushing forward as rapidly as possible in developing the water resources of the country, the Department of the Interior is moving ahead at a record pace in setting up facilities for the trunkline transmission of electricity from federally constructed plants now operating or under construction.
At the same time, numerous cooperative arrangements are being made with rural electric cooperatives and other customers given preference by law to insure them power distribution at low rates.
These projects for development of our river valleys will yield continuing financial returns far into the future.
They will, in fact, be reflected in an income curve rising faster during the decade of the sixties than in the fifties.
To many, it is of even greater importance that herein lies our opportunity to continue to apply American ingenuity to problems that must be resolved to assure the future welfare of ourselves and our children.
Our conquest of our land frontiers won us world-wide admiration.
The conquest of our water frontiers will give us land, power, food, new communities, new industries, greater leisure, and a steadily mounting income.
Most of all, it will bring the sure and certain realization that we still know how to work together to harness the gifts of nature for the service of man.
Throughout the Nation's history, the growth in our strength has closely paralleled the availablity of land for an increasing population.
Pioneering on homestead lands in the West created a rich tradition that symbolizes the conquest of vast natural resources by a strong and virile people.
The Nation possessed much land; and farmers, stockmen, lumbermen, prospectors, and railroad builders spread to the Pacifie with titles to acreages from the public domain.
With the growth of an industrial economy and the concentration of people in towns and cities, the free land era, when land was offered by the Government in return for the exploitation of its fertility in soil or minerals, came to an end.
Emphasis on efficient management of land resources dominates the Government's activities on the public domain today.
Those resources are the common property of the people, whether they be public lands, Indian reservations, or national parks.
They have contributed to the year ending September 1949, an increase of about 50 percent over the highest prewar year.
Althought restricted travel during the war years prevented full use of the parks, they were not idle.
Many areas were used for special training of men and women in uniform.
Some were utilized as hospital, rehabilitation, or rest areas.
Over 8 million service men and women visited the parks.
The effective management of our parks will continue to be of utmost importance if they are to provide the benefits we expect from them.
Maintenance of facilities, roads, and landscape are of primary importance.
Such maintenance problems were high lighted following World War II by the conditions caused by a protracted period of material and labor shortages.
It will also continue to be necessary to weigh carefully such potential threats to park lands as overgrazing, logging, or imprudent water diversion.
Closely related is the problem of determining whether the national-park type of protection and management is being applied to enough of our land.
While the primary mission of the Service is “to conserve the scenery and * 水 * objects" in the national parks as is stated in the act of 1916 which established the Service, greater attention will be directed to the full development of the recreational resources of the areas under its supervision.
There is a growing awareness in the Service that a broad program of recreational planning must be undertaken, the need for which becomes of increasing importance as population trends continue upward.
It is inevitable that proposals will be made from time to time for certain types of resource development which, if carried out, would destroy some of the scenic or recreational assets of our park areas.
The erection of a needed dam, or the diversion of water, might well undermine these values.
In such cases, the issue must be weighed carefully in terms of the long-term best interests of both the Nation and the region.
In the case of the Dinosaur National Monument, a decision has been made that the construction of dams at Echo Park and Split Mountain is justified and their authorization has been recommended.
On the other hand, it has been decided that the waters of the Colorado River should not be diverted past Grand Canyon National Park; that flood control works should not be permitted to damage Mammoth Cave; and that the national interest does not justify flooding of 20,000 acres at Glacier National Park by a dam at Glacier View.
It is fallacious to declare that the construction of a dam will enhance the scenic or historic values of a national park or monument, and it is only in the rare case—such as Echo Park and Split Mountain—can they be justified.
In these cases, it is obvious that if the projects are authorized as recommended, extraordinary efforts and diligence will be exercised so that the pristine beauty of this area will be preserved.
The people of America have always enjoyed abundant resources in fish and wildlife, which have contributed to our food sources and provided unsurpassed opportunities for recreation.
Growing world populations require protein food supplies beyond the production possible from land areas.
Many nations are accordingly turning to the sea to augment these supplies.
Within the United States, most of the inshore fisheries have been exploited almost to full capacity, but great, untapped fishery resources remain in the sea.
In order to prepare for the requirements of our rapid economic expansion we should be ready to exploit the rich food resources of the sea.
The Department's Fish and Wildlife Service is engaged in a study of tunas and other high sea fishes over a vast area of the mid-Pacific.
Prewar Japanese exploration and our own preliminary work indicate the existence of potential tuna resources in these regions comparable with those that have been so highly valuable on our west coast.
The proper development of these new resources should provide substantial quantities of food and income for the people of our Nation and of the Pacific Island Territories.
The high cost of discovery, development, and expansion of great oceanic areas is well known.
This factor of cost has led to continued exploitation of already discovered fishing grounds by commercial interests with only rare efforts to find new grounds.
Such exploratory fishing as that undertaken in the Central Pacific has consequently become a well-recognized Government function for providing new food sources, for the development of new industry and employment, and for relieving strain on stocks of fish in known grounds.
That a similar type of investigation must be carried on in many other oceanic areas is becoming rapidly clear.
The Fish and Wildlife Service has also recently undertaken exploratory fishing programs in the North Pacific, in Alaskan waters, in the North Atlantic, and in the Gulf of Mexico.
Location of fishery resources, determination of seasonal abundance, improvement of efficiency in operation through testing of gear and vessel equipment these are necessary steps in fishery investigation.
Of possible revolutionary significance to future commercial fishing operations are currant experiments in fish location by sonic and electronic devices.
Exploratory fishing is of particular importance to the future development of the fisheries of Alaska which, after more than 80 years of commercial utilization, still form the basis of the Territory’s most important industry.
Approximately 250 fishery wholesale and manufacturing establishments in Alaska employ between 25,000 and 30,000 persons and have yielded products valued at more than 100 million dollars annually in recent years.
With the doubling of Alaska's population in the last decade, land use and industrial developments have taken place which will ultimately have an impact on the anadromous fishes of the Territory.
Further development, including stream utilization for hydroelectric energy, harvesting of timber for manufacture of pulp, and clearing lands for farming—all will present serious problems in maintaining fish supply.
Vigilant control will be required if fishery resources are to survive.
In addition to supplving food, the sea also provides fertilizers for our soil in the form of ocean plants and fish life.
Many of the hundreds of fishes not suitable for human consumption can be processed for fertilizer.
Fishing in our inland and coastal waters has become the country's greatest single outdoor sport.
During 1949, nearly 15.5 million licensed fishermen enjoyed this type of recreation.
Catering to the needs of anglers throughout the Nation is now an important industry.
Conservation through restocking and proper management of waters is essential if fishing is to be continued.
In the case of trout waters, for example.
Many of our hatcheries, built before or around the turn of the century, must be modernized to produce greater numbers of legal-size trout.
Programs for such modernization are under way.
Stream pollution is a major deterrent to this particular use of our water resources.
With increased industrialization and growth of communities, increasing attention must be directed to sewage treatment, abatement of industrial waste disposal in streams, and more effective soil conservation practices.
One out of every seven Americans fishes or hunts, or both.
During the last fiscal vear, hunting licenses totaled nearly 13 million.
A much greater number of persons derive esthetic enjoying from study and observation of wildlife, and from vacationing in areas enhanced by the presence of wildlife.
It is important that there be clear recognition of the need for building lines of defense against destruction of our wildlife through a firmly established system of refuges and management areas.
In our efforts to maintain a constant waterfowl and wildlife population, it has become clear that there will always be competition and conflict with other economic interests.
We must recognize however, that our wildlife heritage, once damaged, is difficult to reclaim.
Already there is great need for additional refuges along the ancestral flyways for migratory waterfowl.
The problem of more nesting and feeding grounds is equally urgent.
Predators among the country's wildlife population received continuing attention during the year.
Rats and mice, among the most destructive, annually consume or contaminate about 200 million bushels of grain or the production of approximately 8 million acres.
Jackrabbits and pocket gophers, existing in relatively small numbers in semiarid regions, are known to multiply tremendously when such areas are irrigated or when other farm practices increase their food supply.
Current progress in the development of selective control methods, repellents, and other practices indicates that such techniques can be effectively applied to produce much greater economic and recreational benefits for our country.
In the decade ahead the intelligent conservation of our fish and wildlife resources can play an important part in assuring the kind of America we want to achieve.
In an expanding economy that calls for steadily increasing production, our Indian citizens must be counted upon to contribute their talents and energies to our national wealth.
They must be helped to find their rightful place in the national social and economic structure.
As our economy becomes more mechanized, the unskilled laborer is fast disappearing in manufacturing, mining, lumbering, and agriculture.
The future will offer little advancement for the Indian unless his economic opportunities can be measurably broadened.
The advancing tide of our technological civilization has largely destroyed the economic foundation of the early Indian population, just as it has altered the economic pattern of an earlier America.
The old Indian economic pattern cannot be restored as it once existed, and our Indians cannot be isolated from contact with the present-day world.
They must be brought closer to the center of the productive process of our economy.
In the meantime, the problem of the Indians must be worked out in terms of safeguarding and developing such resourees as they now have, in raising standards of health and education, and in helping to create jobs off reservations that have proved economically inadequate.
The greatest resource the Indians possess is land.
Of approximately 45 million acres of Indian grazing land, the owners are actually using about 34 million acres.
If the additional 11 million acres could be brought into Indian use, livestock holdings could be increased by approximately 300,000 head of breeding cows.
This stock, on the basis of 60 breeding cows per family, would provide an average annual income of $1,200 for 5,000 families.
In 1946, Indians were using 900,000 acres of the available 3,000,000 acres of cropland.
Non-Indians were leasing 1,800,000 acres.
The value of sales from the crops produced by Indian farmers in 1946 amounted to $7,700,000, or approximately $8.50 per acre.
This acreage return could, of course, be increased by more intensive farming methods.
Entirely apart from that possibility, if the same rate of return were realized by Indians on the lands in non-Indian use, their income from agricultural production could be inereased by 15 million dollars.
On the basis of $1,200 per family, this income would benefit 12,500 additional families.
The achievement of these goals would provide a $1,200 minimum income for 34,000 families of the 44,000 who derive some part of their income from agricultural pursuits.
A total of 10,000 would remain part-time farmers or farmers operating small units.
Similarly, expanded irrigation projects would add greatly to Indian resources.
The total area of Indian lands now irrigated amounts to approximately 540,000 acres.
Ultimate development would place 1,285,000 acres under irrigation.
If these 745,000 additional acres were divided into 60-acre parcels they would provide an improved income for 12,400 families.
More than 500 million board feet of timber is annually taken from Indian-owned forests.
These forests are managed under sustained yield principles.
With few exceptions, this timber is harvested by non-Indian operators.
It is obvious that expanded Indian income would result if more Indian timber were milled on the reservation and if the milling process were extended to include finished products.
The situation of the Indians today is one of limited opportunity.
In 1945, when non-Indian farmers were obtaining a net annual income of $2,541, Indian families received a net income of $501.
Many reservations remain essentially underdeveloped.
Many Indian groups find it difficult to gain a decent living from their limited land resources and must increasingly turn to industry.
Although the natural resources of the Indians contribute materially to the economy of many Indian and non-Indian communities, full employment of their resources, both physical and human, is far from being achieved.
The need for development along lines other than agriculture is clear.
Trades and services offer many possibilities for increasing Indian employment.
If the Indian human resources are to be utilized, new ineome producing activities both on and off the reservations will be essentíal.
Indians of the United States are demonstrating the progress they can make when they are given technical aid.
Properly developed programs will not only enable them to accelerate the progress they are making and contribute to our expanding economy, but also make possible eventual withdrawal of Federal supervision.
Irresponsible propagánda attacks upon the United States as an expansionist power bent on exploiting the peoples and resources of colonial areas receives its most incisive answer in the development of our Territories.
In the islands of the Caribbean and the Pacific and in Alaska there are nearly 3 million people under the United States flag.
Here péoples of many races draw on the resources of our 48 States for as much or more than they contribute to American wealth.Here peoples, who already enjoy a large measure of self-government, look confidently forward to increasing self-government to the fullest extent.
The Office of Territories was created, not as a colonial office but to promote the well-being of citizens of areas not yet admitted to statehood.
It is founded on the antithesis of colonialism, for its primary responsibility is to further“the economic, political, and social development of the territories of the United States.
The Territories can be expected to contribute their full share to the expanding economy which the President has called for.
That share will be proportionate to the resources of these areas, to the initiative of their citizens, and to the wise planning of government.
Many branches of the Department contribute to territorial needs through their facilities for cooperative planning and cooperative accomplishment.
At the same time much of this joint effort is directed toward increasing the initiative and self-sufficiency of the citizens of the areas served.
The work of the Office of Territories contributes to territorial progress in an area where economics, politics, and social evolution are different aspects of the same growth pattern.
The Office has promoted progress in all three aspects by devoting attention to assisting the 'Territories of Hawaii and Alaska in securing statehood.
Statehood can be expected to give great impetus to economic expansion in these areas in the next decade.
At the close of the fiscal vear the Congress-enacted Public Law 600, which gave to the people of Puerto Rico the right to frame their own constitution based on democratic principles.
The new law received the vigorous support of the Department and its acceptance through a referendum in Puerto Rico seems certain.
In the Pacific, the people of Guam have been made citizens of the United States and will assume territorial status with a popularly elected legislature.
Administrative responsibility for Federal authority is in the course of being transferred to the Department of the Interior.
Developments somewhat similar are ahead for American Samoa and the Trust Territory.
All of these political changes, in the Caribbean, in the Pacific, and in Alaska, will contribute greatly to the Nation's economic growth.
America has well learned the lesson, written in the blood of her citizens, that a slave people can be neither a happy nor a productive people.
This lesson is being brought to bear in the Territories, not through conflict, but through Federal encouragement of the aspirations of men and women who have been created equal in the right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
This report has directed attention to the Nation's problems and responsibilities in conserving and intelligently mobilizing its natural resources to meet the needs of an expanding economy.
I feel strongly that this task is urgent.
We need to develop our resources more fully to meet the requirements of our rapidly growing population and to attain a continuously higher standard of living for our people.
We cannot afford to mark time.
We must plan soundly and work aggressively to meet the demand for greatly increased production of energy, goods, and food.
We face a great danger as well as a great opportunity.
If we waste our irreplaceable resources, we shall place a heavy burden upon our children and our grandchildren.
On the other hand, if we soundly conserve our exhaustible resources, develop new sources of supply, and expand our use of our inexhaustible resources, such as water power, we shall have made a rich contribution to the future national welfare.
We cannot close this report without stressing the additional heavy strain which has been imposed on all of our resources by the continued international crisis.
To meet the grave threat of Communist imperialism, we are putting our industrial machine into high gear.
The success of this defense production effort will depend first of all upon the adequacy of our natural resources.
Lack of a plentiful and expanding supply of power, of minerals, or oil might defeat our cause.
With so much at stake, we must make sure that we can do the job.
Secretary of the Interior.
HE BUREAU OF RECLAMATION FORGED AHEAD to a new high in its construction accomplishments for development of irrigable lands and expansion of hydroelectric facilities on projects throughout 17 Western States during fiscal year 1950.
Undertaking the unprecedented 387-million-dollar program, the Bureau increased the scope and speed of its operations and ended the year with an all-time record construetion achievement.
Contracts in force at the beginning of the year, covering construction and construction equipment and material, totaled nearly 474 million dollars.
At the end of the year they totaled 481 million dollars.
During the year, 900 new construction and supply contracts were awarded totaling nearly 140 million dollars.
The construction contracts alone amounted to 117 million dollars, or about 84 percent of the total awarded.
An indication of over-all accomplishment, in the biggest annual program since Bureau of Reclamation activities started in 1902, is shown by the year's construction progress.
Construction work accomplished during the year amounted to a total value of 277 million dollars, the largest annual dollar volume in Reclamation's history.
Spotlighted examples of major project features finished in fiscal year 1950 include four dams on the Missouri River Basin project; two dams on Columbia Basin project; Tracy pumping plant and large segments of Delta-Mendota and Friant-Kern canals on Central Valley project; and Granby Dam, which forms the main reservoir on Colorado-Big Thompson project.
Greater efficiency and stabilization of operations were effected through many progressive developments and improvements within the Bureau's organization, including better coordination of operations between the Branch of Design and Construction and field organizations.
Decisions were speeded up, standard designs used more extensively, and many internal administrative improvements made.
Certain basic design methods were improved through restudy and unification and by adapting designs to commercial standards whenever practicable.
Noteworthy progress was made in specifications procedures, numerous improvements being worked out in cooperation with contractor organizations.
The increased number of bidders and steady reduction of bid prices was at least partly attributable to these improvements.
Streamlined bidding and contract awarding procedures expedited initiation of construction, and more uniform contract administration improved field relations with contractors.
Progress in research studies and investigations was furthered during the year, resulting in findings that will lead to better and cheaper construction, improved design of water-control structures, the application of new testing techniques, better control of waterweeds, and other important developments.
New studies initiated include one now underway in the Bureau's newly established radioisotope laboratory on the application of radioactive tracer techniques in the studies of weed control and materials research.
Important contributions to national defense and to Nation-wide programs were made by the Bureau, and duplication of effort minimized, through its cooperative work with other agencies.
Substantial progress was made in this work in design, research, mapping, and other fields.
The Bureau began tests for the Atomic Energy Commission in the development of heavy, dense concrete to be used in the Commission's structures.
Tests were made of concrete aggregates for the Tennessee Valley Authority.
Laboratory tests were made to assist the Forest Service in eradicating beetles in national forests; coordinative seismological studies with the Coast and Geodetic Survey and National Park Service were expanded; designs and specifications were prepared for a dam to be built on the Rio Grande by the International Boundary and Water Commission; assistance was given to at least one city in developing its city water supply.
Countries world-wide also benefited from Bureau technical assistance during the fiscal year, helping to cement friendly international relations, and promote cooperative world progress.
Foreign officials from some 37 different countries visited and studied Reclamation projects.
Engineering trainees from 14 foreign countries studied Bureau engineering practices at its engineering offices and laboratories.
First-hand engineering assistance was given by the Bureau and its technicians to a dozen or more widely scattered countries, involving many thousands of miles of travel.
All told, the Bureau of Reclamation through its multiple activities during fiscal year 1950 made notable progress toward helping to strengthen the Nation and contribute to its expanding economy.
Internationalwise, it exemplified the United States Government's efforts to aid other democratic countries in achieving full development and economic progress, pointing the way to eventual world peace.
Major contracts awarded during the year included such extensive construction as the Olympus and Pole Hill tunnels on the Colorado-Big Thompson project in Colorado, the Tecolote tunnel on the Cachuma project in California, Trenton Dam on the Missouri River Basin project in Nebraska, and the Duchesne Diversion Dam and tunnel on the Provo River project in Utah.
A summary of the major contracts awarded is given in table 1.
Acceleration of construction brought several major features on many projects to completion, some ahead of schedule.
Of the four major structures—Heart Butte, Angostura, Medicine Creek, and Enders Dams—completed on Missouri River Basin project, two were finished much earlier than contracts required.
Heart Butte, scheduled for completion by November 1950, was actually completed in December 1949.
Medicine Creek Dam, planned for completion by November 1951, was finished in December 1949, almost 2 years earlier than required under the contract.
Granby Dam and Reservoir on Colorado-Big Thompson project, and Tracy pumping plant of Central Valley project, were also completed.
A Bureau record for excavation and earth-placing operations was made at Bonny Dam, Missouri River Basin project, in November 1949 when 1,280,000 cubic yards were excavated and 1,100,000 cubic yards of earth filled.
A high monthly record for concrete placement was set in June at Hungry Horse Dam, largest Bureau dam now under construction, when approximately 123,000 cubic yards of concrete were placed.
Another record achievement was chalked up for the Bureau with the rapid reconstruction of the 1914-built tunnel No. 3 on Grand Valley projəct in Colorado, which collapsed March 9, 1950, as the result of a landslide.
Awarded a contract March 16, the contractor rushed the work and holed through April 27, about a month ahead of schedule, thus assuring a water supply for 29,000 acres of highly developed land on the project.
Grand Coulee pumping plant was advanced to 83 percent of completion during the year, while the contract called for only 54 percent.
Soap Lake siphon, Columbia Basin project, was 80 percent completed by year's end, but only 55 percent of the contract time had elapsed.
The first unit of Kortes power plant was placed in operation June 30, the first power plant on the vast Missouri River Basin project to generate power.
Although severe winter conditions and other factors retarded progress on construction of Kortes Dam and the power plant, work progressed to about 85 percent of completion.
When the year ended, construction was in progress on 14 storage dams and 3 diversion dams, 11 power plants, 6 pumping plants, 20 miles of tunnels, 500 miles of main canals, and 2,200 miles of transmission lines.
Principal features completed on Bureau of Reclamation projects this year are shown in table 2.
The structures tabulated in table 3 are among the major features expected to be placed under construction on Bureau of Reclamation projects during fiscal year 1951.
These include nine dams, three power plants, three pumping plants, over 1,000 miles of transmission lines, 170 miles of canals, and laterals to serve over 121,000 acres of irrigable lands.
Cachuma project: Cachuma Dam, Calif.
44 miles Mohawk Canal, Ariz.
Paonia project: 24 miles Fire Mountain Canal, Colo.
Anchor Dam, Wyo.
Bixby Dam, S. Dak.
Missouri River Basin project—Con.
Riverton project: 27 miles Muddy Ridge canal, Wyo.
Colorado-Big Thompson projeet: Willow Creek Dam, Colo.
Carter Lake Dam, Colo.
Rattlesnake Dam, Colo.
Flatiron Afterbay, Colo.
Pole Hill power plant, Colo.
170 miles transmission lines, Colo.
Major features of Bureau projects expected to be completed in fiscal year 1951 are listed in table 4.
These structures include nine dams, four power plants, two pumping plants, 2,300 miles of transmission lines, 40 miles of canals, laterals to serve 14,000 acres, and 6 miles of aqueducts.
The costs of many basic materials for Bureau of Reclamation work and labor costs continued to rise during the year.
Steel, lumber, copper, zinc, and other building materials rose in price as activity of the construction industry increased.
Although the cost of living declined somewhat early in the year, it again rose near the end of the year and wages increased accordingly.
The cost of nearly all Bureau construction work declined, however, as indicated in table 5.
No increase is shown in any of the types of work listed, and only three items, all of which required the use of large quantities of steel, remained the same in June 1950 as they were in July 1949.
This is attributed to increased competition among bidders for most work.
As contractors cut their unit prices where stiff competition prevailed, it was evident that they were operating on a smaller margin of profit.
Other factors enabled contractors to reduce their bids, including the decreased cost of earth-moving operations.
Such work requires a minimum of labor, and materials and costs were lowered by increased efficiency of large earth-moving equipment.
In addition, equipment and materials were in much better supply and it was unnecessary to include contingency items previously required to cover possible delays in obtaining materials and equipment or in making costly substitutions.
Labor was in good supply, resulting in greater efficiency of operations and increased production efficiency.
New specifications methods were adopted to assist contractors in preparing their bids for Bureau work.
Specifications procedures were initiated aimed at minimizing the inclusion of contingency costs in bid prices.
To provide for progress payments under the lump-sum price for water control and care of the river during construction, a method was adopted to permit the contractor to submit a breakdown of his watercontrol plan.
The contractor was thus permitted to allocate the total lump-sum price into 12 major divisions of work.
When approved, the allocation and the water-control plan became a part of the contract and monthly estimates for progress payments.
Specifications paragraphs regarding extra work and contractors' protests were modified to provide for a more equitable and expeditious procedure in handling and processing contract adjustments.
Construction specifications were individually analyzed for division of work into smaller schedules to give small contractors an opportunity to bid.
Provision was made in many specifications for final acceptance of work completed but which constituted only a portion of the total contract; thus contractors were relieved of responsibility for maintenance of the completed and accepted portions.
The construction contract bid form and the specifications paragraph relating to commencement, prosecution, and completion of work were modified to expedite start of construction.
Although the Bureau is still furnishing items of large quantity and specially designed metal work and operating equipment, specifications were prepared providing for the contractor to furnish the major portion of construction material.
Early in the year, Bureau engineers' estimates of the cost of performing construction work by contract were published for the first time, permitting contractors to compare bids with the engineers' estimates, thereby assisting the contractors in planning future work.
Coordination of field design activities with the Chief Engineer's office in Denver and the development of closer liaison between these offices speeded design and specification work materially.
The program of inspection to assure satisfactory service conditions and functions of Bureau of Reclamation structures and facilities, initiated in fiscal vear 1949, was conducted successfully.
In all, about 250 major structures were inspected since start of the program, and work totaling approximately $2,000,000 was accomplished as a result of inspection recommendations.
To assure proper and efficient operation of installed equipment and machinery, operating criteria and instructions were issued to operators of Bureau power plants, pumping plants, dams, and canal systems.
Information was provided to field design offices preparing operating instructions for delegated design work.
Progress in standardization of operation instructions continued, and instructions prepared for the operation of appurtenant works of dams, and test apparatus for earth and concrete dams.
A panel of engineers reexamined all basic design criteria for concrete dams, making many revisions.
The panel reviewed results of observations of instruments embedded in Bureau dams such as Grand Coulee and Shasta, and also considered applicable data from such outside agencies as Tennessee Valley Authority and the Corps of Engineers.
New criteria that may effect important economies in construction of future concrete gravity dams were being considered at year's end.
Concurrent with the expanded design and construction activities, increased emphasis was placed on continued improvement of the engineering staff and administrative functioning.
A notable development was the initiation of annual conferences of Bureau construction engineers during the winter season when major construction activity is curtailed.
The first conference, devoted to discussions of technical and administrative procedures, was held in February in Denver.
Aimed at improved control procedures and uniform construction standards, the conference stressed design and specifications requirements and construction practices, and resulted in better all-around understanding of over-all objectives.
As the result of a development program for recruitment and training of construction engineers, initiated during the year, 70 engineers were selected as potential construction engineers from those who applied for training and from those nominated by the Bureau's regions.
At the peak period this year, more than 300 young engineers participated in the program for developing young engineers under the rotation plan, initiated last year with a group of 50.
Under the plan, participants move from one assignment to another every 3 months, thus gaining diversified engineering experience, and providing the Bureau with a more flexible work force.
When the work load is heavy in one part of the engineering organization, rotatees are reassigned to balance the load.
Also, during the year, more than 100 young men were given 90-day field assignments to round out their experience.
An operation and maintenance liaison representative was appointed on the Chief Engineer's staff in March 1950, in order to assure that significant information regarding operation and maintenance experience and requirements is made available to design and construction engineers.
Data concerning operation and maintenance activities were compiled for use in developing improved design and construction practices.
A management survey of the Bureau's design and construction functions, completed in 1949, resulted in clarification of branch and field offices' responsibilities.
Specific recommendations based on the survey strengthened coordinated activities and improved over-all efficiency of design and construction operations.
An Assistant Chief Engineer was appointed in the fall of 1949 to assist the Chief Engineer in directing the technical and administrative functions of the Branch of Design and Construction.
The Bureau's research laboratories in Denver intensified activities in the investigative and testing fields.
Major efforts were directed toward studies of construction materials and verification of designs through the use of structural and hydraulic models, as well as investigations of new construction materials and processes which would lead to better and cheaper construction.
An important addition to the laboratories was the installation of a 5-million-pound universal testing machine, used to determine the strength and elasticity of construction materials in both tension and compression.
With facilities for testing large specimens up to 32 feet in length.
One result of the machine's use indicated that large, low-alloy, high-strength steel members could be successfully welded.
Another addition to research facilities was the establishment of a new radioisotope laboratory, headed by a scientist trained at the Atomic Energy Commission's laboratories in Oak Ridge, Tenn.
Here, initial studies were begun on the application of radioactive tracer techniques in the studies of weed control and materials research.
The laboratory is expected to assist research engineers in the solution of many complex problems heretofore unsolvable by conventional methods.
An important conclusion, resulting from continuing investigations of pozzolanic cementing materials, was the decision to use fly ash in the concrete for Canyon Ferry Dam on the Missouri River Basin project in Montana, the second dam to contain this material.
It is also being used in the concrete for Hungry Horse Dam now under construction in Montana.
Fly ash, a waste product from steam power plants using powdered coal as fuel, insures a concrete of better quality where, as at Canyon Ferry, for example, the aggregate for the concrete is found to be reactive with alkalies in portland cement.
Fly ash, together with certain admixtures, was also shown to improve the pumpability of cement grouts used extensively in construction work to solidify foundations and fill in areas of fractured rock and voids behind tunnel linings.
In connection with the pozzolanic studies, it was indicated that certain pozzolans would reduce the cracking tendencies of concrete made with the reactive aggregates found in certain areas in Nebraska and Kansas.
As a result, portland-pozzolan cement will be used in the concrete for Trenton Dam to be constructed in Nebraska.
The strain-relief testing technique for determining existing stresses in rock was further developed in the laboratories, and applied to Diablo Dam for the city of Seattle to measure stresses in that structure.
Additional data were obtained in the strength of mass concrete under triaxial loading, leading to a better understanding of the factors of cohesion and shearing resistance of concrete in dams.
A new chemical, rosin amine D acetate, was found to be effective in destroying algae growths in drains.
Applications of this compound in the field, carried out by laboratory personnel, immediately reduced the maintenance required to keep drains and ditches open.
In the field of earth controls, the laboratories prepared a classification chart outlining the various types of soils and defining their physical properties.
This chart proved valuable to field engineers and the Denver laboratories in coordinating field data on earth materials.
A field permeability test to determine probable water losses in canals was also developed.
Stabilization and drainage of soils by an electro-osmotic process were studied and applied on certain canals on Bureau projects.
New basic data in the field of hydraulics, compiled by research engineers, contributed to improved design of water-control structures.
Particular emphasis was given to problems of silt deposition and sedimentation, and to methods for reducing scour and aggradation in unlined canals.
An electric analog computer, devised for evaluating flows in estuarine channels, was utilized in the studies of flow in the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta area in California, resulting in savings that significantly lowered design and construction costs.
Corrective measures to solve the troublesome problems of watersurface surging in the open stands of pipe irrigation systems were obtained from cause-determining studies.
Experiments were conducted to develop new and cheaper materials and methods for lining irrigation canals, including the use of asphaltic membranes and novel methods for applying them.
These linings, very low in first cost, were applied on reaches of certain canals with marked success.
Patent application was made on a prefabricated buried asphalt membrane canal lining, and the lining was utilized on several installations.
Marked progress and increased activity featured the preparation and issuance of publications relating to the technical work of the Bureau.
Publications issued reflect a wide diversity of engineering knowledge acquired and disseminated in Bureau design and construction operations, including new important contributions to the profession.
Major technical publications issued during the year include: The fifth edition of Concrete Manual, a handbook of information and instruction on concrete construction; a new edition of Hydraulic and Excavation Tables; the Arc-Welding Manual, containing information on the design and control of welded steel construction; engineering monographs; and a group of bulletins completing the series recording results of studies, investigations, and the more unusual problems of design and construction in developing Boulder Canyon project.
Two publications were prepared for issuance in the next fiseal year, namely, the Earth Construction Manual, bringing together engineering practices and procedures developed in earth materials testing and construction; and the Paint Manual, recording the procedures and techniques for control of paints and protective coatings.
Other publications planned for fiscal year 1951 include manuals on safety, bituminous construction, hydraulic laboratory and materials laboratory subjects, and additional engineering monographs.
The Bureau was again called upon to assist outside agencies and other Government departments in design and research work covering a widely diversified field of engineering, and continued mutually beneficial cooperative undertakings.
Detail work continued on designs and specifications for Falcom Dam and power plant, to be constructed by the International Boundary and Water Commission on the Rio Grande near Laredo, Tex.
Through a cooperative agreement with the city of Seattle, an analysis was made of the structural behavior of Ross Dam, based on extensive data obtained from instruments imbedded in the concrete of the dam.
The instrument readings were analyzed to determine how the dam is performing under loading.
Also, stress measurements on Diablo Dam were made for the city of Seattle, and laboratory tests made of the properties of the concrete in the dam.
Tests were begun for the Atomic Energy Commission in the development of heavy, dense concrete to be used in the Commission's structures.
Concrete aggregates were tested for the Johnsonville steam plant of Tennessee Valley Authority.
And tests were conducted on concrete core specimens of the Copper Basin Dam for the metropolitan water district of California.
Paints stocked by the Bureau of Federal Supply centers were tested by the Bureau for performance with purchase specifications.
Bureau of Reclamation laboratories assisted the United States Forest Service in its campaign to eradicate beetles in national forests by conducting tests for the chemical control of the dichlorobenzenes used in the beetle eradication.
The city of Kennewick, Wash., was assisted in development of its water system.
Survey, Army Map Service, Coast and Geodetic Survey, and Soil Conservation Service, were continued to insure that no duplication occurred.
The Bureau awarded contracts for aerial photography and mapping for areas in California, Colorado, Montana, New Mexico, North Dakota, Texas, Utah, and Wyoming.
In order to meet the Bureau's requirements for special high-dam design data, and requirements of the Coast and Geodetic Survey for the latest seismic information, coordinative seismological studies of the Bureau.
Increased demands upon the Bureau of Reclamation for technical assistance to foreign countries were made during the year.
Existing legislation made possible Bureau assistance to foreign countries in the fields of irrigation, drainage, hydroelectric power development, and comprehensive planning for multiple-purpose projects.
In fulfilling the demands, the Bureau received considerable valuable information through certain exchange arrangements for technical data.
Approximately 200 foreign officials and engineers from some 37 countries toured Reclamation projects and visited the Bureau field offices.
About 50 engineering trainees from 14 foreign countries studied Bureau engineering practices in the Denver engineering offices and laboratories.
Numerous requests were filled by the Bureau for specifie engineering information, technical assistance and guidance.
Bureau engineering assistance was given to Greece, Portugal, Turkey, France, and Korea, at the request of the Economic Cooperation Administration.
Engineers were sent to Japan and islands of the Pacific to aid in construction of irrigation and conservation projects, at the request of the Departments of the Navy and Army.
Other engineers went to Australia, Pakistan, Puerto Rico, and New Zealand to lend assistance.
Requested by the Department of State, Bureau engineers assisted with certain preliminary work in connection with the proposed Maraetai Dam in New Zealand, and Kosi Dam in India.
Under similar arrangement, earth materials tests were conducted in Bureau laboratories for the proposed Gal Oya Dam in Ceylon and for the Hirakud Dam in India.
Requests by mail from other countries and individuals throughout the world for Bureau publications and prepared data on a diversity of complex problems continued to increase.
During the fiscal year, Bureau of Reclamation engineers participated in international conferences, including the United Nations Scientific Conference on the Conservation and Utilization of Resources at which three papers were presented, and the International Conference on Large Electric High-Tension Systems.
Nine technical papers have been prepared for presentation at the International Congress on Large Dams to be held in India in January 1951.
Reclamation exists not only for the purpose of constructing dams and power plants and creating far-flung irrigation systems, but for the service that these facilities provide.
This service is an important factor in the creation of irrigation farms for settlement by veterans and others, homes for farm families, sound agricultural communities, and stable agricultural foundations for related business and commercial enterprises throughout the West.
In 1949, through the Bureau of Reclamation's operation and maintenance activities, irrigation service was supplied to 91,000 farms with a total farm population of 354,000.
A farm population in excess of 246,000 was reported for the 64,000 farms on regular Reclamation projects and a population of about 108,000 for the 27,000 farms receiving water from Reclamation under Warren Act or special contracts.
With the inclusion of units of less than 5 acres, the total number for 1949 was nearly 100,000 farms.
Including the approximately 1,500,000 population reported for towns located on or adjacent to the irrigation projects, the Reclamation area population now totals about 1,850,000, an increase of roughly a quarter of a million from the 1948 estimate.
The estimates are exclusive of Central Valley project in California.
In addition to the above, Reclamation service is provided to a large number of people in distant cities, towns and rural areas who receive electric energy from hydroelectric plants on Reclamation projects, and others benefit directly from flood control and through use of recreational facilities created by storage reservoirs.
Operation and maintenance of the 65 projects, or divisions of projects, completed by the Bureau of Reclamation, including the use of water, maintenance of irrigation systems, production of crops and livestock, and the general welfare of the water users, constitute “service" matters of primary concern to every Reclamation employee.
Progress was continued during fiscal year 1950 on one of/the fundamental service jobs of Reclamation, namely, to"keep the water running down the ditch."
This is sometimes a complicated matter involving stream flow and runoff forecasts, regulation and operation of storage reservoirs and distribution systems, maintenance of all structures and distribution facilities, measurement and delivery of water, drainage where necessary, and control of waterweeds.
The task is becoming even more complicated on multipurpose, basin-wide projects such as in the Central Valley of California and in the Columbia and Missouri River Basins.
Other operation and maintenance activities on which progress continued include negotiation and approval of amendatory and new repayment and water service contracts, rehabilitation and betterment of older existing projects, sprinkler irrigation studies, opening of additional public land to settlement, operation of development farms to provide assistance to settlers and others, lower cost canal lining investigations, and soil and moisture conservation operations.
The end objective of all the operation and maintenance activities is the adequate and proper development of land through irrigation, and its use by farm families.
Irrigation facilities were extended in 1949 to the point where irrigation service could be provided for 5,678,512 acres, an increase of 298,497 acres over that of the previous crop year.
Total acreage irrigated was 4.820,589, an increase of 261,834 over 1948.
The difference between the acreage for which irrigation facilities have been provided and the acreage irrigated is due principally to the need for allowing land to fallow for a season, the need for farm ditches on some new farms, clearing or leveling, idle land involved in settlement of estates, rights of-way, and other factors.
7s-10t00.to gumcont gainiamoz od.
The remaining increase of 90,101 acres irrigated, not listed by projects, represents lands on Reclamation projects which temporarily received a water supply from private wells, and scattered tracts of land on a number of projects that had a previous irrigation history, but were not irrigated in 1948.
An estimated additional 110,000 acres will be irrigated for the first time during 1950 with project water.
In order to supply Reclamation area farmers with irrigation water for crop production, activities on operating projects continued to stress, as the first order of business, the storage, regulation, and distribution of irrigation water supplies, and the maintenance of structures and distribution systems.
As a result, crops were matured profitably on all operating projects during the calendar year 1949, despite some water shortages which occurred again in the Southwest.
On some projects where surface water was not adequate, ground water was pumped to supplement supplies.
The Bureau of Reclamation operates and maintains directly 24 projects or divisions of projects, while 41 projects or divisions of projects are now operated by water-users organizations under only general supervision of the Bureau.
In accordance with established congressional and departmental policy providing for transfer of completed projects to water users for operation and maintenance, the Carlsbad project was so transferred during the fiscal year.
Progress was made on investigations of and improvements in serious drainage conditions, and in water-conservation programs, including control of carriage losses, sprinkler-irrigation investigations, education for better farm-irrigation practices, waterweeds control, and reuse of return flows, all aimed at fuller utilization of water resources.
One major break in a distribution system occurred early in March 1950 when mountain landslides crushed a portion of a tunnel forming part of the main canal of Grand Valley project, Colorado.
Although first estimates for repairs indicated that serious delay might be suffered in project water delivery, expeditious handling and close teamwork resulted in completed construction of a new tunnel bore around the collapsed section within 2 months, and water delivery to project farmers early in May, practically on schedule.
This achievement was accomplished through cooperative effort by the Chief Engineer, the Regional Director, the project operation and maintenance forces, and the contractor, whose forces worked consistently around the clock to get the job done.
For the fourth consecutive year, crop production on farms receiving Federal Reclamation water was in excess of one-half billion dollars.
For the fifth successive vear, the value of crops grown exceeded $100 an acre.
The 1949 valuation of $516,329,008 compared with a record high of $555,420,804 established in 1947 and $534,623,541 in 1948.
Crop returns in 1949 averaged $105.03 an acre while the previous year average was $113.76 an acre.
Highest average return per acre was $121.95 in 1947.
Highest 1949 per acre crop value was reported for the Coachella Valley, Calif., which receives water from Coachella division, All-American Canal system.
Including 1949 production, the cumulative value of crops grown since irrigation water was first supplied from Reclamation projects in 1906 totals $6,583,570,000.
Vegetable and truck crops, a large portion of which were grown on projects in the Southwest that supply the Nation with fresh vegetables during the off-season months, accounted for about 29 percent of the 1949 value; and another 29 percent came from hay, forage, and grain crops, consumed largely by livestock in the producing areas or in feed lots near west coast cities.
Thé volume of crops produced amounted to 13,225,070 tons, practically the same as 1948, compared with a record volume óf over 14.4 million tons in 1946.
Vegetable, truck, hay and forage crops totaled 59 percent of the 1949 tonnage.
Generally favorable yields were obtained by irrigation farmers and water supplies were generally adequate for full crop production.
Average yields of grain and forage crops were maintained at the fairly high level of 1948.
Yields of alfalfa seed, most vegetable crops, sugar beets, and most deciduous fruits were higher in 1949 than 1948, but lower for potatoes, prunes, and citrus fruits; citrus yields were reduced by freezing weather during the early months of the year.
The cultivated acreage from which erop production was caleulated in 1949 was 4,916,234, an increase of 216,500 cropped acres over that reported for 1948.
Throughout the West a general increase in acreage of hay and forage crops and some reduction in sugar beet acreage occurred.
The difference between the 4,916,234 acres cropped on Reclamation project farms and the 4,820,589 acres irrigated by Reclamation was due to some relatively small areas in dry farming on irrigated farms.
Livestock and equipment on Reclamation farms November 1, 1949, were valued at $220,000,000, approximately the same as the November 1948 value.
Livestock value was $89,000,000, 76 percent represented by cattle, 12 percent by sheep, 5 percent by poultry, 3 percent by hogs, another 3 percent by horses and mules, and 1 percent by miscellaneous livestock.
Equipment was valued at $131,000,000, with tractors, trucks, and other motor vehicles accounting for two-thirds of the value.
Marked increases in inventory values of machinery and equipment on Reclamation projects have occurred in recent years; in 1949 the increase was only 4 percent, indicating that project farmers may have largely replaced machinery worn out during war years.
Income tax revenues from Federal Reclamation areas represent a return to the Federal Treasury over and above the return of appropriate reimbursable construction costs by the irrigators, and from power revenues.
Estimates were prepared of income taxes paid from seven selected project areas, including businesses and residents of adjacent towns.
These estimates indicate that from these seven aréas almost $57,000,000 was paid in individual income taxes in 1949 and about $384,000,000 since the initiation of Federal income taxes.
Federal construction net expenditures for these same projects through May 31, 1950, total approximately $163,000,000.
Thus, Federal income tax revenues amounted to about two and one-third times the Federal expenditures for irrigation development.
Individual income taxes from these areas in 1949 amounted to about $52 per irrigated acre, and the estimated cumulative total averaged about $351 per acre.
These tax revenues represent not only taxes paid by irrigation farmers but also the taxes paid by the individuals of the nearby towns and villages whose business or employment is directly or indirectly attributable to the Reclamation development.
In addition to the above tax revenues an appropriate share of corporation income taxes and other Federal taxes are either directly or indirectly attributable to business and industrial activity resulting from Reclamation developments.
Rough estimates of these additional Federal taxes were made of Maricopa County, Ariz., which represents the Salt River project area.
These additional Federal revenues plus the $24,643,000 of individual income taxes would raise the total Federal tax revenue from that area in 1949 to over $65,000,000.
Inclusion of all Federal taxes in the estimate for the seven project areas would raise the figure to about $86,000,000 for 1949 and to more than $500,000,000 for the 1916–49 period.
It is roughly estimated that about 1.4 billion dollars of individual income taxes or more than 2.0 billion of all Federal taxes have been paid into the Treasury since 1916 from all Federal Reclamation areas.
This compares with a Federal construction cost on these projects of about $500,000,000.
These estimates do not include projects under construction such as Columbia Basin, Central Valley, Hungry Horse, and Missouri Basin, nor power developments at Hoover, Fort Peck, Parker, and Davis Dams.
Including these major projects under construction, Federal construction costs totaled 1.8 billion dollars at the end of the fiscal year, an amount about equivalent to the estimated returns in Federal taxes from all Reclamation projects and the nearby communities.
During fiscal year 1950, the Bureau conducted four land openings involving a total of 12,830 acres of irrigable land, public and Government-acquired, comprising 128 farm units.
The units on Columbia Basin project were offered for outright purchase, as in the fiscal year 1949 opening, rather than for acquisition through homesteading.
This latest opening marked the second such sale of lands served by irrigation facilities of Columbia Basin project.
Although the number of acres available for homesteading in fiscal year 1950 was less than half the number available in fiscal year 1949, there has been continued interest in the openings as evidenced by the large number of requests for applications.
In the Boise project opening alone more than 12,000 requests for applications were received.
Veterans from 41 States and far-off Arabia filed applications for farm units in the most recent of the land openings, on the Riverton project.
Up to the end of the fiscal year, the Bureau had conducted 21 postwar land openings with a total of 82,599 acres, including 878 farm units, opened either to homestead entry or, in the case of Columbia Basin project, to purchase.
In all openings, veterans were given preference in the submission of applications, and their demands for publicland farm units has greatly exceeded the supply, averaging 29 applications for each available unit.
Thus, unfortunately, for each veteran who succeeded in obtaining a farm unit, 28 were disappointed.
During fiscal year 1951 additional units on Riverton project, Wyoming, and Columbia Basin project, Washington, are expected to be opened for settlement, and a few additional units on one or more of the other Bureau projects may be available.
It is planned to make available for sale during the first half of the fiscal year, 56 part-time farm units on Columbia Basin project.
Considerable attention has been devoted during fiscal year 1950 to developing policies and procedures in connection with this first sale of part-time units on a Reclamation project.
Development farms.
Nine development farms have been established by the Bureau of Reclamation, as a phase of its settler assistance program, in cooperation with the several State agricultural colleges.
The one most recently established is on Frenchman-Cambridge division of Missouri River Basin project in Nebraska, where a privateiy owned 95-aere unit was selected.
Considerable research is being done on these farms for irrigation development, by the colleges, the Bureau of Plant Industry, Soils, and Agricultural Engineering, the Soil Conservation Service, and other agencies.
Establishment of several additional development farms is anticipated within the next 2 years.
Inasmuch as several Bureau regions have been developing and operating development farms by substantially different means, the Chief of Land Development, Columbia Basin project, was directed to make a study of methods being used or contemplated on such farms in the various regions.
Differences can be attributed largely to the ownership of the land on which the farms are located and to variance in local circumstances.
Result of the study was made available early in 1950 in a factual report setting forth the purposes of development farms, nature of the work conducted, methods of establishment and operation, and cooperative relationships with State and Federal agencies in the program.
Credit for settlers.
Limited finance of settlers on projects of the Bureau of Reclamation has been a persistent problem.
Despite this fact, the 104 settlers who obtained farm units on the Heart Mountain division of Shoshone project in the fall of 1949 had 60 percent of their acreage in crops by the spring of 1950.
Under provisions of Public Law 361, Eighty-first Congress, it is now possible for the Farmers Home Administration, Department of Agriculture, to make loans to settlers on public land previous to the time the settler receives patent to the land.
A memorandum of understanding between the Departments of the Interior and Agriculture, outlining the general procedure to be followed by the Farmers Home Administration, the Bureau of Land Management, and the Bureau of Reclamation when the former agency extends financial assistance to settlers on public land, has been approved.
This inerease in credit availability has been of material assistance to the settlers in developing their farm units.
But credit facilities to settlers are still not entirely adequate, as development of private lands for irrigation will create new problems of financial assistance.
Cooperation with other agencies.
It is the policy of the Bureaù of Reclamation to continue obtaining technical information and assistance with the agricultural and economic phases of its program through cooperation with the State colleges of agriculture and agencies of the United States Department of Agriculture.
In this connection the Bureau has in effect at the present time 35 memoranda of understanding with the State colleges and other agencies.
During the fiscal year, memoranda of agreement were effected in connection with the following projects: Tucumcari, Missouri River Basin, Riverton, Columbia Basin, Shoshone, Kendrick, and Rio Grande.
Representatives of the Division of Land Economics and the Division of Farm Management and Costs, both of the Bureau of Agricultural Economics of the Department of Agriculture, have cooperated with the Bureau of Reclamation in securing more information as to the type and extent of land-use integration which has developed between existing irrigated areas and surrounding dry-land and range area and in developing a type of program which will intensify and expand the desirable types of land-use integration.
With respect to the agricultural economy, such integration may be separated readily into two types, i.
In addition, the increased and more stabilized production resulting from irrigation generally results in building up the community or urban economy.
Although considerable information is available bearing on these various types of integration, additional studies will be pursued to determine more precisely their nature and extent and the specific types which should be fostered.
The full stride set in fiscal year 1949 in the Bureau's repayment program was maintained throughout fiscal year 1950.
Significant progress was made toward disposing of the backlog of financial adjustment investigations on operating projects.
Negotiations for new repayment and water-service contracts kept abreast of the accelerated construction program.
The guiding principle for these negotiations remains the same: that repayment arrangements should be tailored to fit the payment capacity of the water users.
During fiscal year 1950, negotiations of amendatory repayment contracts for six projects were completed under provisions of section 7 of the Reclamation Project Act of 1939.
Congressional approval was given to the results of these negotiations in Public Law 419, Eighty-first Congress, first session.
Oregon: Vale project, Vale irrigation district; Umatilla project, Stanfield irrigation district and Westland irrigation district.
Wyoming: Shoshone projeet, Deaver irrigation district.
The Bureau's rehabilitation and betterment program is based on Public Law 335, Eighty-first Congress, first session, which requires full reimbursement of funds expended.
This program was placed in full operation during fiscal year 1950, thus requiring considerable additional repayment contract negotiation, some of which was on an emergency basis.
This additional load was handled successfully and repayment arrangements were negotiated for 11 projects.
These negotiations were conducted under procedures prescribed by Public Law 335, and its amendment, Public Law 451, Eighty-first Congress, second session, which requires approval of repayment arrangements by the Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs and the House Committee on Public Lands before expenditures can be made on rehabilitation and betterment work.
These requirements were met for six projects through special provisions in amendatory repayment contracts negotiated under section 7 of the Reclamation Project Act as cited above.
The remaining five cases involved only rehabilitation and betterment and received specific approval of the two congressional committees.
California: Orland project.
Colorado: Grand Valley project.
Montana: Bitter Root projeet; Milk River project.
Nebraska-Wyoming: North Platte project.
Oregon: Vale project.
South Dakota: Belle Fourche project.
Washington: Yakima project, Prosser irrigation district.
Wyoming: Riverton project; Shoshone project.
Idaho: Boise project, Black Canyon irrigation district; Owyhee project (eight districts).
Montana: Milk River project, Malta irrigation distriet and Glasgow irrigation district; Frenchtown project, Frenchtown irrigation district.
Oregon: Umatilla project, Hermiston irrigation district and West Extension irrigation district; Deschutes project, North Unit irrigation district.
Utah: Ogden River project, Ogden River Water Users' Association; Hyrum project, South Cache Water Users' Association.
Washington: Yakima project, Roza irrigation district.
Financial adjustment investigations were in various stages of completion on 19 additional projects.
Montana: Sun River project.
New Mexico-Texas: Rio Grande project.
Washington: Okanogan project; Yakima project, Storage division.
Arizona: Yuma project, Arizona Edison Co. (municipal water), and sale of waste and drainage water to Mexico.
California: Central Valley project, Contra Costa County water district (interim) and Ivanhoe irrigation district; Cachuma project, Santa Barbara County water agency.
Montana: Milk River project, city of Havre.
North Dakota; Missouri River Basin project, city of Dickinson.
Oregon: Deschutes project, Grants Pass irrigation district and Ochoco irrigation district.
Texas: Rio Grande project, city of El Paso and Hudspeth County conservation and reclamation district No. 1.
At the close of the fiscal year, negotiations had been completed on 12 additional contracts which were pending formal execution by either the water users or the Government.
Arizona: Gila project, North Gila Valley irrigation district.
California: Central Valley project, Chowchilla water district, Exeter irrigation district, Lindsay-Strathmore irrigation district, Madera irrigation district, Saucelito irrigation district, Stone Corral irrigation district, Terra Bella irrigation district, and Tulare irrigation district.
North Dakota: Missouri River Basin project, Heart River irrigation district.
In addition, detailed physical and economic investigations were completed and negotiations were advanced on 20 water service and/or repayment contracts involving new projects or new project units.
Urban population growth through out the West is increasing the need for development of supplemental municipal water supplies.
During the past year, seven contracts were negotiated to provide additional municipal supplies from Reclamation projects.
It is anticipated that the growing competition for limited water resources will require increasing attention to municipal and industrial water requirements, both from existing Reclamation projects and in the authorization of future projects.
Full water resource development in connection with multiple-purpose basin developments will necessarily entail proper integration and recognition of municipal water requirements.
The Branches of Design and Construction and Operation and Maintenance have taken positive steps during the past year to assure that the members of both branches cooperate to the fullest extent in ironing out possible future problems which may be taken care of in the design stage of any new project or individual structure.
The Chief Engineer has appointed an engineer with years of experience in both design and project operation and maintenance to spearhead this task.
At the close of the fiscal year, much badly needed rehabilitation and betterment work on the physical plants of older irrigation projects had been completed and the volume of work in progress was increasing steadily.
Following the depression vears prior to World War II and the restrictions on manpower, equipment, and materials during the war, deferment in maintenance of the physical plant of many of the older irrigation projects approached a critical stage.
A survey of then existing conditions, authorized and executed during 1946 and 1947 on 51 projects or divisions of projects, revealed that thousands of wood structures constructed from 20 to 30 years ago were in need of replacement; many concrete and steel structures were badly in need of repair or replacement; canals, laterals, wasteways, and drains badly needed cleaning to restore them to their original capacities; additional canal lining to prevent excessive loss of water was needed; additional drain ditches were required to prevent further waterlogging of lands; and additional roads and cattle guards and many other items were mandatory to restore the projects to their original operating condition.
This program was initiated in fiscal year 1949 by an appropriation of $1,500,000 and the funds were allotted to nine projects showing the greatest need for immediate aid.
It was intended from the inception of the program that the costs would be repaid by the water users in installments over a sufficient number of years.
In order to clear up misunderstandings that had arisen and caused some delays in the program, Public Law No. 335 was enacted in the first session of the Eighty-first Congress, and an amendment thereto, Publie Law No. 451, enacted in the second session, prescribes procedures for negotiation and approval of repayment contracts in connection with expenditures of rehabilitation and betterment funds.
Investigation of the possibilities of sprinkler irrigation has been intensified during the past year through operation and observation of the sprinkler systems installed by the Bureau on Columbia Basin project in Washington, Missouri Basin project in both North and South Dakota, and on Gila project in Arizona.
Many types of systems being used on a large variety of crops and under a wide range of conditions continue to indicate that sprinkler irrigation is well established as a successful practice with most crops and on most arable lands.
It does not appear to be as economical or otherwise superior to surface methods on lands well adapted to the latter.
A preliminary report on these investigations, prepared during fiscal year 1949, proved so popular that the original supply was soon exhausted.
In December 1949 the report was fully revised to reflect all new developments, and is now available to the public.
Sprinkler irrigation may be purchased from the Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing Office, Washington 25, D. C., price 20 cents.
A growing concern about the loss of water from irrigation canals and laterals and the excessive cost of making canals and laterals reasonably watertight prompted the Bureau to initiate a lower-cost canal-lining program in 1946, aimed at the development of more economical methods of seepage control.
The program has progressed through laboratory tests and experimental field installations of various types of materials and construction methods.
Certain phases of the work have been performed by the State colleges and universities with the assistance of the Soil Conservation Service in making cooperative studies.
Progress during the first 2 years was covered in a general information report entitled"Lower Cost Canal Linings," dated June 1948.
Subsequently, a number of special reports on equipment development, trial installations, cooperative tests, and condition surveys have been issued.
The most outstanding accomplishments to date are development of placing methods and equipment; relaxing of specification restrictions of line and grade, and finish of concrete and mortar; elimination of reinforcing steel when not required for safety; development of buried asphalt membrane lining, covered with a protective blanket of earth or gravel; and greater utilization of thick compacted earth linings of selected earth.
Findings and developments in this program have been utilized in design and construction of new projects and in rehabilitation and betterment of older, existing projects.
Worth-while savings are being realized.
The soil- and moisture-conservation program of the Bureau is a minor item in comparison with the total over-all Reclamation program, but it is particularly important in connection with the prevention of siltation of reservoirs and the protection of water-distribution systems above Reclamation projects.
Within the limit of the funds made available to the Bureau for these purposes, control of accelerated erosion on public lands under its jurisdiction and protection of the watersheds above Reclamation projects are being accomplished.
Affairs, the Forest Service, the Soil Conservation Service, and various soil-conservation districts.
The prevention of water losses, including correction of wasteful practices in the distribution and use of water on irrigation projects, is gaining recognition as equal in importance to the prevention of soil erosion.
This activity is receiving increasing consideration in our current work and in planning for future operations under the soil- and moisture-conservation program.
Greater emphasis has been placed during the fiscal year on the Bureau's weed-control program, and effective results are evident in most regions.
The control of new willow growths has become a simple operation with newly developed Bureau techniques, and the control of waterweeds in many instances has been reduced to a routine operation with aromatic solvents.
New chemicals, equipment, and methods are beginning to show large savings, not only in labor and chemical costs, but also in irrigation water.
Recommendations for the'use of aromatic solvents in the control of waterweeds in irrigation channels have been revised, and more than double the amount of the chemical formulation applied in 1949 will be used in 1950.
The formulation developed through the Bureau of Reclamation's cooperative research program with the Bureau of Plant Industry has been more effective this year due to better emulsifying agents, tested and approved by the Chief Engineer's office.
Several of the regions have made special investigations of the salt cedar control problem, including a determination of water losses caused by the plants, methods of control, and other factors.
This program has been coordinated with other agencies interested in the effect of the plants on land use, flood control, and water conservation, and much progress made through meetings with inter-agency and intra-agency committees that have been recently established.
Official status has been given to the Department of the Interior Weed Control Committee, which has as its principal function the exchange of weed-control information among the Department of the Interior agencies having weed problems on lands under their jurisdiction.
A revision has been made in the Bureau's weed manual, Control of Weeds on Irrigation Systems, and the revised publication has been made available for general distribution.
Bureau personnel are engaged in the preparation of a motion picture entitled"Weed Control on Irrigation Systems," which will demonstrate the most effective methods of controlling weeds on Bureau rights-of-way and other lands under Bureau jurisdiction.
Prints of the film are expected to be available early in 1951.
It is believed that the new methods developed through cooperative research with the Department of Agriculture can best be shown to irrigation districts through visual methods.
On August 1, 1949, the Secretary of the Interior delegated authority to the Commissioner of Reclamation, by order No. 2529, for furnishing assistance under the provisions of the act of June 29, 1948 (43 U. S. C. A., sec. 385a), and legislation supplementary thereto, to local school districts on which an undue burden is cast by reason of the construction activities of the Bureau.
The Commissioner's order No. 1, dated December 20, 1949, redelegated to regional directors authority for furnishing assistance at a rate not exceeding the average per pupil cost of the State in States in which school funds are equalized, and at a rate not exceeding the average per pupil cost of the school district in States in which school funds are not equalized.
Amendment No. 1 to order No. 2529 delegated to the Commissioner, without authority of redelegation, authority for giving additional assistance to local school districts in cases where extraordinary circumstances or conditions indicate that in fairness and equity a rate above that provided in the original order should be paid.
During the vear cooperative agreements covering school assistance were negotiated with the following: Trenton, Nebraska, school district (Trenton Dam) ; Indianola, Nebraska, school district No. 2 (Frenchman-Cambridge unit); rural school district No. 9, Crook County, Wyo. (Keyhole Dam) ; York consolidated school district, Lewis and Clark County, Mont. (Canyon Ferry Dam)—all in the Missouri River Basin project: School district No. 18 (Platoro Dam), San Luis Valley project, Colorado; Grand Coulee school district No. 55, and Quincy school district No. 144, Grant County, both in the Columbia Basin project, Washington.
Negotiations were under way at the close of the fiscal year for rendering assistance to other eligible school districts.
Construction of dams and reservoirs for irrigation and power development provides incidental but very definite benefits to the public through the creation of exceptional recreational opportunities.
At the larger reservoirs, such as Lake Mead, on the Colorado River between Arizona and Nevada; Franklin D. Roosevelt Lake, on the Columbia River in Washington; and Millerton Lake, on the San Joaguin River in California, the administration of recreational facilities is handled for the Bureau by the National Park Service.
At certain other reservoirs located within National Forest boundaries, recreational facilities are administered by the United States Forest Service.
As a prerequisite to achievement of a program for optimum recreational use of all existing Reclamation reservoirs, as well as for those under construction or still under investigation, legislation is required to provide for the expenditure of nonreimbursable funds for development and administration of these recreational resources.
A new record of achievement in hydroelectric power capacity and production on multipurpose Federal Reclamation projects was accomplished during fiscal year 1950.
By year's end, the total installed capacity was 3,168,400 kilowatts, highest in Bureau of Reclamation history.
Sales of electric energy during the year totaled approximately 19,790,000,000 kilowatt-hours, which brought in revenue about $33,200,000.
Additional capacity to be added in fiscal year 1951 will approximate 663,000 kilowatts.
Although previous records of capacity and generation are surpassed with the installation of each additional unit of Reclamation projects, demands for electric power still remain unsatisfied.
Applications for power continue to mount and contracts for energy sales are being processed in great numbers to provide for the utilization of power to be generated from plants now under construction.
Expansion of rural electrification is a major factor contributing to the increasing power requirements in many areas, particularly in Missouri River Basin States.
Shortages of power of particular note have occurred in North and South Dakota.
To alleviate the critical situation, the Bureau has been authorized by the Congress to advance the construction of portions of its ultimate power system.
These portions will be utilized to serve cooperative loads from available sources and from proposed Rural Electrification Administration generation plants until such time as the ultimate system is required to market Federal power.
Advancing construction of transmission lines and substations even a few years means the difference between keeping these cooperatives alive or letting them remain dormant until added capacity is available.
This cooperative arrangement demonstrates clearly what can be accomplished by coordinated development of the Federal program.
Wheeling arrangements, whereby Reclamation power is transmitted over the lines of private utilities, constitute another significant factor in the utilization of Federal electric output to a maximum of capacity.
Such arrangements have been consummated with a number of private utilities and are under active negotiation with other utilities operating in Reclamation areas.
Through these, existing utility capacity is utilized to the maximum extent possible for serving areas at an earlier date or at a more economical cost to the Reclamation project.
In many instances it has been possible by wheeling and interchange arrangements to provide power to preference customers, especially Rural Electrification Administration cooperatives, well in advance of the time when additional service can be made available to them by construction of added capacity and necessary transmission systems.
These arrangements also permit delivery of power to areas remote from Federal power plants and beyond the present economical transmission distance but which can be served by maximum utilization of existing facilities, by displacement.
Irrigation pumping continues to impose greater demands upon the Reclamation power systems.
It has been proven that tapping underground sources of water to permit irrigation of additional areas has been a boon to agricultural development, but electric power is necessary for the pumping.
The Bureau is continuing to plan development of a program to increase the power available consistent with full development and utilization of western water resources.
The installed nameplate capacity of 3,168,400 kilowatts in the 19 power plants in operation by the Bureau of Reclamation at the end of fiscal year 1950, showed an increase of 411,000 kilowatts capacity over the 1949 fiscal year.
The increase resulted from the addition of 3 generating units of 108,000 kilowatts each at Grand Coulee power plant on Columbia River Basin project in Washington, 3 units of 25,000 capacity each at Keswick power plant on Central Valley project in California, and the first of 3 units of 12,000 capacity each at Kortes power plant on Missouri River Basin project in Wyoming.
Power plants operated by other agencies, principally water users' organizations, on Reclamation projects totaled 16 of which 9 with a total installed capacity of 30,967 kilowatts were installed by the Bureau of Reclamation, and 7 with a total installed capacity of 62,900 kilowatts by others.
Dedications of Shasta and Grand Coulee Dams were the most significant events concerning hydroelectric power development during the fiscal vear.
Shasta's dedication marked completion of the installations at Shasta and Keswick power plants.
At the time of Grand Coulee dedication, the total number of main generating units at its power plant had been brought to 13, making it the largest power plant in the world with a present installed capacity of 1,424,000.
Under construction by the Bureau during the year were 10 new power plants, which will have an ultimate capacity of 892,100 kilowatts.
A contract was awarded for a turbine and generator for 1 additional 50,000-kilowatt unit at Hoover power plant on the Boulder Canyon project, while fabrication was continued on 2 units of 82,500 kilowatts each for which contracts were awarded in fiscal year 1949.
Completion of Keswick power plant on Central Valley project, with an installed capacity of 75,000 kilowatts in three generating units, brings the total installed capacity on the project to 454,000 kilowatts, including both Shasta and Keswick plants.
The first unit in Kortes power plant on Missouri River Basin project was placed in operation this year.
Construction is continuing on the remaining 2 units in Kortes power plant for completion during the early part of fiscal year 1951, to bring the total capacity in the plant to 36,000 kilowatts.
Marys Lake power plant of 8,100-kilowatts capacity and Estes power plant of 45,000-kilowatts capacity, now under construction on Colorado-Big Thompson project in Colorado, are scheduled for initial seasonal operation during the summer of 1950.
These will bring into operation the initial phase of the eastern slope power development of this project.
Work is progressing on approximately 100,000 kilowatts of additional capacity to develop the power drop between Estes power plant and Foothills storage system of the project, scheduled for initial operation in fiscal year 1953.
On Missouri River Basin project, work is progressing on Boysen Dam and power plantin Big Horn Basin in Wyoming.
The power plant of 15,000-kilowatt capacity is scheduled for operation in fiscal year 1952.
Davis Dam and power plant, located on the Colorado River downstream from Hoover Dam, is scheduled for operation in the spring and early summer of 1951 with an installed capacity of 225,- 000 kilowatts.
The power plant at Anderson Ranch Dam in Idaho will have an initial installed capacity of 27,000 kilowatts and is scheduled to be placed in operation in the fall of 1950.
Hungry Horse Dam and a power plant of 285,000 kilowatts, now under construction on the South Fork at Flathead River in Montana, is scheduled for initial operation in October 1952, with the second unit in operation by December of that year.
The remaining two units are scheduled for operation in August and November of 1953.
Canyon Ferry power plant in Montana, now under construction, will begin initial operation in November 1953.
The Bureau of Reclamation is responsible for marketing power generated at dams constructed by the Department of the Army's Corps of Engineers in Missouri River Basin, and therefore has an interest in their construction progress since power requirements of the basin areas indicate the immediate need for additional generating capacity.
The Engineers Corps is progressing on the installation of a third unit on Fort Peck project in Montana with a 35,000-kilowatt capacity, scheduled to be in operation in 1952.
They have Garrison Dam in North Dakota and Fort Randall Dam in South Dakota under active construction.
Although power requirements of both these areas indicate immediate need for additional generating capacity, the initial operating schedule for Garrison is tentatively 240,000 kilowatts capacity in fiscal years 1955 and 1956, and for Fort Randall, 160,000 kilowatts in fiscal years 1954 and 1955.
Actual progress which can be accomplished is contingent upon appropriations to meet these schedules.
The status of hydroelectric power plants on Reclamation projects, in operation, under construction, or authorized is shown in table 9.
At the close of fiscal year 1950, the Bureau had about 4,400 miles of high-voltage transmission lines in operation.
Construction was continuing on more than 2,000 miles of high-voltage lines at the end of the fiscal year.
These lines will be placed in operation during fiscal year 1951 or in subsequent fiscal years.
Sales of electric energy and power revenues by the Bureau of Reclamation reached an all-time high during the fiscal year.
The Bureau marketed the output from the 19 power plants it operated and, under the provisions of the Fort Peck Project Act of 1938, from the Fort Peck power plant, operated by the Corps of Engineers.
The 1950 fiscal year sales and revenues compare to a total of approximately 18.32 billion kilowatt-hours sold during fiscal year 1949, and approximately 32.23 million dollars in revenues that year.
This increase in sales and revenues resulted from the continuing heavy demands for electric power, and integration of the Bureau's hydroelectric systems with other existing systems to obtain maximum power production from the water resources.
A summary of power sales and revenues by projects is shown in table 10.
Electric power was delivered by the Bureau to numerous major and minor users of power during the fiscal year.
Major deliveries were made to 26 municipalities, 7 State government agencies, 65 rural electric cooperatives, 4 Federal agencies, 41 public authorities, 27 commercial and industrial users, and 34 privately owned utilities.
A summary by classification of customers for the 12 months ending June 30, 1950, is contained in table 11.
During the year, 84 contracts for delivery of power were executed.
These include 2 contracts with irrigation districts, 4 with other Federal bureaus and agencies, 1 with public-power districts, 4 with State authorities, 15 with private utilities, 45 with rural electric cooperatives, 8 with municipalities, and 5 with other customers.
A number of these contracts were renewals of expiring contracts or revisions resulting from changed conditions.
The contract between the Bureau and Montana-Dakota Utilities Co. was supplemented during the year to provide for service by the Bureau to additional preference customers.
The wheeling arrangement now in effect between Montana-Dakota Utilities Co. and the Bureau has been instrumental in providing electric service to cooperatives not directly connected to Bureau transmission facilities.
A wheeling contract with Otter Tail Power Co. has been executed to provide a similar service to preference customers in the section of Missouri River Basin project served by the company.
Similar wheeling arrangements are now in process with other utilities in Missouri River Basin area.
At the beginning of fiscal year 1951, the Bureau had 242 contracts for delivery of power under negotiation.
These include 7 with irrigation districts, 2 with public-power districts, 9 with Federal agencies and bureaus, 4 with State authorities, 27 with private utilities, 112 with REA cooperatives, 72 with municipalities, and 9 with other customers.
A number of these are for the renewal of existing contracts or for revision to reflect changed conditions.
A large number of contracts under negotiation are for future power deliveries at such time as additional generating capacity now under construction is placed in operation.
General investigations is that phase of Bureau of Reclamation activity concerned with resource investigations and developments of project plans.
Its interest begins at the time the potential project is first considered for development and extends through project construction, development, and operation.
The success of Reclamation projects is dependent not only upon sound planning but also effectuation of the plans and efficient operation of the project.
Planning and survey work for western resource development through Bureau of Reclamation projects on a comprehensive riverbasin basis went forward during the fiscal year with certain significant accomplishments achieved.
A Report on Comprehensive Plan of Development of the Water and Related Resources of the Columbia River Basin, including recommended projects and a recommended basin-account plan, was submitted to the Congress and printed as House Document 473, Eighty-first Congress, second session.
The Bureau's report emanated from coordinated plans prepared late in fiscal year 1949 by both the Bureau and the Corps of Engineers for the comprehensive development of Columbia River Basin.
It recommended that the initial units of the plan be authorized for construction and that the basin financial pooling plan be established.
One of the most important features of the Bureau's Columbia Basin report, the basin financial pooling plan, known as the "basin account," has two primary objectives, namely, to provide a basis for the establishment of power rates on a uniform basis or region-wide basis; and to provide a means for paying irrigation costs to the extent that they cannot be repaid by the water users, applying for that purpose the interest component of pooled power revenues.
The Congress, in the Flood Control Act of 1950, authorized those Columbia River Basin projects included in the joint plan for construction by the Department of the Army's Corps of Engineers, but omitted all the projects jointly recommended for construction by the Department of the Interior's Bureau of Reclamation.
It also omitted provisions for establishing the basin account without which the various Federal projects to be constructed in the Basin cannot be combined in a sensible and practical operating system.
I urge that the Congress reconsider this matter at the earliest opportunity, and authorize the missing pieces of the Army-Interior Columbia Basin plan.
The Flood Control Act of 1950 also authorized the Secretary of the Army to develop comprehensive, integrated plans for improvement of the Arkansas-White, and Red River Basins.
I shall attempt to assure concerted action and effective planning, so far as that may be accomplished under existing laws.
I am therefore issuing instructions to the appropriate Federal agencies to work together in preparing comprehensive plans for these basins, insofar as their existing authority permits, and to invite participation by the States concerned.
An interagency field committee for the Arkansas-White and Red River Basins was established by the Federal Interagency River Basin Committee on June 12, 1950, to coordinate at the field level, work in the comprehensive survey of these basins.
The Flood Control Act of 1950 provides an opportunity as well as a responsibility to develop a comprehensive program of resources development, urgently needed by this area.
This work will be under way in fiscal year 1951.
The Bureau of Reclamation's comprehensive report on Central Valley Basin, Calif., was transmitted to the Congress early in the fiscal year and printed as Senate Document 113, Eighty-first Congress, first session.
After careful analysis of testimony presented at a public hearing April 3, 1950, the Secretary of the Interior approved construction of Echo Park and Split Mountain Dams for impounding water within Dinosaur National Monument, in connection with development of Colorado River storage project.
The project would provide storage for comprehensive development of upper Colorado River Basin.
The hearing, called to consider the merits of the two proposed dams, attracted large numbers of proponents from Colorado River Basin States and numerous opponents representing recreational interests.
Work will be furthered in fiscal year 1951 on the United Western Investigation, an important reconnaissance investigation, involving several Western States, initiated late in fiscal year 1949.
The investigation is being conducted to ascertain, and to report to the Congress, whether the Bureau of Reclamation should further explore the possibility of bringing surplus water from Columbia River Basin, or elsewhere, by diversion, transfer, or other means, into the Southwest, which is greatly deficient in water supply; and whether, by suitable exchanges, further development can take place in the States within the Colorado River Basin.
Continuing rapid growth of population, industry and agriculture in the Western States is requiring extensive additional developments of local streams, many of which are, or soon will be, fully developed.
Ground water supplies essential to the existence of many communities already have been heavily overdrawn.
Future growth will be inhibited unless new water supplies can be brought to such dry areas by diversion, transfer, or other means.
The following projects, or units of projects, have been authorized for construction by the Congress: Folsom unit and Sly Park unit, American River division, Central Valley project, California; Weber Basin project, Utah (report printed as S. Doc. 147, 81st Cong., 2d sess.); Fort Sumner project, New Mexico; Buffalo Rapids project, Montana (reauthorized); rehabilitation of pipeline, Grants Pass irrigation district, Deschutes project, Oregon; Middle Rio Grande project, New Mexico, previously "approved" by the Congress.
At the end of the fiscal year, the Senate was considering a bill, passed by the House and printed as H. R. 940, to authorize construction of Eklutna project in Alaska.
Reclamation's report on the project had been forwarded to the Congress prior to the House action.
A report on initial development of North Fork Kings unit of Kings River division, Central Valley project, California, was submitted to the Congress by the Secretary of the Interior, with recommendations for authorization.
It was printed as H. R. 537, Eighty-first Congress, second session.
When the year ended, the Bureau of the Budget was considering Reclamation reports on the following: Alcova power plant, Kendrick project, Wyoming; Canadian River project, Texas; Collbran project, Colorado; North Side pumping division, Minidoka project, Idaho; and Palisades project, Idaho (reauthorization).
The President, on March 21, 1950, signed the bill approving the Snake River compact between Idaho and Wyoming, now known as Public Law 464, Eighty-first Congress, second session.
This action is expected to clear the way for further developments along Snake River, especially construction of Palisades Reservoir in Idaho.
The States of New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Texas have been authorized to negotiate a compact on the Canadian River, and a Geological Survey representative has been named Federal representative.
Legislation was introduced in the Congress to authorize a compact on the Sabine River, but no action was taken during the fiscal year.
Negotiations are still under way for the Bear River compact and Cheyenne River compact.
The Upper Colorado River Commission has been active during fiscal year 1950 setting up machinery to implement the upper Colorado compact which went into effect during fiscal year 1949.
Bureau of Reclamation representatives have participated in all these compact negotiations in various capacities.
In addition to its normal hydrologic studies, the Bureau has intensified its planning for river operations particularly in Missouri River Basin and Columbia River Basin.
Plans were formulated for better uitilization of water for irrigation, improvement and coordination of flood-control operations with the Corps of Engineers, and to form the basis for an operational plan which will be gradually enlarged as new units are constructed.
The Bureau is engaged in an important investigation, in cooperation with the Geological Survey, the Weather Bureau, and the Department of the Navy, to determine the rate of evaporation at Lake Hefner near Oklahoma City, Okla.
Techniques of this study will be applied in the precise determination of evaporation at Lake Mead as an aid to operations; and they also will have wide application in planning other western reservoirs and improving studies of water loss by nonbeneficial consumptive use by vegetation.
More adequate and economic spillway design has resulted from improvements and refinements of design flood studies in connection with specific investigation.
The improvements and refinements were effected through use of new techniques developed with the aid of storm, unit hydrograph, and infiltration studies.
Looking toward improving the design of diversion works and canals and determining more precisely reservoir storage space allocations, sedimentation studies have been continued with particular attention given to bedload studies of streams in Missouri River Basin.
A sedimentation survey of Belle Fourche Reservoir, Belle Fourche project, South Dakota, made during the fiscal year, disclosed that only slightly more than 8 percent of its capacity had been depleted in 42 years.
Studies were made and a report prepared showing the effect of all developments existing and proposed on the water supply in Missouri River Basin.
The Bureau participated in the international engineering studies of Kootenai River in Columbia River Basin, and in developing information for use in the preparation of a report to the International Joint Commission on all international aspects of Columbia River.
Engineering work has been advanced on the Waterton-Belly Rivers reference and the Souris-Red Rivers reference made to the International Joint Commission in January 1948.
A report on present and future water uses in Waterton and Belly Rivers was submitted to the Commission, and the Commission held public hearings in Montana and Alberta relative to the apportionment between the United States and Canada of the waters of those two streams.
Work was started on collection of data that will be needed for preparation of plans of mutual advantage to the two countries as the final phase of the investigations.
Studies of present and future water uses were continued on the Souris and Red Rivers.
The devastating floods which occurred on the Red River in May 1950, were the greatest on record and caused increased interest in the control and use of that stream, and acceleration of the international engineering studies now in progress.
Definite plan reports were completed during fiscal year 1950 for four units of Missouri River Basin project, namely, Fort Clark unit in North Dakota, Keyhole unit in South Dakota and Wyoming, lower Marias unit in Montana, and Owl Creek unit in Wyoming, and for two other projects, including Eden in Wyoming and Fort Sumner in New Mexico.
Preliminary drafts of reports on several other projects and units were also prepared.
The Bureau's definite plan reports are those prepared finally for a whole project, or a unit of the project, depending on the size and complexity of the plans recommended for development after authorization of the project.
A brief explanation of how these definite plan reports fit into over-all project planning will not be amiss.
Project planning feasibility reports are prepared to present a comprehensive plan for orderly development and conservation of water and related resources, and to ascertain the probable engineering and financial feasibility to enable recommendation for or against work on the plan of a project.
Considerable detailed studies and exploratory work usually remain to be done after this stage before sufficient data are available to initiate preparation of final plans and specifications.
In some cases, projects are authorized by the Congress before investigations have been completed, documented, and reviewed on the basis of limited data, but are sufficient to support favorable recommendation for authorization of a project.
Frequently, there is a fairly long period between authorization and start of actual construction due to lack of funds as well as lack of detailed information.
In these instances, there is need for further detailed, documented, and up-to-date information on which to program and develop final plans and specifications for an authorized project, and need for a report on the additional studies.
This final report is the definite plan report.
The definite plan report is used by all Bureau administrative officials and technical personnel as the authoritative, detailed plan and specification, and, if favorable, as the basic guide for carrying out plans for proper and orderly development of a project, division, or unit.
The report is also important as the basis for scheduling and programing the planning and construction of the project; as the fundamental source of information for budget justifications furnished to the Bureau of the Budget and to congressional committees in support of requests for construction funds, and for other officials and interested agencies; and, as a check to determine the engineering, agricultural, and economic soundness of the plan in its various details of development, or of individual major portions of the plan, before actual construction is undertaken.
The Bureau held its first Reclamation policy conference in fiscal vear 1950, with regional and branch directors and other members of the Reclamation Commissioner's immediate staff participating.
Results of this conference clearly indicated the value of such meetings, and they will be held annually hereafter in the month of December.
As work progressed on the Missouri River Basin project during the vear, it became inereasingly apparent that firm criteria needed to be established and used in moving units of the project from the planning stage (phase B) to construction (phase A).