Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the Congress: This 82d Congress faces as grave a task as any Congress in the history of our Republic.
The actions you take will be watched by the whole world.
These actions will measure the ability of a free people, acting through their chosen representatives and their free institutions, to meet a deadly challenge to their way of life.
We can meet this challenge foolishly or wisely.
We can meet it timidly or bravely, shamefully or honorably.
I know that the 82d Congress will meet this challenge in a way worthy of our great heritage.
I know that your debates will be earnest, responsible, constructive, and to the point.
I know that from these debates there will come the great decisions needed to carry us forward.
At this critical time, I am glad to say that our country is in a healthy condition.
Our democratic institutions are sound and strong.
We have more men and women at work than ever before.
The threat of world conquest by Soviet Russia endangers our liberty and endangers the kind of world in which the free spirit of man can survive.
This threat is aimed at all peoples who strive to win or defend their own freedom and national independence.
Indeed, the state of our Nation is in great part the state of our friends and allies throughout the world.
The gun that points at them points at us, also.
The threat is a total threat and the danger is a common danger.
All free nations are exposed and all are in peril.
Their only security lies in banding together.
No one nation can find protection in a selfish search for a safe haven from the storm.
The free nations do not have any aggressive purpose.
We have skilled and vigorous peoples, great industrial strength, and abundant sources of raw materials.
And above all, we cherish liberty.
Our common ideals are a great part of our strength.
These ideals are the driving force of human progress.
The free nations believe in the dignity and the worth of man.
We believe in independence for all nations.
We believe that free and independent nations can band together into a world order based on law.
We have laid the cornerstone of such a peaceful world in the United Nations.
We believe that such a world order can and should spread the benefits of modern science and industry, better health and education, more food and rising standards of living--throughout the world.
These ideals give our cause a power and vitality that Russian communism can never command.
The free nations, however, are bound together by more than ideals.
They are a real community bound together also by the ties of self-interest and self-preservation.
If they should fall apart, the results would be fatal to human freedom.
Our own national security is deeply involved with that of the other free nations.
While they need our support, we equally need theirs.
Our national safety would be gravely prejudiced if the Soviet Union were to succeed in harnessing to its war machine the resources and the manpower of the free nations on the borders of its empire.
If Western Europe were to fall to Soviet Russia, it would double the Soviet supply of coal and triple the Soviet supply of steel.
If the free countries of Asia and Africa should fall to Soviet Russia, we would lose the sources of many of our most vital raw materials, including uranium, which is the basis of our atomic power.
And Soviet command of the manpower of the free nations of Europe and Asia would confront us with military forces which we could never hope to equal.
In such a situation, the Soviet Union could impose its demands on the world, without resort to conflict, simply through the preponderance of its economic and military power.
The Soviet Union does not have to attack the United States to secure domination of the world.
It can achieve its ends by isolating us and swallowing up all our allies.
Therefore, even if we were craven enough I do not believe we could be--but, I say, even if we were craven enough to abandon our ideals, it would be disastrous for us to withdraw from the community of free nations.
We are the most powerful single member of this community, and we have a special responsibility.
We must take the leadership in meeting the challenge to freedom and in helping to protect the rights of independent nations.
This country has a practical, realistic program of action for meeting this challenge.
First, we shall have to extend economic assistance, where it can be effective.
The best way to stop subversion by the Kremlin is to strike at the roots of social injustice and economic disorder.
People who have jobs, homes, and hopes for the future will defend themselves against the underground agents of the Kremlin.
Our programs of economic aid have done much to turn back Communism.
In Europe the Marshall plan has had an electrifying result.
As European recovery progressed, the strikes led by the Kremlin's agents in Italy and France failed.
All over Western Europe the Communist Party took worse and worse beatings at the polls.
The countries which have received Marshall plan aid have been able, through hard work, to expand their productive strength-in many cases, to levels higher than ever before in their history.
Without this strength they would be completely incapable of defending themselves today.
They are now ready to use this strength in helping to build a strong combined defense against aggression.
We shall need to continue some economic aid to European countries.
This aid should now be specifically related to the building of their defenses.
In other parts of the world our economic assistance will need to be more broadly directed toward economic development.
In the Near East, in Africa, in Asia, we must do what we can to help people who are striving to advance from misery, poverty, and hunger.
We must also continue to help the economic growth of our good neighbors in this hemisphere.
These actions will bring greater strength for the free world.
They will give many people a real stake in the future and reason to defend their freedom.
They will mean increased production of goods they need and materials we need.
Second, we shall need to continue our military assistance to countries which want to defend themselves.
The heart of our common defense effort is the North Atlantic community.
As the third part of our program, we will continue to work for peaceful settlements in international disputes.
We will support the United Nations and remain loyal to the great principles of international cooperation laid down in its charter.
We are willing, as we have always been, to negotiate honorable settlements with the Soviet Union.
But we will not engage in appeasement.
The Soviet rulers have made it clear that we must have strength as well as right on our side.
If we build our strength--and we are building it--the Soviet rulers may face the facts and lay aside their plans to take over the world.
That is what we hope will happen, and that is what we are trying to bring about.
That is the only realistic road to peace.
These are the main elements of the course our Nation must follow as a member of the community of free nations.
These are the things we must do to preserve our security and help create a peaceful world.
But they will be successful only if we increase the strength of our own country.
Here at home we have some very big jobs to do.
We are building much stronger military forces--and we are building them fast.
We are preparing for full wartime mobilization, if that should be necessary.
And we are continuing to build a strong and growing economy, able to maintain whatever effort may be required for as long as necessary.
We are building our own Army, Navy, and Air Force to an active strength of nearly 3 1/2 million men and women.
We are stepping up the training of the reserve forces, and establishing more training facilities, so that we can rapidly increase our active forces far more on short notice.
We are going to produce all the weapons and equipment that such an armed force will need.
Furthermore, we will make weapons for our allies, and weapons for our own reserve supplies.
On top of this, we will build the capacity to turn out on short notice arms and supplies that may be needed for a full-scale war.
Fortunately, we have a good start on this because of our enormous plant capacity and because of the equipment on hand from the last war.
For example, many combat ships are being returned to active duty from the "mothball fleet" and many others can be put into service on very short notice.
We have large reserves of arms and ammunition and thousands of workers skilled in arms production.
In many cases, however, our stocks of weapons are low.
In other cases, those on hand are not the most modern.
We have made remarkable technical advances.
We have developed new types of jet planes and powerful new tanks.
We are concentrating on producing the newest types of weapons and producing them as fast as we can.
This production drive is more selective than the one we had during World War II, but it is just as urgent and intense.
It is a big program and it is a costly one.
Let me give you two concrete examples.
Our present program calls for expanding the aircraft industry so that it will have the capacity to produce 50,000 modern military planes a year.
We are preparing the capacity to produce 35,000 tanks a year.
We are not now ordering that many planes or that many tanks, and we hope that we never have to, but we mean to be able to turn them out if we need them.
The planes we are producing now are much bigger, much better, and much more expensive than the planes we had during the last war.
We used to think that the B-17 was a huge plane, and the blockbuster it carried a huge load.
But the B-36 can carry five of these blockbusters in its belly, and it can carry them five times as far.
Of course, the B-36 is much more complicated to build than the B-17, and far more expensive.
One B-17 costs $275,000, while now one B-36 costs $3 ½ million.
I ask you to remember that what we are doing is to provide the best and most modern military equipment in the world for our fighting forces.
This kind of defense production program has two parts.
The first part is to get our defense production going as fast as possible.
We have to convert plants and channel materials to defense production.
This means heavy cuts in civilian uses of copper, aluminum, rubber, and other essential materials.
It means shortages in various consumer goods.
The second part is to increase our capacity to produce and to keep our economy strong for the long pull.
We do not know how long Communist aggression will threaten the world.
Only by increasing our output can we carry the burden of preparedness for an indefinite period in the future.
This means that we will have to build more power plants and more steel mills, grow more cotton, mine more copper, and expand our capacity in many other ways.
The Congress will need to consider legislation, at this session, affecting all the aspects of our mobilization job.
The main subjects on which legislation will be needed are: First, appropriations for our military buildup.
Second, extension and revision of the Selective Service Act.
Third, military and economic aid to help build up the strength of the free world.
Fourth, revision and extension of the authority to expand production and to stabilize prices, wages, and rents.
Fifth, improvement of our agricultural laws to help obtain the kinds of farm products we need for the defense effort.
Sixth, improvement of our labor laws to help provide stable labor-management relations and to make sure that we have steady production in this emergency.
Seventh, housing and training of defense workers and the full use of all our manpower resources.
Eighth, means for increasing the supply of doctors, nurses, and other trained medical personnel critically needed for the defense effort.
Ninth, aid to the States to meet the most urgent needs of our elementary and secondary schools.
Some of our plans will have to be deferred for the time being.
But we should do all we can to make sure our children are being trained as good and useful citizens in the critical times ahead.
Tenth, a major increase in taxes to meet the cost of the defense effort.
The Economic Report and the Budget Message will discuss these subjects further.
In addition, I shall send to the Congress special messages containing detailed recommendations on legislation needed at thisSession.
In the months ahead the Government must give priority to activities that are urgent--like military procurement and atomic energy and power development.
It must practice rigid economy in its nondefense activities.
Many of the things we would normally do must be curtailed or postponed.
But in a long-term defense effort like this one, we cannot neglect the measures needed to maintain a strong economy and a healthy democratic society.
The Congress, therefore, should give continued attention to the measures which our country will need for the long pull.
And it should act upon such legislation as promptly as circumstances permit.
To take just one example--we need to continue and complete the work of rounding out our system of social insurance.
We still need to improve our protection against unemployment and old age.
We still need to provide insurance against the loss of earnings through sickness, and against the high costs of modern medical care.
And above all, we must remember that the fundamentals of our strength rest upon the freedoms of our people.
We must continue our efforts to achieve the full realization of our democratic ideals.
We must uphold the freedom of speech and the freedom of conscience in our land.
We must assure equal rights and equal opportunities to all our citizens.
