THE OUTBREAK of the Korean War which virtually coincided with the beginning of the fiscal year necessitated cutbacks on the program of the Bureau of Reclamation.
The "no new starts" policy of the Administration, with minor exceptions, was continued in effect.
Nevertheless, Design and Construction activities continued the sustained pace and effort of postwar years and progressed on previously authorized and financed West-wide undertakings to new high levels of progress and completion.
As an exception to the "no new starts" policy, the Congress authorized and financed initiation of construction of the Eklutna project, for power development, in Alaska.
During this fiscal year the Bureau carried out one of the largest volumes of work in its history.
About $255,000,000 was added to the nearly 2-billion-dollar Reclamation investment in water resources developments.
Defense-order priorities, material scarcities, rising price levels, and sharply increased power demands combined to add difficulties to the year's operations.
However, streamlining of working methods, and cooperation by the regional and field units in matters of project plans, specifications, contract awards, and design delegations helped to keep to schedules.
At the same time designs met requirements even when schedules were foreshortened by changes in plans or by expedited program requirements.
More than 850 construction, material, equipment, and supply contracts were awarded for the fiscal year period.
These contracts comprised an aggregate total of more than 107 million dollars.
Contracts for construction totaled 86 million dollars of this amount, or about 80 percent.
Construction contracts in force at the beginning of the year totaled more than 325 million dollars.
At the end of the year they totaled nearly 283 million dollars.
An additional 2 million dollars worth of work was awarded and completed during the year.
Construction highlights were completion of four dams—Kortes, Bonny, and Dickinson Dams and Superior-Courtland Diversion Dam—on the Missouri River Basin project; North Coulee Dam and Feeder Canal on the Columbia Basin project; Davis Dam on the Davis Dam project; and Estes and Marys Lake Power Plants, and Granby Pumping Plant on the Colorado-Big Thompson project.
Of signal interest was the completion of major canal and pumping plant features to the extent that first integrated operation of the Central Valley project was assured during the 1952 fiscal year and that irrigation water to serve the first 87,000 acres of land in the Columbia Basin would flow soon.
Administratively, the branch strengthened its functions and procedural techniques through a critical analysis survey, and instituted several organizational changes for greater efficiency and economy of operations in these areas.
Through continued review of its contractual relations and specifications, additional improvements in specifications were adopted, and advance contract information was broadened to attract an increased number of bidders on Bureau work.
Increase of technical assistance to other governments through an expanded foreign activities program during the year made possible the furtherance of international cooperation and enhanced the cause of world progress and understanding.
Through its intensive design and construction accomplishments in conserving and developing the water resources of the Western United States, the Bureau of Reclamation in fiscal year 1951 made a major contribution to the country's effort to mobilize and utilize natural resources during the national emergency.
Major contracts awarded during the year are summarized in Table 1.
Among the features placed under contract for construction were Cachuma Dam on the Cachuma project in California, Flatiron Power and Pumping Plant and Afterbay Dam on the Colorado-Big Thompson project in Colorado, 92 miles of the Angostura Canal on the Missouri River Basin project in South Dakota, more than 380 miles of electrical transmission lines to be integrated in the Transmission Division of the Missouri River Basin project, and 16.5 miles of the East Low Canal on the Columbia Basin project in Washington.
Construction on Bureau of Reclamation projects during the year continued on the high plane of performance and accomplishment initiated in and exemplified by larger Reclamation programs of the postwar period.
The work of the field construction forces continued to be consistent in progress and quality with the performance of the previous year and was matched by progressive advance in the contractors' skill and equipment ‘as well as in supervisory relations.
In general, the over-all rate of accomplishment and economy of construction was improved, although economic comparisons were difficult to analyze in view of the sharp change in price trends during the year.
Thé construction record for the year was notable for completion of several major structures.
On the Missouri River Basin project, Kortes Dam and Power Plant, Bonny and Dickinson Dams, and Superior-Courtland Diversion Dams were completed.
Bonny Dam was completed more than 11/ years ahead of schedule.
Dickinson Dam, scheduled for completion by June 1951, was actually completed in August 1950.
Estes and Marys Lake Power Plants, among the principal sources of power for the Colorado-Big Thompson project, and the Granby Pumping Plant, a key project unit, were also completed.
The unique transmission cable through the Alva B. Adams Tunnel on the Colorado-Big Thompson project was placed in operation also to serve as the connecting link between the western slope and eastern slope power features of this transmountain diversion development.
On the Central Valley project the last 40 miles of the 153-mile-long Friant-Kern Canal was completed.
Sixty miles of the Delta-Mendota Canal were added to the project, and construction on the final reaches was advanced to a point where virtual completion of the 120-mile-long facility was assured early in the following fiscal year.
Installation of four additional generators, R-5, R-6, R-7, and R-8, in the Grand Coulee Power Plant on the Columbia Basin project was completed during the vear, bringing the total installed nameplate rating capacity of the plant to 1,866,000 kilowatts.
The Grand Coulee Pumping Plant structure was essentially completed by the end of the year; the first pump was placed in continuous operation in June, and the second pump was scheduled for operation in July.
On the same project, the North Coulee Dam and Feeder Canal, Soap Lake Siphon, and 18 miles of the Winchester Wasteway were completed.
Progress of work on Hungry Horse Dam, largest of Bureau of Reclamation dams now under construction, was maintained on schedule.
The millionth cubic vard of concrete was placed in the dam in November 1950.
14 months after placement began.
By the end of the vear the height of the dam had reached about 300 feet of its full height of 564 feet above the foundation.
On other projects, Davis Dam and Power Plant on the Davis Dam project, Arizona-Nevada, were completed, and all five generators were placed in service by June; Fort Sumner Diversion Dam onthe Fort Sumner project in New Mexico was completed, and 15 miles of the Main Canal were added to the project; and the 18-mile-long Wellton-Mohawk Canal was completed on the Gila project.
Construction progress on features remaining under contract reached substantial levels of accomplishment indicating completion in 1952 of such major structures as Boysen, Keyhole, Shadehill, and Cedar Bluff Dams on the Missouri River Basin project, Platoro Dam on the San Luis Valley project, and Big Sandy Dam on the Eden project.
At the close of the year, construction was under way on 13 storage dams, 2 diversion dams, 10 power plants, 6 pumping plants, 360 miles of main canals, 28 miles of tunnels, 2,200 miles of transmission lines, and lateral systems for 17 separate areas.
Principal features completed on Bureau of Reclamation projects are shown in table 2.
Included are 7 dams, 5 power plants, 167 miles of main canals, and 1,686 miles of transmission lines.
Among the major features expected to be placed under construction on Bureau projects during fiscal year 1952 are 3 power plants, 2 pumping plants, 84 miles of main canals, laterals to serve 260,000 acres of irrigable lands, 370 miles of pipelines for an irrigation distribution system, and over 600 miles of transmission lines.
Major features on Reclamation projects expected to be completed in fiscal year 1952 consist of 6 dams, 5 pumping plants, 160 miles of main canals, over 2,100 miles of transmission lines, and 400 miles of pipelines for an irrigation distribution system.
Award of a contract this year for materials for a steel warehouse at the Eklutna, Alaska, Government camp was the first Reclamation contract ever awarded for a project located outside the 17 Western States.
The Eklutna project, located about 30 miles northeast of Anchorage, Alaska, is designed primarily to make available critically needed power for an important area.
It also is to provide irrigation and recreation benefits later.
The project includes a 30,000-kilowatt power plant, a low earth dam, a 41/2-mile-long concrete-lined diversion tunnel, and a 160,000-acre-foot storage reservoir.
During the vear design and specifications preparations were under way for start of construction in fiscal year 1952 for several features of the project.
This work was directed toward the following scheduled program: issuance of specifications and award of the construetion contract for the power plant structure; award of the contract for construction of the diversion tunnel; issuance of specifications for construction of the Eklutna switchyard; completion of the Palmer substation: completion of the Government camp, warehouse, laboratory, and initial installation of communication equipment, and completion of the Eklutna-Palmer transmission line.
Development of the Eklutna project is an initial step toward realization of a full-grown regional economy.
The project is the first stage of a much larger plan for development of water resources in the fast growing areas around Anchorage and in the Matanuska Valley.
Over-all staff efficiency and administrative funetioning continued to receive close attention and analysis to maintain the degree of design and construction performance necessitated by the year's program and defense requirements.
To appraise staffing requirements and operating practices and to reexamine functions and procedures for the purpose of eliminating nonessential activities and reducing personal services expenditures, a "cost of doing business" survey was conducted throughout the Branch as part of a Bureau-wide survey.
As a result of the survey, several procedural and organizational changes were made, making possible greater efficiency and better utilization of personnel.
In addition, a number of recommendations relating to design and construction procedures submitted by regional and operating offices were analyzed and improved.
A significant result of this phase of the survey was the simplification of technical field reporting requirements.
To improve technical and administrative procedures and uniformity of construction standards, construction engineers were again convened in Denver for the annual Construction Engineers' Conference.
During the week-long conference, the problems of contract administration, labor regulations, equipment and machinery installation by contract, and other matters relating to the Bureau's contractual responsibilities were subject to critical review and open discussion.
Emphasis this vear was placed on construction quality, economy, and concentration of work to speed production of additional hydroelectric power needed for the defense effort.
Program participants represented virtually every important Reclamation project in the 17 Western States and the Denver and Washington Offices.
Security conditions at Bureau power plants were carefully investigated during the year.
An outstanding event of the year was the formal dedication at Denver, Colorado, of the Reclamation Enginering Center in July.
More than 40,000 visitors toured the offices and laboratories during the open-house program.
As in previous years, improvement of specifications and contractual administration procedures received continued attention.
Although the impact of the national rearmament program did not seriously affect the Bureau's bidding procedures for construction contracts, certain specifications requirements were modified because of shortages and price changes.
Sufficient bids were received for most specifications issued, and quotations for equipment were reasonable under the current market conditions.
However, to avoid delay stipulations in bids for heavy electrical and mechanical equipment, it was necessary in some instances to include escalation provisions in specifications.
In some of the larger electrical equipment specifications an additional provision covering the right to terminate after a prolonged period of delay was also included.
The paragraph for contractor-furnished materials in construction specifications was modified to allow for substitution of specified materials which might not be available because of priorities or scarcities.
During the year lists of prospective bidders and lists of those who have requested copies of the specifications for any work or equipment were removed from a restricted status to make them available at issuing offices for inspection by contractors, suppliers, and other interested parties.
To make specifications clearer, more concise, and more readable new measures were initiated during the year to reduce the context of specifications.
Such changes included elimination of detailed materials specifications, instructions for use of special type materials, and certain laboratory procedures.
Standard Bureau specifications were made available to bidders and suppliers to cover the requirements for these special materials.
Design activities continued the trend of the past several years toward increased efficiency and output by closer cooperation with field forces.
The design staff was occupied also with review of project plan reports, study of drainage requirements, operation and maintenance liaison work, and inspection of structures.
Design work was facilitated by improved program formulation, initiated through group conferences of the program staff with regional representatives.
Following an exhaustive study of the design criteria for concrete dams, recommendations were approved providing for an increase in concrete stresses.
By allowing an increase in stresses, significant savings will be possible in certain concrete dams through a reduction of the volume of concrete and requisite foundation excavation.
The new criteria for concrete dam design mark an important advance in Bureau engineering practice.
A signal achievement of the engineering staff was solution to the long-continued problem of control of serious vibrations of the large turbine runners in the Parker Power Plant on the California-Arizona border.
The vibration, at times a difficult problem in such installations, had caused cracking of some of the turbine blades.
As a result of exhaustive tests and measurements taken during turbine operation, a change in the shape in the runner blades was made, eliminating the crack-causing vibrations.
In addition, these modifications increased the power output and improved efficiency.
Basic data derived from these tests were also valuable in establishing precedents for future designs of large turbines.
The difficult problem of surging (flow fluctuation) in the pipelines of the Coachella Valley Distribution System was also solved during the year.
Intensive studies revealed that the surging could be controlled by covering the vertical pipe stands of the system with vented caps.
Use of the lids reduced surging to such an extent that delivery of water was made possible from all completed structures.
During the year approximately 50 designers’ operating instructions were issued ranging from those to be used in operating a single gate valve to comprehensive criteria for the complex operation of an entire feature such as a dam and power plant.
The operating criteria and instructions were initiated in the previous year to assure proper and efficient operation of installed equipment and machinery.
Much work was done also by designers on the development of new designs of overhead vertical lift gates, investigation of dredge stability, and earthquake effects on dams.
Nearly all forms of Reclamation structures and their functioning were under study in the Bureau's research laboratories in Denver.
Studies and investigations progressed and field test sections were installed in conjunction with the development of new and lower cost materials and methods of installation for linings to reduce seepage in irrigation canals.
Sections of various membranes, such as those composed of catalytically blown asphalt cement and of prefabricated asphalt backed with paper and reinforced with fiber glass, were installed in canals, and seepage measurements before and following installation of the linings were made.
Research in earth included, aside from a great volume of current soil testing: study of expansive clays, development of field penetration tests for soils, and development of soil classification standards.
Some important field tests were also begun.
Piles were driven in loessial soils and pile bearing tests were performed, in collaboration with field forces, to determine driving and bearing characteristics for frietional and point-bearing types of piles.
The results were used to correlate pile bearing capacity with characteristics of loessial soils.
Electrical methods of soil stabilization were also investigated.
As a result of these studies, the feasibility of these methods in the field is now determinable in the laboratory.
Geophysical tests, by seismic and electrical resistivity methods, were conducted to determine depths of weathered rock at dam sites.
Geophysical techniques were also used in tests to determine adaptability of geophysical equipment for location of aquifers and points of leakage from irrigation canals.
The laboratories continued their studies on "false set" in portland cement (a premature stiffening of the cement in concrete and mortar) and advancements were made in the determination of the causes of this phenomenon.
A specification was developed during the year to cover all types of pozzolanic materials in conerete.
Previously, detail specifications were available for fly ash (a pozzolan) only.
Prompted by the need for finding economical substitutes for rock materials on earth dams, the Bureau initiated a program of experimental installations of two substitute materials at Bonny reservoir in eastern Colorado.
Asphaltic concrete and soil cement were the materials placed as test sections at the reservoir.
From this full-scale test program may come the answer to the problem of reducing the cost of construction of earth dams throughout the Great Plains States of the Missouri River Basin.
In many plains areas, rock materials are unobtainable locally and must be shipped in from distant sources.
A comprehensive test program on anchorage values of various types of reinforcement bars, including new "high bond" bars, was also completed.
Performance of the bars in beams in flexure was tested and many pull-out tests were made.
Data from these tests were analyzed and significant information relative to structural action of reinforced concrete was developed.
In metals, continuous records of strains in steel were made by electronic equipment to study the effects of creep, plastic flow, and fatigue.
Tests performed during the year indicated that the techniques used in welding mild steel can be used without modification for welding low-alloy, high-strength steel members.
The substitution of pozzolan for cement confirmed by laboratory testing, together with the adoption of revised criteria for design of large gravity-type dams, has effected substantial economies in the cost of such dams.
To corroborate conclusions reached from previous investigations on Hungry Horse and Canyon Ferry Dams, an extensive testing program was carried out on cores taken from concrete placed last year in the dams.
The results substantiated earlier investigations and assured greater reductions in cement and pozzolan content.
The Branch of Design and Construction, as in past years, played a significant part in carrying out the Bureau's increasing responsibilities in the field of foreign activities.
The scope of the participation of this Branch included the loan of personnel for missions abroad, rendering training, design, testing, and related services, taking part in international conferences and, through correspondence and publication exchanges, maintaining the exchange of technical information with engineers of other countries.
In addition to carrying out Reclamation design and construction responsibilities, the staff performed much work for outside agencies.
Leading assignment was continued work in the preparation of construction drawings and preparation of specifications for equipment for Falcon Dam and Power Plant, a principal International Boundary and Water Commission structure on the Rio Grande in Texas.
Supervision of grouting at Diablo Dam and continued study of structural behavior of Ross Dam for the city of Seattle were also major undertakings.
Much test and research work was performed for outside agencies.
Laboratory work on development of heavy, dense concrete for the Atomic Energy Commission continued.
Of primary consideration was the selection of a dense aggregate, heavier than that normally used in concrete, and which would produce concrete meeting certain rigid requirements relative to behavior under special service conditions.
The laboratories continued to assist the United States Forest Service in conducting tests on chemicals used in control of beetles in national forests.
At the request of the Fish and Wildlife Service, the laboratories gave advice and information concerning the development of an insoluble coating for poisoned grains to be used for rodent control in reforestation projects.
Cooperative studies between the Bureau research laboratories and Colorado A & M College were undertaken to improve methods of designing stable unlined channels.
Weed control investigations were also conducted in the laboratories in cooperation with the Department of Agriculture.
Progress was made in the radioisotope laboratory in application of radioactive tracer techniques involving use of "tagged atoms."
Studies were initiated on the measurement of absorption of radio-active materials as a means for determination of the density and moisture control of soil.
The laboratories continued to act as the acceptance testing agency for the Denver office of the Federal Supply Service in testing of protective coatings and related materials.
Work was also performed for the Navy on the use of construction materials for the Fena River dam site in Guam, for the General Services Administration in remodeling certain buildings of the Denver Federal Center, and for the Northern Arizona Light & Power Co. in analyses of a transmission system by use of the Bureau's network analyzer.
Members of the research staff, representing the Branch of Design and Construction, participated in the concrete conference held during the year with representatives of the Department of Army.
Included in the agenda were discussions and interpretations of test results on permeability and of tests on lean mass concrete, and experimental determination of uplift pressures on concrete dams.
Bureau designers cooperated with the Corps of Engineers in the design and construction of irrigation features and facilities for flood-control reservoirs at Harlan County and Folsom Dams.
The Bureau's mapping activities, particularly those using aerial photography, were coordinated with the programs of such primary mapping agencies as the Geological Survey, Army Map Service, Coast and Geodetic Survey, and Soil Conservation Service, to insure that no duplication occurred.
Contracts for aerial photography and mapping were awarded by the Bureau for areas in California, Colorado, Montana, Nebraska, Wyoming, and Alaska where urgent requirements could not be met by the primary mapping agencies.
In order to meet the Bureau's requirements for special high-dam data, and requirements of the Coast and Geodetic Survey, for the latest and more complete seismic information, coordinative seismological studies of the Bureau, the Coast and Geodetic Survey, and the National Park Service were continued at Hoover, Shasta, and Hungry Horse Dams.
The Bureau continued cooperating with the National Park Service, Smithsonian Institution and various state agencies regarding archeological and paleontological surveys, and excavations at sites where construction was contemplated or in progress.
At the beginning of the year costs for Bureau of Reclamation construction had reached the lowest level experienced in the period following the end of World War II.
With the outbreak of hostilities in Korea, however, costs began to rise again.
By the end of the year Bureau construction involving only labor and equipment rental reflected wage increases and higher equipment costs.
Generally these increases were slight except in those instances where considerably lessened competition and uncertainty of labor supply in areas of intensive defense activity were contributing factors.
The cost of work embracing large amounts of construction materials and fabricated products became as high as or higher than at any time in the past.
This is indicated in table 3, which lists cost indexes for construction work based on the combined costs of materials and labor furnished by contractors and material and labor furnished by the Government.
Bid prices for materials were widely varied and showed increases generally from 20 to 100 percent over June 1950.
This was attributed primarily to shortages, real or anticipated, caused by stockpiling of materials expected to be in short supply or not available and by military purchases.
Important advancements representing a cross section of engineering and scientific endeavors by the staff were recorded this year in Bureau technical publications.
Since publication of the Bureau's fifth edition of the Concrete Manual in 1949, its acceptance as an authoritative work on concrete control and concrete construction has been widespread and a reprint was required.
Certain additions and corrections were incorporated in the reprint which is to be distributed early in the following year.
The Earth Construction Manual and Paint Manual will be made available for distribution early in fiscal year 1952.
The first manual records engineering practices and procedures developed in earth materials testing and construction; the latter manual is an assemblage of procedures and techniques for control of paints and protective coatings.
Also published were three engineering monographs which discuss the design and construction of the Soap Lake Siphon, stress analysis of concrete pipe, and friction factors for large pipes.
Under preparation during the year were: a revised edition of Dams and Control Works; a revision of the Arc-Welding Manual under the title "Welding and Riveting Manual," which brings up to date and expands its present coverage to include other types of welding as well as riveting; a geology manual, presenting technical instructions relating to geological investigations; a hydraulic laboratory manual; a revision of the Manual for Measurement of Irrigation Water; a safety manual; a manual on bituminous construction; and additional engineering monographs.
The Advance Construction Bulletin and Advance Equipment Bulletin which report Bureau work proposed for the following 90 days were issued in increasingly greater numbers in response to requests from contractors and subcontractors.
To promote increased competitive interest among wider numbers of prospective bidders, the bulletins were improved in format by inclusion of more details on work involved and on materials and equipment the construction contractor is to furnish and install.
Approximately 20 new maps were issued of Bureau projects or units of the Missouri River Basin plus a new edition of a wall-size map showing present and proposed Reclamation activities.
The degree of Bureau of Reclamation participation in the several authorized foreign technical assistance programs of the United States again showed an increase over previous years.
Each year since the termination of World War II requests from abroad for the technical services of the Bureau have shown an increase in numbers and importance.
To facilitate the administration of the Bureau's increased activities in the foreign field the Office of Foreign Activities has been established as an operating office under the Commissioner.
The most significant development in the program was the passage of the Act for International Development (Public Law 535, 81st Cong.) popularly known as the Point IV Act.
Also of special note was the execution of a contract with ECA for rendering service to trainees, official observers, and accredited visitors that they refer to us.
While this Government's Foreign Technical Assistance Programs are directed primarily at benefiting other countries the Bureau nevertheless profited greatly from the resulting mutual exchange of technical and general information regarding water-resources development the world over.
There were 22 missions overseas to 22 different countries involving 40 individuals in effect at one time or another during the last year—all as a result of specifie requests from the countries concerned and with the approval of the Department of State, ECA, or other of the agencies administering a foreign program.
Under the point 4 program missions were sent to Lebanon, Honduras, Costa Rica, Libya, Nicaragua, and Ecuador.
Other Bureau personnel traveled to Australia, Afghanistan, Iran, Ceylon, Pakistan, and India to render technical assistance under the provisions of Public Law 402, Eightieth Congress.
Our part in ECA's program included the loan to that agency of Bureau personnel for service in Italy, Greece, Turkey, Northern Rhodesia, Italian Somaliland, and Thailand.
Other overseas missions included Guam, the Ryukyus, Saudi Arabia, and Puerto Rico at the request of the Navy, Army, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and the Puerto Rico Water Resources Authority, respectively.
Approximately 230 foreign officials and engineers from some 32 countries toured reclamation projects and visited Bureau Field Offices.
Engineering trainees numbering 54, representing 12 foreign countries, studied Bureau engineering and administration practices in the Denver engineering offices and laboratories or at other Bureau offices.
During the last fiscal year Bureau employees were designated as official United States delegates or observers at the following international conferences: Large Electric High-Tension Systems, World Power Conference, Congress on Large Dams, Sectional Meeting of the World Power Conference, International Association of Hydraulic Research, UN Economic and Social Council Conference on Flood Control, International Commission on Irrigation and Canals, Fourth Inter-American Conference on Agriculture, and the UN International Institute for the Arid Zones.
In addition to sending delegates to these conferences numerous papers were prepared by Bureau employees for presentation at the above meetings.
The Bureau also rendered testing, research, design review, and other similar services to foreign governments at their request and with the approval of the Department of State.
Because of the Bureau's extensive and unique facilities for performing this type of work, the numbers of such requests continue to increase.
Testing and design review in connection with the important Chao Phya Dam in Thailand is being carried out at that Government's request.
In addition soils and material testing were performed for the Governments of Israel and Venezuela and for Bhakra Dam in India.
In addition to the above activities, hundreds of letters were received from foreign nationals requesting technical and general information, publications, reports, photographs, and similar material.
Requested items and information were supplied insofar as facilities permitted.
At the same time numerous exchange arrangements for technical information were established.
Publication exchanges with foreign government agencies continued at an increased rate.
A further increase is anticipated in the scope and magnitude of the Bureau's part in this Government's foreign technical assistance programs during the coming fiscal year.
Participation in worthwhile projects of this sort will continue insofar as the Bureau's domestic activities will permit and funds in connection therewith are made available.
Operation and Maintenance means providing irrigation water for 310,000 settlers on 100,000 farms which comprise almost 6 million acres of land, preparing land for settlement where ultimately many times the present number of settlers will become Reclamation farmers, and last, but not least, to see that thousands of miles of irrigation facilities throughout the 17 Western States are kept in good working order to conserve and use water to the greatest advantage, thus assuring service to the people of the area.
These facilities include 107 storage and 68 diversion dams, more than 16,000 miles of canals and laterals, more than 3,500 miles f drains, 495 pumping plants and an estimated 6,000 miles of roads.
In addition to the farm population, about 1,380,000 persons living in the nearby towns and villages are dependent upon the success of the Reclamation program.
Two new projects, the 3,500-acre Lewiston Orehards project in Idaho, and the 2,216-acre Savage Unit of the Yellowstone Division of the Missouri River Basin project in Montana, were added to the Reclamation family, making a total of 62 projects or divisions of projects now in operation.
Six new agreements were made with State Agricultural Colleges and United States Department of Agriculture Agencies whereby information on the latest and most economical methods of irrigation farming will be obtained for Reclamation.
This brings the total number of agreements in effect to 41.
The repayment program, another principal Operation and Maintenance activity, continued at top level during the year.
Six amendatory contracts (revision of existing agreements between the Bureau and irrigation distriets to adjust the charges paid by the farmers to the current economic situation) and 20 new water service and repayment contracts were executed during the period January 1, 1950, to June 30, 1951.
The total value of all Bureau repayment contracts is $519,800,415 of which $88,739,714 has been repaid to date.
Central Valley project districts signed 11 of these agreements indicating widespread support of the Bureau's program and poliey, and making it possible for the Bureau to deliver Central Valley project water to the numerous valley customers.
Representatives of the Chief Engineer's Office conducted annual inspections of all major Bureau structures and facilities and the various project superintendents continued to conduct inspections of the minor structures and facilities to insure uninterrupted and equitable scheduled water deliveries.
In addition to the inspection program, Bureau personnel are responsible for checking stream flow, conducting runoff forecasts, and measuring and delivering water.
Water users on the Grand Valley, Milk River, North Platte, Riverton, and Salt River projects executed contracts with the Bureau which paved the way for the Rehabilitation work on their respective projects.
Veteran settlement through public land homesteading and purchase of acquired lands continues to receive wide public attention throughout the Nation.
Applications for farm units remain many times the number of units available.
Increased annual maintenance assumed by water users as part of the regular Operation and Maintenance work, and the Rehabilitation and Betterment program, which is handled in conjunction with the regular Operation and Maintenance program, resulted in the irrigation facilities being in more efficient operating condition than at any time during the past three decades.
During the vear a reappraisal of the drainage program was made by all Regions to assure that it was meeting present needs.
An active up-to-date drainage program is being formulated, and attention will be given to the need for day-to-day maintenance of facilities and preventive construction to keep additional lands from going out of production due to lack of proper drainage is being stressed.
The accelerated weed control program resulted in a tremendous saving in maintenance costs and cut water losses considerably.
The development of aromatic solvents for controlling waterweeds was a high spot in the program and has resulted in saving thousands of dollars annually.
Facilities provided by the Bureau of Reclamation were expanded to extend full or supplemental service to a total of 6,025,000 irrigable acres in 1950.
This represents an increase of 346,000 acres over the previous crop year.
Of these irrigable acres, 5,077,000 were irrigated in 1950, which is an increase of 256,000 acres over 1949.
The major increase in irrigation service occurred on the Central Valley project of California where supplemental water was provided for the first time this vear to districts in which 172,000 acres were irrigated.
Se o t s ai.
Wa a ect.
Pri t t ds.
Gen t t ned watr Aru ud ur u tply Noltt at tt r t t tito.
Crop production and irrigation service on Reclamation projects reached an all-time high in 1950.
The volume of crops produced was over 16 million tons for the first time in Reclamation's history and the value of the crops was $578,238,000 which is an increase of $62,- 000,000 over 1949 and almost $23,000,000 over the 555 million dollar golden harvest of 1947, previous all-time high.
This was the fifth successive year that the value of Reclamation crops topped the halfbillion-dollar mark and for the same period the average per acre value of crops reached $111.
The volume of vegetables, truck fruits and nuts, the "protective food," reached 5,613,000 tons or nearly 35 percent of the total crop.
The highest per acre crop value was found on the Coachella Division of the All-American Canal system where project water users received an average of $433 per acre for their crops.
The high value received here is largely due to the large acreages of fruit and truck crop, mainly string beans and sweet corn and dates.
Including the crop returns for 1950, the cumulative value of crops grown in the 45 years since irrigation water was first supplied from Reclamation sources totals $7,161,808,000.
The types of crops raised on western irrigated lands include many products not available from other places in the United States.
An outstanding record was achieved in 1950 in the production of cotton.
Both medium and long staple cotton are produced.
The value of the 454,000 bales of cotton lint and 184,000 tons of cottonseed grown by irrigation on Bureau projects was $111,531,168.
Approximately 670,000 acres, or 13 percent of the entire irrigated area, was devoted to this valuable fiber crop.
Yields of cotton, deciduous fruit, except in a few areas damaged by late spring frosts, and potatoes were excellent.
Yields per acre of pears and peaches on regular projects in the Rocky Mountain States were especially hard hit by the bad weather.
The production was almost a total loss in some instances.
As a result of the small quantities of fruit produced, the price was higher than usual and some recovery was made in terms of total returns.
The resulting total value of fruit on Reclamation projects substantially increased over 1949.
Prices of grapes and cotton were good, with a resultant high gross value.
The prices of potatoes generally, and of lettuce in the Southwest, were down from the previous year.
Alfalfa and other hay was substantially the same as in the preceding year but the value of these commodities was relatively low when compared with other crops.
Grains were about average on yield and price.
Water supplies were generally adequate, but shortages were apparent in the Salt River Valley of Arizona and on the Rio Grande project of New Mexico and Texas.
The cultivated area on which crop production is based amounted to 5,189,000 acres.
This represents an increase of 273,000 acres from the previous crop year.
Shifts in the cropping pattern on this irrigated acreage included generally a reduction in the amount of cereal grains, principally wheat, general increases in the acreage devoted to seed crop production, and substantial acreages devoted to cotton.
Rsited.
Livestock and equipment inventory of project farmers on November 1, 1950, showed an increase in value to 271 million dollars or an increment of 51 million dollars over the previous year.
Of this total, the value of livestock amounted to 118 million dollars, while equipment constituted 153 million dollars, or 56 percent of the total inventory value.
A portion of the increase in value was due to advances of prices by the latter part of the year, but the stimulation of the Korean War caused extensive purchasing of equipment, in anticipation of difficulties of procuring machinery in the event of a protracted struggle.
This stockpiling is in direct contrast to the situation when the inventory increase probably was not much more than sufficient to replace worn-out equipment.
Thus in 1950 the inventory increase of farm equipment amounted to 17 percent more than the preceding year which had increased 7 percent over 1948.
The livestock were accounted for by a preponderance of cattle, representing 78 percent of the total inventory.
Of this percentage, 48 percent were mainly beef or unsegregated cattle while 29 percent were dairy stock.
Of the remaining livestock, sheep represented 13 percent, poultry 4 percent, hogs 3 percent, horses and mules 2 percent, and miscellaneous livestock 1 percent, respectively, of the total livestock inventory.
Crops that make up the impressive total tonnage include feed and forage essential in attaining balanced land use of the western range— important in livestock production.
Cotton, sugar beets, and choice cereals were also included in the Reclamation farmers crop rotation.
Most important, however, was the tremendous variety of fruits, nuts, vegetables, and truck crops which now make up such an important portion of the American diet.
Of the 16 million tons of strategic food and fiber produced on Reclamation lands over 5.6 million tons were fruits, nuts, vegetables, and truck crops.
Thus nearly one-third of the 1950 harvest was in those highly prized crops which are classed as "protective foods" by our dieticians.
Many of these crops are grown exclusively under irrigation.
In fact, a very large portion of the Nation's highly prized fruits, nuts, and vegetables comes from irrigated land in the western United States.
In 1948, the 11 Western States produced virtually all of our apricots, almonds, dates, lemons, figs, prunes, and olives, 95 percent of the grapes, over 90 percent of the lettuce, 85 percent of the sweet cherries, 75 percent of the avocados, pears, and cantaloupes, 65 percent of the asparagus, 50 percent of the peaches, and over 50 percent of all truck crops.
As a result of the detailed attention paid to problems associated with the storage, regulation, and distribution of irrigation water supplies, and the maintenance of structures and distribution systems, crops were matured profitably on all operating projects during the calendar year 1950 despite water shortages resulting from the longcontinued drouth in the Southwest.
On some projects where surface water was not adequate, ground water was pumped to supplement supplies.
Irrigation water was delivered to the water users during fiscal year 1951 without a major break in the distribution system of any Bureau-operated project.
Better results in operation of some of the older projects are showing up as a result of completion of all or of the first stages of the rehabilitation and betterment programs on those projects.
Progress was continued on investigations of and improvements in drainage conditions, and on water-conservation programs, including reductions in distribution-system losses, sprinkler-irrigation investigations, education for better farm-irrigation practices, weed control, and reuse of return flows, all aimed at fuller utilization of existing water resources.
In accordance with established Congressional and Departmental policy, responsibilities for the operation and maintenance of three projects or units thereof were transferred to the water users during the fiscal year.
These were the Midvale Irrigation District of the Riverton project in Wyoming, the Mirage Flats project in Nebraska, and the Balmorhea project in Texas.
Completed portions of the Salt Lake Aqueduct, Utah, and of the Coachella distribution systems, California, likewise were transferred for operation and maintenance by the water users organizations.
Negotiations were completed during the year for effecting the transfer of the Valley Division of the Yuma, Ariz., project to the water users on July 1, 1951, at the start of fiscal year 1952.
The Rehabilitation and Betterment Program of the Bureau of Reclamation, based on Public Law 335 of the Eighty-first Congress, Firsf Session, as amended, continued to move forward in many areas.
This program requires full reimbursement by the water users of all funds expended.
In most cases, the Rehabilitation and Betterment Program has required the negotiation and execution of supplemental repayment contracts.
Interior and Insular Affairs before expenditures can be made on rehabilitation and betterment work.
Arizona: Salt River projeet.
Colorado: Grand Valley project.
Montana: Milk River project.
Nebraska-Wyoming: North Platte project.
Wyoming: Riverton project.
Arrangements for repayment of rehabilitation work on the Belle Fourche project, South Dakota; Orland project, California; Bitter Root project, Montana; Vale project, Oregon; Shoshone project, Wyoming; and the Storage Division of the Yakima project in Washington are provided for by existing contracts with irrigation distriets and water user associations.
In addition, contracts for repayment of rehabilitation and betterment work on the Okanogan project, Washington, and the Sun River project, Montana, have been approved by the appropriate Congressional Committee and are now awaiting execution by the water users.
All work contemplated under the rehabilitation and betterment program for accomplishment on the Orland (Calif.), Vale (Oreg.), and Bitter Root (Mont.) projects was completed during the year, the latter two entirely with funds carried over from fiscal year 1950 allotments.
The work on the various projects included replacement of old wood structures; repair or replacement of old concrete and steel structures; cleaning and repair of canals, laterals, wasteways, and drains; installation of canal lining to prevent excessive water losses; construction of drains; construction and repair of roads, cattle guards, fences, and many other items as required to place the projects in first-class operating condition.
Cooperation between the Branches of Design and Construction and Operation and Maintenance continued to improve during the past year.
The appointment of a special liaison officer during the previous year for the purpose of inspecting, compiling, and interpreting operating results on all existing projects for the benefit of design personnel engaged on the preparation of designs and specifications for new projects has been particularly effective.
In his efforts, the liaison officer has received guidance and full support from both the Chief Engineer and the Director of the Branch of Operation and Maintenance.
The progress made in the past few years in executing new and amendatory repayment contracts with water users' organizations continued with good results during the period January 1, 1950, to June 30, 1951.
Negotiations of basic amendatory repayment contracts for the Hyrum and Ogden River projects, Utah, were completed under seetion 7 of the Reclamation Project Act of 1939.
These contracts accomplished needed financial adjustments for the South Cache Water Users' Association and the Ogden River Water Users' Association, and were approved by the Congress by the enactment of Publie Laws 666 and 667, Eighty-first Congress, Second Session.
Negotiations of basic amendatory repayment contracts involving financial adjustments for the nine irrigation districts, Advancement, Bench, Crystal, Gem, Ontario-Nyssa, Owyhee, Payette-Oregon Slope, Slide, and Ridgeview, which comprise the Owyhee project, Oregon-Idaho, and for the Malta and Glasgow Irrigation Districts of the Milk River project, Mont., are virtually complete and Secretarial reports thereon are being readied for submittal to the Congress pursuant to section 7 of the Reclamation Project Act of 1939.
Colorado: Colorado-Big Thompson project, Northern Colorado Water Conservaney District.
Idaho: Boise project, Wilder Irrigation District.
New Mexieo: Rio Grande project, Hudspeth County Conservation and Reclamation District No. 1.
Oregon-California: Klamath project, Klamath Irrigation District.
Idaho: Boise project, Black Canyon Irrigation Distriet, Nampa and Meridian Irrigation District.
Montana: Frenchtown project, Frenchtown Irrigation District.
Oregon: Deschutes project, North Unit Irrigation District; Umatilla project, Hermiston Irrigation District, West Extension Irrigation District.
Washington: Yakima project, Roza Irrigation District.
Financial adjustment investigations were commenced during FY 1951 on a number of additional projects.
At the close of FY 1951, substantial progress had been made also in connection with acquisition of the power system and negotiation of amendatory contracts with the districts in the North Platte project in Nebraska and Wyoming.
Arizona-California: Yuma project, sale of waste water to Mexican interests, Yuma Čounty Water Users' Association (Operation and Maintenance Transfer contract).
California: Central Valley project, Chowchilla Water District, Contra Costa County Water District (interim), Exeter Irrigation District, Lindsay-Strathmore Irrigation District, Lower Tule River Irrigation District, Madera Irrigation District, Saucelito Irrigation District, Stone Corral Irrigation District, Terra Bella Irrigation District, Tulare Irrigation District, temporary 1950 and 1951 water service contracts (numerous districts in San Joaquin Valley).
Kansas: Missouri River Basin project, Kansas Bostwick Irrigation District No. 2.
Montana: Milk River project, city of Havre (Municipal Water).
Nebraska: Mirage Flats project, Mirage Flats Irrigation District.
New Mexico: Tucumcari project, city of Tucumcari (Municipal Water).
Oregon: Ochoco project, Ochoco Irrigation District.
South Dakota: Missouri River Basin project, Angostura Irrigation District.
Wyoming: Eden project, Eden Valley Irrigation and Drainage District; North Platte project, city of Casper (Municipal Water).
At the close of the fiscal year, negotiations had been completed on a number of additional contracts which were pending formal execution by either the water users' organizations or the United States.
Arizona: Gila project, North Gila Valley Irrigation District; Yuma Auxiliary project, Unit B Irrigation and Drainage District.
California: Central Valley project, Buckeye Water Distriet, Contra Costa County Water District, Delano-Earlimart Irrigation District, Porterville Irrigation District; Cachuma project, temporary water service contracts (contemplated with several districts).
Montana: Buffalo Rapids project, Buffalo Rapids Irrigation District No. 1.
Nebraska: Missouri River Basin project, Frenchman-Cambridge Irrigation District.
North Dakota: Missouri River Basin project, Fort Clark Irrigation District, Heart River Irrigation District.
Oregon-California: Klamath project, Langell Valley Irrigation District.
South Dakota: Missouri River Basin project, Belle Fourche Irrigation District (Keyhole unit).
Wyoming: Missouri River Basin project, Owl Creek Irrigation District.
In addition, detailed physical and economic investigations were completed and negotiations were well advanced on more than a score of contracts involving other new projects or new units of projects.
Items in the new contract program of particular note during the past year included court confirmation of a revised water service and repayment contract with the Frenchman-Cambridge Irrigation District, Nebraska, Missouri River Basin project.
On the last day of the fiseal year, the judge of the superior court of Red Willow County, Nebr., indicated that he would enter an order confirming the proposed contract as revised following court disapproval of the preceding contract executed in 1947.
The first water service and repayment contract for the Missouri River Basin project in South Dakota was executed on May 29, 1951, with the Angostura Irrigation District.
The first Missouri River Basin contract in Kansas was also executed—with the Kansas Bostwick Irrigation District No. 2.
The Supreme Court of North Dakota in actions involving the Fort Clark Irrigation District cleared the way for early execution of the frst irrigation water service and repayment contract for the Missouri River Basin projeét in North Dakota.
The changing construction-cost picture arising in connection with the Defense Program and the Korean situation may result in the need for additional repayment contract coverage for some of the projects now under construction.
Building as the Bureau does on a strictly cost basis, when significant changes in costs occur, it is the poliey of the Bureau of Reclamation to advise the water users’ organizations of these increases in costs as soon as possible and where necessary to negotiate supplemental repayment contracts to cover the added costs.
The Bureau of Reclamation, since it operates on a cost basis, does not have the opportunity that private contractors have of making up losses on one contract by profits on another.
Expansion of the urban population in the West, and the growing water requirements of the National Defense Program in Western States, have called for additional contract activities related to the furnishing of municipal and industrial water from Reelamation projects.
These contract activities have included not only the negotiations with municipal water users seeking new and supplemental water supplies for municipal and industrial purposes, but also in connection with furnishing additional supplies to military installations and certain defense industries closely related to the National Defense Program.
In accordance with the policy of the Secretary of the Interior water charges for municipal and industrial purposes have included payment of interest on the construction cost at 2 percent.
Federal income, corporation, excise, and other tax payments received directly or indirectly from Reclamation project areas are estimated to aggregate about 2.3 billion dollars.
This is based on a sample analysis of 15 Federal Reclamation projects which are estimated to have produced over 68 million dollars in individual income taxes alone during 1950 with the total of these payments since the building of these projects amounting to over one-half billion dollars.
Other Federal tax payments in these areas are estimated at approximately a quarter of a billion dollars.
Thus total Federal revenues in 15 project areas are estimated in excess of three-quarter billion dollars.
These revenues constitute a partial measure of the extent to which Reclamation projects contribute to the stability, productive capacity, and defense of the Nation.
Rough estimates have been made of the F'ederal individual income taxes paid directly and indirectly from 15 Federal Reclamation project areas.
These estimates include taxes paid by irrigation farmers, townspeople, and business in the general project area.
For these 15 selected areas, it is estimated that approximately $68,000,000 of Federal individual income taxes were paid in 1950 and about $525,000,000 since development of the areas.
In addition to the above-estimated tax revenue an appropriate share of corporation income taxes, excise and other Federal taxes are directly and indirectly related to the business and industrial activity in these areas.
As an example the rough estimates for Maricopa County, Ariz., representing the Salt River project area include $23,- 552,000 of corporation taxes and $18,315,000 of other miscellaneous tax revenues, bringing the'estimated total Federal tax revenue from the area to about $65,000,000.
For the 15 projects for which estimates were made, the individual income taxes of $525,000,000 plus about $250,000,000 of corporation tax revenues bring the total to approximately $750,000,000 since development of the areas.
By projecting this total to the 62 irrigation projects now in production, estimates on total Federal tax payments can be secured.
These estimates indicate that, since Federal income taxes were initiated, approximately 1.55 billion dollars of individual income taxes and about 2.3 billion dollars of all Federal taxes have been paid from all Reclamation project areas receiving either a full or supplemental water supply from Federally constructed works.
Two Reclamation project areas will serve as examples to demonstrate purchasing power created by reclamation activity.
In 1949 approximately 40 percent of the volume and 72 percent of the value of all railroad shipments of freight into Ada and Canyon Counties were from the 37 States east of the Rocky Mountains.
From 1939 to 1949 the volume increased from about 2,200 to more than 8,235 carloads and the value increased from 6.5 million to 92.2 million dollars.
The in-shipments totaled 20,476 cars valued at 127.6 million dollars and the out-shipments amounted to 21,403 cars valued at 50.7 million dollars.
Truck freight shipped in would increase these figures by about one-fourth.
Thus the total in and out shipments in 1949 approximate an equivalent of about 52,000 cars valued at 223 million dollars.
The Scottsbluff area of the North Platte project in Nebraska received 283 carloads of freight in 1900.
With the development of irrigation in the area these in-shipments increased to 1,447 carloads in 1910: 6,207 in 1940; and 7,144 in 1942.
In this area the freight shipped in is more than twice the volume shipped out of the area.
The value of retail sales provides another excellent clue to the relationship of the West to the Nation.
In 1949 alone, in the 17 Western States they amounted to nearly 34 billion dollars.
An analysis of railroad carloadings, as previously indicated, shows that a very high percentage of this merchandise was shipped into the West from the industrial centers of the Midwest and the East.
In terms of the international market in which we as a Nation seek to stimulate trade, the value of retail sales in the 17 Western States exceeds total United States exports by 3 times.
Retail sales in the three far Western States exceed the total value of United States exports by 20 percent.
The deposits in banks which directly service Reclamation areas have been constantly increasing and for the last 5 years have averaged more than a billion dollars a year.
In 1950 deposits were up to approximately 1.1 billion and are expected to increase in future years.
During the fiscal vear of 1951 the Bureau opened for sale and settlement 4.257 acres of irrigable land on the Columbia Basin project comprising 106 farm units.
These openings included 30 units consisting of 2,505 acres in the East Columbia Irrigation District and 20 units involving 1,634 acres in the Quincy Columbia Basin Irrigation District.
In addition to these openings which were full-time farming opportunities the Bureau opened 56 part-time units in the Burbank Pumping Unit with a total acreage of 118.
All farms were located on the Columbia Basin project in the State of Washington.
A large portion of the irrigation facilities now under construction or scheduled for future construction by the Bureau will serve privately owned lands.
However, during fiscal year 1952 about 25,000 acres of public or government acquired lands on Reclamation projects are scheduled to be opened for settlement.
These lands scheduled for settlement in 1952 are located on the Columbia Basin, Gila, All-American Canal, and Riverton projects.
The farm units opened for settlement on the Columbia Basin project during the past year were composed primarily of government-acquired land and were sold to settlers under the provisions of the Columbia Basin Project Act rather than being disposed of through homesteading.
Veterans of World War II were given preference in the purchase of these units.
The demand for farm units still continues to exceed the supply as indicated by the 1,683 applications which were received for 50 full-time farm units on the Columbia Basin project or an average of 33 applications per farm unit.
Thus where 1 veteran succeeded in obtaining a unit 32 were unsuccessful.
Fifty-six of the units offered for sale on the Columbia Basin project were part-time farm units ranging in size from one-half to five irrigable acres.
This is the first time that part-time farm units have been offered for settlement on Reclamation projects.
These part-time farm units are intended primarily for persons who obtain income from other sources but who desire a rural residence where they can obtain part of their living from the farm.
The units were established in accordance with the recommendations made in the Columbia Basin Joint Investigations.
These investigations or studies as they are frequently referred to were conducted by the Bureau of Reclamation in cooperation with members of Federal, State, and local agencies, along with authorities from universities and other walks of life in order to encourage the success of settlers on the project.
The entire study, designed to assist new settlers in every phase of reclamation, is the most extensive and informative ever undertaken in connection with an irrigation development and today is world renowned for its value to those interested in irrigation farming.
One public land drawing was held during the year for the award of 54 farm units, consisting of 6,940 acres on the Riverton project in Wyoming.
The public announcement for these farms was issued on March 28, 1950, and the last day for filing was June 26, 1950, while the actual drawing was held on August 26, 1950.
The Bureau has extended its continuing program to obtain technical assistance for new settlers on Reclamation projects through cooperation with State Colleges and agencies of the Department of Agriculture.
The Bureau now has in effect nine working agreements with State Colleges in Idaho, Kansas, Oklahoma, Oregon, Montana, New Mexico, Washington, and two in Wyoming for helping settlers to get off to a good start on their new farms.
The State Colleges of Agriculture have employed assistant county agents to give special counsel to the newcomers.
In other cases the various agricultural agencies, which are able to grant specific service to the settlers, have jointly formed a settler-assistance program and have mutually agreed on the individual aid each will give to the farmers.
Development farms.
Eleven development farms have been established in connection with this program.
They are Bostwick, Nebraska, in the Bostwick division of the Missouri River Basin projeet; Burbank, Burke, Pasco, and Winchester in Washington; Huron and Redfields in South Dakota; Bowbells and Mandan in North Dakota; Kanopolis in Kansas; and Riverton in Wyoming.
These farms are located in new project areas, namely, Columbia Basin, Missouri Basin, and Riverton, which are being brought under irrigation primarily to demonstrate approved methods of irrigation and cultural practices best adapted to specific localities.
A part of each farm generally is reserved for use by the State experimental station and agencies of the United States Department of Agriculture for condueting research.
The findings of this research are made available to settlers in this area and are also demonstrated on the development farms.
Field days and tours are conducted on the development farms.
Some of these farms have been in operation for three or more years.
During the past year new farms were established on the Columbia Basin, Missouri Basin, and Riverton projects.
Several additional development farms are scheduled for the Missouri Basin projeet within the next 2 years.
Credit for settlers.
Limited finances continue to be a problem for new settlers, even though during the past year a great deal of progress has been made to remedy this situation.
Under provisions of Publie Law 361, Eighty-first Congress, it is now possible for the Farmers Home Administration of the Department of Agriculture to make loans to settlers on public land previous to the time they receive patent to the land.
Under the provisions of this law, the Farmers Home Administration has made loans to a relatively large percentage of new settlers on Reclamation projects, and as a result these farmers have made rapid progress in developing their farm units.
As an example, the 104 settlers on the Heart Mountain Division of the Shoshone project in Wyoming who obtained farm units late in 1949 had an average of over 70 percent of their land under cultivation in the fall of 1950.
Excellent cooperation exists between the Farmers Home Administration and the Bureau of Reclamation and the Bureau works closely with the Administration in estimating the needs of that agency for funds for loan purposes.
The settler application for a loan must be approved by the local Farmers Home Administration Board.
Also the money must be available in the Farmers Home Administration which is dependent upon annual Congressional appropriations.
Cooperation with other agencies.
The Bureau of Reclamation is continuing its policy of obtaining technical information and assistance in the agricultural and economic phases of its program through cooperation with state colleges of agriculture and agencies of the United States Department of Agriculture.
In this connection the Bureau now has in effect 41 memoranda of understanding or cooperative agreements with state colleges and other agencies.
These agreements provide for a wide range of activities including research on the agricultural, economic, or engineering phases of reclamation, service to the Bureau, and joint efforts in the solution of problems.
An example is the agreement between the Washington State College, the Soil Conservation Service, and the Bureau of Reclamation which provides for the conducting of investigations on the Columbia Basin project to develop technical standards and practical irrigation guides to be used in advising and assisting settlers in efficient use of irrigation water on that project.
As a result of these investigations, standards and guides will be prepared for the use of settlers and also for use of the several agricultural agencies in their assistance to settlers.
Another example is the memorandum of understanding between the Washington State College, the Farmers Home Administration, and the Bureau of Reclamation which provides for the Bureau's collaboration with the Farmers Home Administration and the State College Extension Service in preparing plans for a domestic water system for each irrigation block in the Columbia Basin project.
The Extension Service will then conduct educational work and will, if necessary, help to perfect organizations of landowners which can assume financial obligations for domestic water systems.
The Farmers Home Administration will work with individuals or organizations to achieve the development of domestic water systems as planned.
The Administration will also take steps to finance such construction insofar as available funds permit.
This special-investigations program, aimed at a determination of materials, methods, and procedures that will result in the most economieal canal linings, was initiated in 1946.
The investigations have included laboratory work in Denver and experimental field installations throughout the West.
The work was continued during the past year by the Bureau of Reclamation directly and by utilization of the resources and experience of State colleges and the Soil Conservation Service, in cooperative studies.
Utilization of the findings and developments under this program in design and construction of new projects and in rehabilitation and betterment of older; existing projects has resulted in definite worthwhile savings to the Government.
Progress during the first 2 years of the investigations was recorded in a general information report titled "Lower Cost Canal Linings," dated June 1948.
It is anticipated that a complete, revised report of accomplishments to date will be issued early in fiscal year 1952.
1. Liberalization and simplification of specification requirements with respect to line, grade, and finish of hard-surface linings have encouraged greater mechanization of placing equipment and resulted in lower construction costs and lower bid prices.
2. Elimination of reinforcement steel in concrete linings, except where safety is involved, has resulted in savings of 10 to 15 percent in total cost.
3. Development of subgrade-guided slip-forms has made it economically feasible to line small canals and laterals with hard-surface linings which heretofore have been prohibitive in cost.
4. Development of a buried asphalt membrane lining which may be constructed of prefabricated strips or hot sprayed-in-place asphalt cement, covered with a protective blanket of earth or gravel, has resulted in greatly reduced costs where its use is applicable.
During the past vear, investigations of drainage problems were intensified.
The branches of Project Planning, Design and Construction, and Operation and Maintenance cooperated to make sure that in the planning stage proper consideration was given to potential drainage problems, that programs were provided or reestablished to assist operating projects in making water-table observations, and that the design and construction of drainage works were properly supervised.
Drainage is one of the important items in the Rehabilitation and Betterment program and it is hoped that on the existing projects, where drainage systems are necessary and feasible but are beyond the ability of the water users to finance in regular Operation and Maintenance assessments, they will be cleared up in the next few years.
The comprehensive program of weed control and research now being conducted has resulted in material savings in operating problems, maintenance costs, and water losses.
The development of aromatic solvents for the control of waterweeds has saved many thousands of dollars annually.
The use of 2,4-D has been instrumental in helping solve the serious willow problem on ditchbanks as well as noxious perennial and annual weeds.
The new herbicide TCA (Trichloroacetate) is helping eliminate weedy grasses.
An educational program is conducted for project operators to teach the most effective and economical methods.
A handbook which describes these methods has been written and distributed to both Federal and private irrigation projects.
Requests for the book have been received from 21 foreign countries.
In the spring of 1951 a motion picture "Weed Control on Irrigation Systems" and a slide lecture on the same subject were completed.
These have been in great demand.
The Department of the Interior Weed Control Committee has been instrumental in the formation of a similar committee in the Department of Agriculture.
The two committees hold bimonthly meetings to exchange information on weed-control methods and to discuss common problems.
They also help coordinate weed-control programs being conducted by land management agencies with the general aim of preventing duplication of activities.
The grass-planting program on ditchbanks has been continued to prevent future weed problems and to furnish extra pasture for project farmers livestock.
Grasses have been found to absorb less water than broadleaved weeds, they prevent erosion of ditchbanks and are excellent weed competitors.
A systematic program of seeding grasses has been formulated with the aim of establishing a grass sod on all proj.
Maintenance costs and water losses due to weeds have been reduced to a minimum where this practice has been established.
On new projects seeding is begun as soon as possible after construction.
Two problems which need further study are the control of salt cedar and cattails.
The program of cooperative research with the Bureau of Plant Industry, Soils, and Agricultural Engineering is being continued at its four weed-control field stations in the irrigated West.
The basic research is conducted at the weed-control laboratory of the Chief Engineer's office in Denver where a BPISAE plant physiologist works with Bureau of Reclamation chemists and weed specialists.
As a result of this cooperation several promising methods of solving these remaining problems have been indicated but further investigation will be necessary before practical applications can be developed.
Field investigations of sprinkler irrigation methods and results under actual farming conditions were continued on the Columbia River Basin project in Washington, on the Missouri River Basin project in North Dakota, and on the Gila project in Arizona.
Final eonclusions regarding the applicability of sprinkler irrigation have not been reached.
In some instances, sprinkling will be the best or perhaps the only feasible method of water application.
Results to date continue to indicate, however, that surface irrigation is more economical on lands adapted to the use of surface methods.
Under the Bureau's program of soil and moisture conservation operations.
This work is accomplished throughout the 17 Western States by individual effort of the Bureau of Reclamation and through effective cooperation with all other interested agencies in each of the areas concerned, particularly with the Bureau of Land Management, the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the Forest Service, the Soil Conservation Service, and Soil Conservation Districts.
With greater Congressional recognition of the importance of this phase of the Bureau's operations, appropriations have been increased, permitting a more effective attack on the soil and water loss problems with which we are confronted.
Representative of these activities are the stabilization and conservation of public lands in reservoir areas of the Central Valley project through revegetation, structures, ete.
The act of June 29, 1948 (Public Law 835) authorized the Secretary of the Interior to make such provision as may be deemed necessary and in the public interest for the eduçation of dependents of persons employed by the Bureau of Reclamation on projects and investigations.
School District, Idaho (Boise project) ; Colorado School District No. 18, (Platoro Dam), San Luis Valley project, Colorado; Grant County School District No. 156, Washington (Columbia Basin project); Grade School District No. 1, Cheyenne County, Kans. (St. Francis unit, Missouri River Basin project); Gustine Union Elementary School District, California (Central Valley project) ; York Consolidated School District No. 33, Lewis and Clark County, Mont.
In addition to the assistance given through the cooperative agreement under Public Law 835 maximum tuition payments of $65 per semester were authorized for the fiscal years 1948-51 for dependents of any Federal employee living in the vicinity of Boulder City, Nev., under the provisions of the act of May 14, 1948 (Public Law 528).
The Eighty-first Congress by recognizing the need for an equitable and uniform Federal school assistance policy passed legislation which placed all school assistance measures in federally affected areas with the Office of Education.
Public Law 815, relating to construction of school facilities in federally affected areas, and Public Law 874, concerning operation and maintenance of schools in such areas were approved September 23 and September 30, 1950, respectively.
These laws provide that funds appropriated to other Federal agencies for the same purpose in fiscal vear 1951 were to be available for transfer to the Commissioner of Education.
A detailed statement of the Bureau's school assistance program was furnished the Commissioner of Education.
In accordance with a Statement of Principles in connection with Public Law 874, issued by the Commissioner of Education, the Bureau of Reclamation was authorized to continue to execute contracts for school operation and maintenance during fiscal year 1951 in cases in which an agreement or understanding for such assistance had been reached prior to the passage of Public Law 874.
Also, the Bureau was encouraged to complete all school construction activities undertaken under Public Law 835 where such construction contract was let prior to the enactment of Public Law 815, Eighty-first Congress.
In any of the above school situations, the Commissioner of Education has agreed not to institute claim for reassignment of funds appropriated to the Bureau for fiscal vear 1951.
Public Law 874 and Public Law 815 also provide that funds shall not be available to other Federal agencies after June 30, 1951, for the same purposes as these acts.
Accordingly, the Bureau of Reclamation will not provide future financial assistance under Public Law 835 or Public Law 528 after the close of the fiscal year.
However, the Bureau has requested funds for fiscal vear 1952 to complete the construction of school facilities at Boulder City, Nev., undertaken in previous year.
Construction of dams and reservoirs for irrigation and power development provides incidental but very definite benefits to the public through the creation of exceptional recreational opportunities.
This is particularly true in the more arid parts of the West.
Except in the Missouri River Basin, the Bureau of Reclamation is not authorized to expend funds for recreational development of reservoir areas.
At certain reservoirs where recreational possibilities are deemed to be of national significance, such as Lake Mead, on the Colorado River between Arizona and Nevada; Franklin D. Roosevelt Lake, on the Columbia River in Washington; Millerton Lake, on the San Joaquin River in California, and Shadow Mountain and Granby Lake on the Colorado River in Colorado, the development and administration of recreational facilities is handled for the Bureau by the National Park Service.
At certain other reservoirs which are located within National Forest boundaries, recreational facilities are administered by the United States Forest Service.
There is an urgent need for legislation to provide authorization for the expenditure of nonreimbursable funds for the coordinated planning, development, and administration of the recreational resources at Reclamation dams and reservoirs.
During the past year, the Bureau of Reclamation also worked closely with the Fish and Wildlife Service and with the various State fish and game agencies for the protection and, where possible, enhancement of fish and wildlife values at reservoirs and on project lands.
A joint report was prepared with the Fish and Wildlife Service with recommendations for maintenance and further development of the San Joaquin River "Grasslands" in California, as a part of the Pacific flyway for migratory waterfowl.
Agreement was also reached with the Service concerning improvement of the Lake Havasu National Wildlife Refuge, which embraces all of the reservoir formed by Parker Dam on the lower Colorado River.
A new record of achievement in hydroelectric power capacity and production on multipurpose projects constructed by the Bureau of Reclamation was accomplished during fiscal year 1951.
By June 30, 1951, the total installed capacity in power plants constructed and operated by the Bureau of Reclamation was 3,939,500 kilowatts, the highest installation achieved by the Bureau of Reclamation.
The sales of electric energy during the fiscal year totaled approximately 21,265,000,000 kilowatt-hours which brought in revenues of about $35,100,000 to the Treasury.
771,100 kilowatts were added in Bureau power plants.
Additional capacity scheduled to be added in fiscal year 1952 will further increase power production capacity by 339,200 kilowatts.
A summary of power sales and revenues by projects is shown in table 7.
Although previous records of capacity and annual generation were surpassed with the record installation of generating capacity in power plants on Reclamation multipurpose projects, demands for electric power still exceeded the available supply.
Applications for power service continued to mount and contracts for sale of energy are being processed in great numbers to provide for the widespread distribution and integrated use of power to be produced from plants now under construction.
The impact of the Korean War has brought about new demands for power from industry and from rural areas.
Many applications for large blocks of power for use by industries have been received by the Bureau of Reclamation but many of these demands could not be met because the present power production is fully utilized and much of the future production is committed.
Expansion of rural electrification is still a major factor contributing to the increasing power requirements in many areas, particularly in Missouri River Basin States.
Shortages of power in North and South Dakota and other areas of the West have delayed extension of rural lines.
This critical situation will be partially alleviated in North and South Dakota by the advance construction of portions of the ultimate Missouri River Basin project power system.
Initially, these portions will be utilized to serve rural loads from presently available sources and from fuel generating plants under construction by Rural Electrification Administration financed generating plants.
When Garrison and Fort Randall power plants are brought into production in 1953 and 1954 by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, these transmission lines will then be used to market this power to preference customers and the hydroelectric generating plants will be integrated with existing plants in the areas.
The advance construction of these lines have been authorized by the Congress, and it is recognized that this will have an important influence in delivering power to rural customers in these areas at an early date.
Ultimately, the transmission systems in North and South Dakota will be extended to cover a much greater area and deliver power from the federally constructed plants to a great number of consumers.
Wheeling arrangements, whereby Reclamation power is transmitted over the lines of private utilities, constitute another significant factor in the utilization of Federal electric power output to a maximum of capability.
Such arrangements have been consummated with a number of private utilities in the West.
Through these, existing utility transmission line capacity is utilized to the maximum for serving areas at an early date or at a more economical cost to the Government.
In many instances, it has been possible by wheeling and power interchange arrangements to provide power to preference customers, especially Rural Electrification Administration cooperatives and municipalities, well in advance of the time when service can be made available to them by construction of Reclamation project transmission systems.
Such arrangements also permit delivery of power to areas many miles from Reclamation project power plants and well beyond economical transmission distance.
Thus the maximum utilization of existing facilities is obtained by displacement.
Irrigation pumping, which is vital to some Reclamation projects, continues to impose large demands upon Reclamation power systems.
Pumping of irrigation water at Grand Coulee Dam in Washington is essential to the Columbia Basin project irrigation plant.
On the Central Valley project, the Tracy pumping plant lifts a tremendous quantity of water to permit irrigation of many additional acres of highly productive agricultural land.
The Bureau of Reclamation is continuing to plan the development of power consistent with multipurpose development of the West's valuable water resources.
The installed nameplate capacity of 3,939,500 kilowatts in the 23 power plants operated by the Bureau of Reclamation at the end of fiscal year 1951 showed an increase of 771,100 kilowatts capacity over the 1950 fiscal vear figure.
The increase resulted from the addition of four generating units of 108,000 kilowatts each, and one station service unit of 10,000 kilowatts at Grand Coulee power plant on the Columbia River Basin project in Washington; two units of 13,500 kilowatts each at Anderson Ranch power plant on the Boise-Anderson Ranch project in Idaho; five units of 45,000 kilowatts each at Davis Dam project in Arizona and California; three units of 15,000 kilowatts each at the Estes power plant on the Colorado-Big Thompson project; one unit of 8,100 kilowatts' capacity at the Marys Lake power plant on the Colorado-Big Thompson project; two units of 12,000 kilowatts each at the Kortes power plant in Wyoming on the Missouri River Basin project.
By these installations five power plants were completed during the 1951 fiscal year.
5) Kortes on the Missouri River Basin project in Wyoming.
Power plants operated by other agencies, principally water users' organizations, on Reclamation projects totaled 16, of which 9 were originally constructed by the Bureau of Reclamation.
These nine plants have an installed capacity of 30,827 kilowatts; the seven other plants constructed by the water users' organizations have an installed capacity of 72,500 kilowatts.
Initial operation of the 225,000-kilowatt power plant at Davis Dam in January 1951 was the most significant event concerning new hydroelectric power development during fiscal year 1951.
The addition of four generating units at Grand Coulee power plant on the Columbia Basin project in Washington brought the total installed capacity to a world record of 1,866,000 kilowatts for a hydroelectrie plant.
In addition, construction of two 82,- 500-kilowatt units and one 50,000-kilowatt unit for Hoover power plant on the Boulder Canyon project was continuing.
One more generating unit which is now being installed remained to be placed into operation at Grand Coulee power plant.
New power plants under construction include Folsom and Nimbus with a combined capacity of 167,000 kilowatts in California on the Central Valley project; Flatiron with a capacity of 63,000 kilowatts and Polehill with a capacity of 33,250 kilowatts, both on the Colorado-Big Thompson project in Colorado; Hungry Horse power plant with a capacity of 285,000 kilowatts in Montana; Angostura and Canyon Ferry with capacities of 1,200 and 50,000 kilowatts, respectively, on the Missouri River Basin project in Montana; Boysen power plant with a capacity of 15,000 kilowatts on the Missouri River Basin project in Wvoming, and Eklutna power plant with a capacity of 30,000 kilowatts on the Eklutna project in Alaska where preliminary construction is underway.
United States Army Corps of Engineers is proceeding ahead of schedule with the construction of Garrison power plant, with a capacity of 400,000 kilowatts in North Dakota, and the Fort Randall power plant with a capacity of 320,000 kilowatts in South Dakota, both on the Missouri River Basin project.
The United States Army Corps of Engineers also is proceeding with preliminary construction at the Oahe Dam where a power plant with a capacity of 425,000 kilowatts is scheduled on the Missouri River Basin project in South Dakota.
The Bureau of Reclamation will market the power from the plants of the United States Army Corps of Engineers in the Missouri River Basin over transmission lines that are constructed on the project.
Authorized to be constructed by the Bureau of Reclamation are 22 power plants with a total capacity of 927,000 kilowatts.
The United States Army Corps of Engineers have an additional 220,000 kilowatts authorized for construction in Big Bend and Gavins Point power plants on the Missouri River Basin project in South Dakota.
The status of hydroelectric power plants on Reclamation projects in operation, under construction, or authorized, is shown in table 8.
By June 30, 1951, it is estimated that the Bureau of Reclamation had about 6,260 miles of high voltage transmission lines in operation.
Construction was continuing on nearly 3,000 miles of high voltage transmission lines at the end of 1951 fiscal year.
A large percentage of these lines will be placed in operation during fiscal year 1952.
Electric power was delivered to numerous major and minor users of power during the fiscal year by the Bureau.
Deliveries were made to 38 municipalities, 3 State government agencies, 83 rural electric cooperatives, 7 Federal agencies, 45 public authorities, 34 commercial and industrial users, and 35 privately owned utilities.
A summary by classification of customers for the 12 months ending June 30, 1951, is contained in table 9.
During the year, 89 contracts for delivery of power were executed.
These include 4 contracts with irrigation districts, 7 with municipalities, 3 with State authorities, 42 with rural electric cooperatives, 5 with other Federal agencies, 2 with public power districts, 23 with privately owned utilities, and 3 with other customers.
A number of these contracts were renewals of expiring contracts or revisions resulting from changed contractual conditions.
Contracts for wheeling service were entered into with Idaho Power Co., Pacific Gas & Electric Co., Northwestern Public Service Co., Public Service Co. of Colorado, Montana Power Co., and East River Electric Power Cooperative.
At the beginning of fiscal year 1952, the Bureau had 282 contracts for delivery of power under negotiation.
These include 7 with irrigation districts, 6 with public power districts, 24 with Federal agencies and bureaus, 9 with State authorities, 16 with private utilities, 80 with municipalities, 124 with REA cooperatives, and 16 with other customers.
A number of these are for the renewal of existing contracts or for revision to reflect changed conditions.
A large number of the contracts under negotiation are for future power deliveries at such time as additional generating capacity now under construction is placed into commercial operation.
The General Investigations program of the Bureau provides for the planning of the basin and project developments of the Bureau of Reclamation for the utilization of the water resources of the West and Alaska.
World War II brought about outstanding increases in population which have aggravated deficiencies in water and power in those areas.
The investigation of water and power resources will clear the way for essential future developments necessary for a stable economy and vital contributions to National defense.
Despite the advances made in the last decade, economic developments have failed to match the population increases.
These investigations are the first steps in matching feasible project construction with existing water and power demands.
The development of the resources of the West for irrigation is short of the half-way mark.
Hardly more than a good start has been made on hydroelectric power development.
Varying degrees of progress have been made in the accomplishment of objectives such as flood control, sediment control, recreation, fish and wildlife preservation and propagation, and pollution abatement.
During the first few decades of water development in the West, the inexpensive and easily developed projects were almost completely exhausted, largely by privately financed development.
The remaining potentials are, in the main, long-range basin-wide developments of exceeding complexity which only the Federal Government has the ability to finance.
Sound reclamation development is impossible without adequate planning which in turn is impossible without adequate appropriations for General Investigations with which the investigations are financed.
However, the funds available for investigations have not been adequate to meet the needs and the Bureau has been forced to limit the number of investigations included in the program because of this lack of funds.
The Flood Control Act of 1950 authorized the Secretary of the Army to develop comprehensive, integrated plans of development for the Arkansas, White, and Red River Basins in the Southwest.
In approving this authorization the President directed all interested Federal agencies to work together in preparing these plans.
An interagency field committee for the Arkansas-White and Red River Basins was established by the Federal Interagency River Basin Committee on June 12, 1950, to coordinate at the field level, work in the comprehensive survey of these basins.
The Bureau's cooperative investigations in these basins got under way in fiscal year 1951.
A reconnaissance report on the potential development of water resources in the Territory of Alaska was cleared with the office of the President and submitted to the Congress in July 1951.
The Bureau of Reclamation completed its reconnaissance of the United Western Investigations and closed the office conducting the survey for the present.
A report was completed which is undergoing review in the office of the Secretary.
The Bureau's investigations of the Rogue River Basin in Oregon leading to a comprehensive basin report have been substantially completed.
The Bureau has underway a number of other basin surveys of western streams.
The investigations of the Washita River Basin in Oklahoma are nearing completion.
Canadian River project, Texas.
Eklutna project, Alaska.
Minidoka project, Idaho, American Falls Power Division and North Side Pumping Division.
Vermejo project, New Mexico.
Palisades project, Idaho—reauthorized.
The Sacramento River Canals were authorized as a part of the Central Valley project, California, subject to a subsequent finding of feasibility to be made by the Secretary of the Interior.
Also, the Alcova Power Plant of the Kendrick project, Wyoming, was authorized by a finding of feasibility under Reclamation law by the Secretary.
Except for the Eklutna project, which would provide power for power-deficient Alaska, and the Aleova Power Plant, which consists only of the construction of a new power plant at an existing dam, none of these newly authorized projects are included in the President's construction programs for fiscal years 1951 or 1952 because of the need to concentrate on national defense, although these projects are urgently needed to help meet existing water and power shortages and to maintain the essential civilian economy.
The report on the Collbran project was transmitted to the Congress on July 3, 1951.
Reports on the Hells Canyon Division and the Scriver Creek power facilities, Mountain Home Division, Snake River project, Idaho, Oregon, were submitted to the President through the Bureau of the Budget in fiscal year 1951.
In connection with the development of the Colorado River storage project, which would provide storage for the comprehensive development of the Upper Colorado River Basin, a public hearing was held on April 3, 1950, to consider the merits of constructing Echo Park and Split Móuntain Dams which would impound water within the Dinosaur National Monument.
The hearing attracted large numbers of proponents from Colorado River Basin States and numerous opponents representing recreational interests.
After careful analysis of the testimony presented at the hearing, the Secretary approved the completion of a report recommending construction of the dams.
The report on the general project plan and on the initial units was completed in fiscal year 1951 and is under review by the affected States and Federal agencies.
River storage project provides for aid in the financing of the construction of irrigation projects in the Upper Basin with revenues from the power developments in the storage project.
Echo Park unit, Colorado, Utah.
Flaming Gorge unit, Wyoming, Utah.
Glen Canyon unit, Arizona, Utah.
Navajo unit, New Mexico, Colorado.
Central Utah project, Utah (initial phase).
Emery County project, Utah.
Florida project, Colorado.
Hammond project, New Mexico.
LaBarge project, Wyoming.
Lyman project, Wyoming.
Pine River project extension, Colorado, New Mexico.
Seedskadee project, Wyoming.
Silt project, Wyoming.
Smith Fork project, Colorado.
The Paonia project, Colorado, now under construction, is proposed for reauthorization as a participating project.
The Eden project, Wyoming, also under construction, has been authorized as a participating project.
In addition, the Shiprock Indian project is proposed for authorization in accordance with laws applicable to the development of irrigation projects on Indian reservations.
The report on the initial development of the Gunnison-Arkansas project, Colorado, is under review by the affected States.
This project would provide supplemental water and power for the Arkansas Valley by diversion from the Upper Colorado River Basin.
The report on the Joseph City unit, Holbrook project, Arizona, was reviewed by the affected States and Federal agencies in fiscal year 1951.
Project planning feasibility reports are prepared to present a comprehensive plan for orderly development and cónservation of water and related resources, and to ascertain the probable engineering and financial feasibility to a degree sufficient to enable recommendation for or against further work on the plan of a project.
These reports are made to secure authorization of the project.
Considerable detailed studies and exploratory work usually remains to be done following this stage before sufficient data are available to start the preparation of final designs and specifications.
Sometimes projects are authorized by the Congress before the investigations have been completed and the report written even though adequate data may·be available to support a favorable recommendation for authorization of a project.
Usually there is a fairly long period between authorization of a project and start of actual construction due to lack of funds as well as to lack of detailed information.
Therefore, following the authorization of a project, there is need for a report on the additional studies, including investigations and negotiations consummated prior to construction, that are required to determine the definite plan of development for the project.
Such a report, known as the Definite Plan Report, is prepared for the whole project, or for a unit of the project, depending on the size and complexity of the plans for development of the project.
Angostura unit, South Dakota.
Yellowtail unit, Montana, Wyoming.
Eklutna project, Alaska.
The Bureau of Reclamation continued to assist the States in every way practical in the negotiations of interstate water compacts and in compact operation.
Bureau representatives have participated directly in the negotiations for most of these compacts.
Bureau technical personnel have assisted in the studies necessary for a successful compact.
The Canadian River Compact between New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Texas and the Yellowstone River Compact between Wyoming, Montana, and North Dakota both have been ratified by the appropriate State legislatures and, at the end of the year, were awaiting congressional action.
Negotiations for the Cheyenne River Compact, between Wyoming and South Dakota, were completed but the Wyoming legislature declined to ratify the compact although an earlier, but similar, version had been ratified.
Active negotiations for the Bear River Compact between Wyoming, Utah, and Idaho, were continued during the year.
In addition to its usual hydrologic studies, the Bureau of Reclamation has continued to improve the bases for its technical work, thus continuing to improve the quality of planning for the best utilization of water for irrigation and power and to coordinate flood control operations with the Corps of Engineers.
During the year, such diverse studies as the use of water on Bureau projects, the derivation of flood hydrographs from precipitation, forecasting of seasonal runoff, and sediment movement in rivers and canals were initiated or continued.
In cooperation with the Forest Service, studies of snow melt in the Colorado River basin were continued while studies of evaporation at Lake Hefner, near Oklahoma City, Okla., in cooperation with the Geological Survey, Weather Bureau, and the Department of the Navy were nearing completion.
Field work in sedimentation studies continued.
Resurveys of Pathfinder and Seminoe Reservoirs on the North Platte River in Wyoming were completed and special studies of sediment movement in the Niobrara River in Nebraska were undertaken in cooperation with the Geological Survey as were general studies of fluvial morphology.
Particular emphasis was placed on development of better methods of forecasting stream discharge, both seasonal and flood flows.
Refinements in method of determining possible flood discharge have resulted in increased confidence that procedures provide a method for adequate and economic spillway design.
Better methods of forecasting seasonal runoff are leading to economy of operation in irrigation projects both to the Bureau and to the farmer.
The Bureau participated in the international engineering studies of the Kootenai River in the Columbia River Basin, and in developing information for use in the preparation of reports to the International Joint Commission on all international aspects of the Columbia River.
Engineering work has been advanced on the Waterton-Belly Rivers reference and the Souris-Red Rivers reference made to the International Joint Commission in January 1948.
The Commission held public hearings at Ottawa in October 1950, relative to apportionment of flows of the Waterton and Belly Rivers to the United States and Canada.
Work was continued on collection of data that will be needed for preparation of plans of mutual advantage to the two countries as soon as the Commission has made its recommendation for apportionment.
Studies of present and future water uses were continued on the Souris and Red Rivers, It was found that from the standpoint of the engineering studies which have been completed, based upon prevailing water flow conditions, no apportionment of the waters of the Red River at the International Boundary appears to be required at the present time.
Studies of current technical developments in artificial precipitation and salt water conversion which were initiated in 1947, were accelerated.
This was done in anticipation of enactment of legislation (H. R. 6 and 7 and S. 5) which would establish an active research and demonstration program in these fields for the purpose of augmenting the Nation's fresh-water supply.
The studies in artificial precipitation made by the Bureau of Reclamation since 1947 were referred to the other agencies of the Department, resulting in the establishment of a departmental committee on artificial precipitation.
During the fiscal year 1951 the Bureau brought to substantial completion the conversion of its accounting system to modern and utility recognized practices.
Under date of July 25, 1950, the system was submitted to the Comptroller General of the United States for approval of the principles and basie concepts underlying the new accounting.
Subject to certain qualifications pertaining to development of policies, improvements, and accounting techniques for depreciation, repayment by water users, costing of accrued annual leave and the classification of physical properties for reporting and ratemaking purposes, the Comptroller General, under date of October 6, 1950, formally approved the new accounting system.
Continuous attention has been directed toward the solution of the problems mentioned above, with special consideration directed toward the subject of depreciation accounting.
The basic principle of depreciation accounting has been approved by the Commissioner of the Bureau and a committee has been appointed to resolve this complex subject.
It is anticipated that depreciation accounting covering all income-producing properties operated by the Government will be adopted by July 1, 1952.
At the time the new accounting system was established it was necessary to require detailed and complete financial statements and reports on a monthly basis in order that the Commissioner's Washington Office could determine from the reports (1) progress being made in analysis of old account balances, (2) accuracy of the new accounting operations and practices, and (3) adequacy and management needs for financial data.
As a result of continuing self-analysis, the frequency and simplification of reporting has been revised with a marked reduction in the workload covering this phase of operations.
When conversion was made to the new accounting system it was necessary to convert many of the old account balances without analysis.
Since conversion, the importance of early completion of the old account analysis has been emphasized in all offices concerned.
Satisfactory progress has been made in this respect and it is anticipated that the analysis will be completed early in the fiscal year 1952.
The completion of the account analysis, the application of accounting improvements and procedures will permit for the first time the preparation of an informative consolidated Bureau balance sheet and financial report as of June 30, 1952.
The Budget and Accounting Procedures Act of 1950, approved September 12, 1950 (Public Law 784, 81st Cong.), granted broad authority to the Comptroller General of the United States and to the Secretary of the Treasury to prescribe such changes in Governmental accounting procedures as would result in simplification, improvement, modernization, and economy.
Pursuant to the provisions of this act several Treasury Department-General Accounting Office joint regulations were issued, which prescribed basic and far-reaching changes and modifications in the accounting procedures of the Government.
Many of these revisions were founded on pilot installations tested and checked in Reclamation offices.
In order that the joint regulations could be made effective on a uniform and consistent basis throughout the Government, the General Accounting Office prepared a number of accounting-systems memoranda which prescribed certain new and detailed accounting procedures for use by all Government agencies.
These actions necessitated a number of changes in the accounting system of the Bureau of Reclamation.
Numerous revisions in Government accounting procedures were prescribed by the Treasury Department and the General Accounting Office.
These actions required almost complete revision of the finance manual.
The revisions incorporated not only the changes necessary for conformance to the newly prescribed procedures but also included refinements and improvements resulting from experience gained in actual practice in the finance offices, and from finance conferences and joint studies conducted by members of the Washington and field staffs.
The general ledger charts of accounts were consolidated and simplified without sacrifice of information.
Additional economies and simplification were obtained in revisions pertaining to allotment and fund accounting, cost accounting, power operation, and irrigation accounting, etc.
Full cognizance is had of the need for additional standardization and uniformity in payroll operations.
During the last quarter of fiscal year 1951, pilot installations were made of payroll procedures on bookkeeping machines in two regions.
Additional pilot installations will be made in selected offices of the remaining regions early in the fiscal year 1952 after which standard payroll procedures will be manualized.
Because of the improvements and economies obtained in the application of machine accounting in certain field offices during the fiscal year 1951, it is proposed to conduct surveys in additional offices during the ensuing year to ascertain whether similar results can be effected on a broader scale.
In addition, it is proposed to review machine accounting operations presently in effect to determine whether broader application to additional accounting would be advantageous.
At the conclusion of these studies, it is proposed to manualize machine-accounting procedures so that the most desirable and consistent benefits will be obtained uniformly throughout all Bureau offices involved.
Formalizing of program procedures to assure coordination of program sehedules with budget documents and program reports and to provide effective administrative control of field activities had been accomplished to a large degree when the fiscal year began.
During the year, emphasis was placed on activities directed toward refinement and simplification of existing procedures.
Particular effort was made to relate programs and budgets to the accounts.
More orderly and systematic procedures were established for handling the annual review of program documents prior to their official approval by the Commissioner.
Conferences were held in Washington and in the field to develop more effective and workable program procedures.
Closer liaison was maintained between the Washington Office and field offices to afford a better understanding of the Commissioner's policies and requirements and to insure the availability of coordinated and up-to-date program documents for keeping top management, the Congress, and the Bureau of the Budget informed of Reclamation's programs.
The international situation was beginning to have its effect on the Bureau's activities during the latter part of the fiscal year.
Changed criteria required reexamination of the Bureau's program and in some cases necessitated rescheduling of programmed work.
Loss of personnel to the defense agencies also necessitated simplification of programing procedures.
Efforts will continue to be directed toward the achievement of more realistic programing, while scheduling procedures will be subject to continuous scrutiny for improvement and simplification.
Inl o o0.
Appropriations for 1951 were made to the Bureau of Reclamation in conformity with the new appropriation structure as recommended by the House Appropriations Committee.
Under the new appropriation structure the Bureau's multifarious activities are grouped into four major appropriation items, namely, General Investigations, Construction and Rehabilitation, Operation and Maintenance, and General Administrative Expenses, with specified amounts to be derived from the Reclamation fund and the Colorado River Dam fund.
These 4 main appropriations replaced 54 appropriation items and unnumbered subitems which appeared in the 1950 Appropriation Act.
The language has been streamlined and reduced wherever possible without sacrificing the intent of the Congress.
This entirely new language is an improvement in mechanies and not a change in basic policy.
Under the lump-sum provisions of the 1951 Appropriation Act, operations of the Bureau are handled in a fashion similar to the manner in which the Missouri River Basin appropriation has been handled in the past 5 years, Allotments are made to individual projects or activities in accordance with the expressed desires of the Congress, and the expenditures are controlled by a programing and reporting system which has been set up in cooperation with the General Accounting Office to insure that the program moves forward only as approved by the Congress at the maximum rate permissible with available funds.
It is anticipated that requests for deficiency and supplemental appropriations will be minimized somewhat as a limited interchange of allotments within the appropriation is permitted in cases of real emergency; only, however, with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior who is charged with the responsibility of carrying out the intent of the Congress with respect to allocations.
The General Appropriation Act, 1951, was the first omnibus appropriation bill approved by the Congress.
However, this type of bill for fiscal year 1952 appropriation was abandoned by the Congress in favor of the appropriation bills for individual agencies such as those types of bills prior to fiscal year 1951.
Regular and supplemental appropriations for the Bureau of Reclamation for fiscal year 1951 totaled $325,494,000.
After savings effected by the Bureau of the Budget acting under the mandate of section 1214 of the General Appropriation Act, 1951, the net appropriations available were $271,543,800, a reduction of $53,950,200.
Contract authority for $3,000,000 granted to the Bureau in the 1951 appropriation was also withheld by the Bureau of the Budget acting under the authority in section 1214.
Unused balances carried over from fiscal year 1950 plus contributions from other sources and fund adjustments equaled $65,783,863 making a total available for obligation of $337,327,663.
The unobligated funds at the end of fiscal year 1951 carried over into fiscal year 1952 amounted to 32.3 million dollars, something less than the regular 10 percent of the total available for obligation usually allowed as a provision against contingencies and frequently carried over.
Obligations for fiscal year 1951 totaled 305 million dollars or 90.4 percent of the work programed in 1951 as compared with 85.3 percent accomplished in fiscal year 1950.
The limitation on the amount of money which may be used for the performance of work by Government forces (force account work), first imposed upon the Bureau in the 1949 appropriation act, was included again in the 1951 act.
The 1951 act carried the same limitation as appeared in the 1950 bill, viz, not to exceed 12 percent of the allotment for any one project with a maximum of $225,000 to be used on any one project or unit of Missouri River Basin.
A limitation of $150,000 in the General Administrative Expenses appropriation was imposed upon expenditures for informational work in 1951.
This was the same limitation as appeared in the 1950 act.
Reporting methods and reports covering analyses of progress on the Bureau's programs for General Investigations, Construction and Rehabilitation, and Operation and Maintenance, operating financial and personnel statistics and preparation of periodicals and publications were further improved during the year to meet minimum administrative and top management requirements.
For progress analyses, the monthly fund and Cost Data Digest of prior year, limited to the Construction and Rehabilitation program was expanded to include General Investigations and Operation and Maintenance programs and retitled Activities Digest.
Available to the Commissioner's Office in summary form by the 15th of the month following the report month, it reports monthly on progress made on each activity, Bureau-wide, in terms of costs and funds.
With this timely report as the base, the Bureau's monthly progress report, complete with supplementary data, was prepared for administrative and for interim statistical reference purposes pending compilation of annual data and for records.
Likewise, the quarterly program accomplishment letters which summarize performances complete with analyses, interpretation, and trends for each region were prepared for management purposes.
A series of display charts illustrating progress on accomplishments and related items were developed and maintained for visual ready-reference and conference purposes.
More sensitive reporting on anticipated changes in scheduled actions was developed by adding forecast of flagged action changes to the established Flagged Action reporting routine.
Among other purposes, the revision provides for establishing advance schedules for critical materials requiring priorities.
The summary cost and progress monthly reporting system for all activities and the monthly reports on status of construction and supply contracts were maintained.
Monthly tabulations of estimated unobligated year-end funds were issued as in prior years and monthly tables of year-end unexpended funds were compiled for management and budgetary use.
Establishment of a centralized statistical record system was initiated.
Among various compilations of ready reference statistical tables, a record of investments, benefits, and pertinent data, by States, was progressed.
With the elimination of the Bureau of the Budget personnel ceiling control, procedures for continuing under a Commissioner's Personnel Ceiling were established.
The routine was effectively used to bring about orderly reduction in employment from approximately 19,000 in early July 1950 to 16,500 in June 1951 in pace with the leveling off of fiscal year 1951 annual program and in anticipation of a smaller program for fiscal year 1952 governed by defense needs.
A plan was developed to eliminate need for personnel ceiling procedures.
Under this plan, personnel requirements will be related to approved project control schedules and internal office budgets, in terms of man-years and personal services funds.
Limitations will be established in accordance with budgets and be funded, accounted and reported upon using manual prescribed documents, accounting procedures, and report forms.
Personnel statistical reports were reduced to a minimum, eliminating all unessential reporting.
Display charts were maintained for employment and its trend.
The Activity and Object Expenditure Report serving as a stopgap measure pending adoption of a more substantial accounting and reporting device on costs involved in general expenses, was continued through the year.
Federal Power Commission FPC 1 report series, the annual power reports required by law under the Boulder Canyon Project Adjustment Act and Fort Peck Project Act, and the Bureau's Annual Consolidated Operating Statement of Bureau of Reclamation Power Systems were compiled.
Likewise the Bureau's Washington Report, a periodical for acquainting all employees with important news and policy matters, was issued on its biweekly schedule.
The Office of the Comptroller pursued the delegated functions of consultative and advisory service to the Commissioner and top staff of his office and continued the development of expanding and more effective auditing activity.
At the beginning of the year a reorganized plan of audit administration was instituted with the Commissioner's approval.
This plan was designed to provide for maximum audit production in the face of very limited potential in terms of staff numbers.
The plan has been productive and the past year witnessed a degree and quality of performance heretofor unattained.
Because of the competition for trained professional accounting personnel and the resulting difficulty of recruitment, the lapse factor in the field audit staff was unusually high.
Recent intensification of recruitment efforts has largely overcome this situation.
As a direct outgrowth of the staffing problem, however, it was impossible to effectuate one phase of the reorganized approach; namely, the establishment of resident auditors.
This phase of the operation has not been abandoned, but its accomplishment is directly dependent upon budgetary and recruitment factors.
Eighty-five auditing assignments were undertaken which included, in addition to comprehensive project audits and water users audits, special analyses of representative projects pertaining to stores and equipment, work order system, salaries and expenses, budget and costing practices, vouchering operations, and power operations.
As heretofore, the field audit activity of the Comptroller covered (1) financial audits of various types relating to the financial operations of Bureau projects: (2) selected audits of water users' organizations having contractual relationships with the Department; and (3) special audits dealing with cost allocations in joint venture construction, construction contract claims, and many other subjects bearing upon the financial program of the Bureau.
Ancillary to the audit work, the Comptroller's staff discharged its functions of financial policy and review in matters of repayment contracts, analyses of rate schedules, municipal finance and management, interagency agreements, external audit, and investigational reports and legislation.
The auditing and review functions of this office have now progressed to a point at which there is positive integration between field examinations and policy review.
In summary, the Comptroller's functions have been stabilized by a well-founded, precise program.
This development is of particular significance in the audit activity in which the work has progressed bevond the experimental and pilot type operation to a phase of systematic, effective performance.
At the close of the 1950 fiscal year several legislative bills affecting the Bureau of Reclamation were pending before the Congress.
Some of these bills were enacted during the latter part of the second session of the Eighty-first Congress, others were in various stages of the legislative process when the Eighty-first Congress adjourned sine die on January 2, 1951.
Among the enacted bills were five measures which authorized the construction of projects by the Department of the Interior on the basis of plans prepared by the Bureau of Reclamation.
The first such project authorized by the Congress during the fiscal vear 1951 was the Eklutna project in Alaska (Public Law 628, 81st Cong., act of July 31, 1950).
This hydroelectric power project is in the vicinity of Anchorage, Alaska, and will supply an area in which there is a shortage of electric energy.
Although the project is not a Federal Reclamation project, the Secretary on September 1, 1950, designated the Bureau of Reclamation as the agency charged with the construction, operation, and maintenance of the project.
The act of September 26, 1950 (Public 'Law 839, 81st Cong.), reauthorized the Central Valley project so as to include certain irrigation canals in the Sacramento Valley as an integrated part of that project.
Studies on such canals were commenced prior to the study of the initial features of the Central Valley project.
The increase in agricultural development in California during the World War II years, plus the unprecedented population increases brought the demand for these canals into existence about 10 years ahead of the anticipated time.
The construction, operation, and maintenance of the Vermejo project in New Mexico as a Federal Reclamation project was authorized by the act of September 27, 1950.
The project, which was originally privately owned and operated, had deteriorated to such an extent that only a part of the lands could be irrigated.
It was no longer selfsustaining and the resources of the local interests were insufficient for the installation of necessary improvements.
In order to preserve the established economy of the area authorization of extensive and effective rehabilitation measures by the Federal Government was necessary.
Authorization of the Palisades Dam and Reservoir project and the North Side Pumping Division and American Falls power plant of the Minidoka project was accomplished by the act of September 30, 1950 (Public Law 864, 81st Cong.).
Enactment of this legislation constituted a long step forward in the development of the water resources of the Upper Snake River Valley in Idaho and in the settlement of an extremely complicated water-right problem in that area.
Public Law 898 of the Eighty-first Congress (act of December 29, 1950) authorized the Canadian River project, Texas.
The primary purpose of the project is to furnish a reliable municipal and industrial water supply to 11 cities and towns in the Panhandle-South Plains area of northwest Texas which are now dependent upon a rapidly declining ground water supply.
Benefits relating to irrigation, flood control, and fish and wildlife will also be served.
In addition to the above laws, which authorized the construction of projects by the Department, other measures directly affecting the Bureau of Reclamation were enacted by the Congress.
Two more amendatory repayment contracts, negotiated pursuant to section 7 of the Reclamation Project Act of 1939, were authorized by the Congress to be signed by the Secretary.
Public Law 666 and Public Law 667, both approved by the President on August 5, 1950, authorized amendatory repayment contracts with the Ogden River Water Users' Association, Ogden River project, and the South Cache Water Users' Association, Hyrum project, respectively.
Other enactments during the latter part of the Eighty-first Congress included: Public Law 713, authorizing the granting of easements and rights-of-way by the United States without restriction to their duration; Public Law 750, authorizing credits to certain agencies in the United States for costs of construction and operation and maintenance of flood protective levee systems along or adjacent to the lower Colorado River; Public Law 832, providing for the transfer of a sewerage system to the town of Mills, Wyo.
Public Law 840, amending the Columbia Basin Project Act so as to extend the time during which landowners within the project may sign recordable contracts and by permitting certain landowners to bring their lands back in the project; and Public Law 851, concerning the sale of State land within the Columbia Basin project.
No legislation was enacted by the Congress affecting the Bureau of Reclamation during the latter half of the fiscal year 1951.
Attorneys in the Office of the Chief Counsel in Washington, D. C., and in the offices of the various regional counsel devoted many hours in fiscal year 1951 to problems arising out of litigation involving the Bureau of Reclamation.
Assistance was given to the Department of Justice in the conduct of trials in numerous cases and in the preparation of legal briefs, arguments, stipulations, and proposed settlements.
Soon after the Supreme Court of the United States had rendered its opinion in the action United States v. Gerlach Live Stock Co. and related cases (339 U. S. 725) it was necessary to devote a considerable amount of attention to various proposals to settle or enter into stipulations in the Will Gill and three related actions which were pending on the docket of the Court of Claims.
These actions were instituted to recover damages for the taking of water of the San Joaquin River by the construction and operation of Friant Dam, Central Valley project, California.
A proposed statement of facts is being considered by the Department of Justice and this Department.
Work continued on the actions filed by owners of land bordering the channels of the San Joaquin River below the mouth of the Merced River for alleged damages to their water rights.
These actions, known as the W. F. Brush and 16 related actions, involve a demand for the sum of $1,287,000 with interest from the date of alleged taking.
Consideration is being given to an offer of settlement of these actions.
Proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decree of the special master in the case of United States v. Alpine Land & Reservoir Co. were submitted to Judge Roger T. Foley of the United States Distriet Court for the District of Nevada.
This action affects the water rights of the United States in Carson River for the Newlands project.
In December 1950 the United States District Court for the District of Colorado decided that it had jurisdiction to hear the action by the United States against the Northern Colorado Conservancy District, the city and county of Denver, and others.
Since that time numerous motions to strike, make more certain, and other motions have been heard.
Public Service Co. of Colorado.
The total number of defendants in the action is approximately 200.
An action was commenced against the United States in the Fourth Judicial District Court for Utah by Mr. and Mrs. M. H. North for damage allegedly due to the high water elevation of the Deer Creek Reservoir of the Provo River project.
That action, later transferred to the Federal Court of Utah, culminated in a decree of no cause of action.
In May 1947 the United States and the Frenchman-Cambridge irrigation district at Cambridge, Nebr., entered into a repayment contract in connection with a unit of the Missouri River Basin project.
As required by the Federal reclamation laws, the irrigation district thereafter filed an action in the District Court of Red Willow County, at McCook, Nebr., asking for approval and confirmation of the contract.
However, the hearings thereon were not held by the court until February 1950.
On July 19, 1950, the court rendered an opinion approving the contract in part and disapproving or rejecting it in part by holding, in effect, that the excess land provisions of reclamation law could not apply to those lands which had vested water rights acquired under independent appropriations, that the United States could not claim waste, seepage and flow rights for the irrigation water involved, and that the Secretary of the Interior did not have a right to make rules and regulations with reference to water use and soil conservation practices.
The irrigation district then filed a motion to set aside this decree on the grounds that the court not only misapplied the Nebraska law but that it was beyond the jurisdiction and authority of the court to render a decision approving the contract in part and disapproving it in part under the issues and the law applicable thereto, and the decree was inconsistent on its face, and that it would not, in any event, apply to the United States.
The motion was overruled and the irrigation district appealed to the Supreme Court of Nebraska.
This Department obtained permission from the Department of Justice to file a brief amicus curiae on behalf of the United States although the United States was not a direct party in the action.
Oral arguments were held before the Nebraska Supreme Court and the court filed an opinion in which it was held that the motion to set aside the decree was in the nature of a motion for a new trial, and, as such, had not been filed in time.
Hence the court did not pass on the merits of the case.
After extensive conferences the repayment contract was amended; as amended it was submitted to the district court at McCook, Nebr., for a reconfirmation, and an order confirming the contract as amended was granted.
After protracted negotiations with reference to a proposed repayment contract with the Kansas Bostwick irrigation district at Courtland, Kans., a contract was executed in final form on April 20, 1951.
Shortly thereafter the irrigation district filed an action in the State district court at Belleville, Kans., wherein approval and confirmation of the contract was requested.
Opposition to the confirmation developed and a hearing before the court was held in Belleville, Kans.
The hearings were continued in the fiscal year 1952.
The main point involved is an attempt on the part of the objectors to obtain an injunction restraining the board of directors of the irrigation district from proceeding with the confirmation proceedings on the grounds that the 1951 amendment to the irrigation laws of Kansas was unconstitutional.
The 1951 amendment involved provides in part that before a contract may be confirmed by the district court having jurisdiction, the board of directors of an irrigation district must file with the court a proposed tax schedule which shall show the assessments proposed for each individual tract of land in the district for the entire period to be covered by the contract.
The amendment also requires the district court to consider the proposed tax schedule with reference to the benefits to be derived from the construction of the proposed works involved.
Management emphasis continued to be directed toward obtaining maximum effectiveness and economy in employee utilization, with satisfactory and encouraging results.
Particular attention was given to the simplification of organizational arrangements and operating procedures.
A Bureau-wide"reduce the cost of doing business" program, involving the participation of virtually every employee in a critical review and analysis of operating methods and practices, was carried out.
Improvements realized by this program involved monetary benefits of an estimated $3,000,000.
Management appraisals of Bureau operations were conducted in regions 1 and 5 and initiated in regions 6 and 7.
A program for the development of work measurement and staffing standards criteria was initiated.
The initial edition of the Reclamation Manual of administrative and technical instructions was completed.
A survey of its use outside the Bureau revealed that nearly 50 foreign governments have requested copies, in addition to numerous other Federal, State, and local governmental agencies, universities and colleges, and private engineering firms.
The review and improvement of forms and reports, and of the procedures governing their use, was continued.
This systematic examination resulted in the elimination of some reports and forms and the more effective utilization of many others.
The program for controlling and improving forms was initiated in two additional regions.
Restricted by Bureau of the Budget personnel ratios placing limitations on the number of employees who could be engaged on personnel work, the Bureau personnel staffs concentrated on planning and developing a forward-looking personnel management and development program.
New staff development programs successfully piloted were the accountant trainee program in two regions, and the hydrologists inventory and training program in region 7.
The construction engineer development program was hampered by no new starts but it is broadening into an executive development and placement program.
Rotation of beginning engineers spread in the field and was very successful where tried.
The student engineer and administrative trainee program instigated 2 years ago was continued.
An expanded power operation training program was adopted in several hydroelectric plants.
Due to the present emergency the Bureau's construction program was curtailed: however, reduction-in-force of personnel was largely avoided by voluntary turn-over and internal placement.
Turn-over during the vear was high and recruitment was difficult in the beginning engineer, draftsman, and other lower-grade groups because of inflation and higher pay in private industry.
New college graduate engineers were offered 15 to 50 precent higher pay than the GS-5 rating offered by Civil Service.
The Central Board of United States Civil Service Examiners for the Bureau processed 42 percent as many applications and placed 33 percent as many persons as in the previous year.
There was a slight increase in student engineers last summer to 242.
This summer one-third of last year's GS-4's are expected to return as GS–5’s.
Labor-management negotiations arriving at mutually satisfactory hourly rates of pay and working conditions were successfully carried out for the Columbia Basin project.
A representation election was held on the combined Parker-Davis Dam projects resulting in the designation of the Colorado River Power Trades Council as the representative of the majority of ungraded employees for the development of the collective-bargaining type of labor agreement.
Although wagerate changes were numerous because of apprehension concerning wage stabilization, the Bureau of Reclamation Wage Board was able to keep the Bureau's wage schedules alined with the local prevailing rates.
Work stoppages among the 25,000 contractor's employees were negligible and did not disrupt construction schedules.
Relations continue to improve between contractors, their employees, and the Bureau.
The Bureau's safety program was continued and further intensified in region 6 by establishing motor vehicle driver training tests.
Safety inspections were performed in all Bureau operations and a program of safety education was continued.
The Federal employees health program was continued in its pilot stage at the Denver Federal Center.
Additional and greater delegations have been made to regional directors authorizing them to make appointments and status changes, excepting a few key positions, in all positions up to and including grade GS-15.
Classification authority of regional directors also has been increased from GS-11 to GS-13 level.
Emphasis was placed upon position classification of the Bureau positions for currency of descriptions and grade allocations to insure equitable treatment of personnel.
Through Presidential directive further study was devoted to top positions and recommendations again made for the allocation of certain positions to the new grades GS-16, 17, and 18 levels established under the Classification Act of 1949.
Contacts with field installations were expanded by both the Washington and Regional Offices to keep abreast of reorganizations and to place positions on a current and accurate basis.
Time was devoted in working with the United States Civil Service Commission on proposed Civil Service Class Specifications and with various Regional Civil Service Classification inspection teams in classification inspections which were enlarged upon during the fiscal vear.
With further delegations to Regional installations a review of policies and procedures was undertaken to change and/or supplement existing policy.
Due to the emphasis placed upon the point 4 program, new procedures were developed and installed to handle this new phase of work.
Twenty-one inspections were made of regional, district, and project offices.
The coverage of the inspections was broadened during the year and the regions were required to apply region-wide the results of each inspection.
On June 30, 1951, the Bureau had on the rolls 16,595 full-time employees, 12,860 of whom were under the Classification Act and 3,735 under the wage boards.
Of this number 8,612 were entitled to veteran's preference; 2,300 were women.
The Bureau of Reclamation maintained and operated a fleet of 8 aircraft consisting of 1 twin-engine, 10-passenger Lockheed Lodestar; 2 twin-engine, 5-passenger Beechcrafts; 4 single-engine, 3-passenger Ryan Navions; and one Bell Helicopter.
The Lodestar, assigned to the Washington Office, was used to transport Departmental and Bureau officials and Members of Congress to observe construction and operation of Bureau dams, power plants, canals, transmission lines and other structures, many of which are located in areas not served by regular commercial airline transportation.
These visits were made in a minimum of time and at a cost equal to or less than that of commercial transportation.
The two Beechcrafts, assigned to regional offices, were used to transport regional staff personnel to areas not generally served by commercial air transportation, for inspection of proposed transmission line rights-of-way and surveillance of floodwater conditions.
They were used very successfully for aerial photographie surveys of features of various Bureau projects and particularly in photographically recording the changing regime of river channels affected by Bureau construction and operations.
During the past fiscal year, four new Ryan Navion aircraft were acquired replacing the single-engine Fairchild airplanes which proved inadequate.
They were assigned to various district and regional offices.
These aircraft have proved extremely valuable inasmuch as they can be landed in relatively small areas and have provided means of transportation directly to many construction sites in a much shorter time and at lower cost than could be afforded by surface transportation.
The airplanes were also used for aerial inspection and aerial photography of Bureau projects.
The Bell Helicopter, assigned to the Parker Dam power project in region 3, was used for regular scheduled flights patrolling 1,522 railes of high-voltage transmission lines.
This type of aerial patrol has proved superior to ground patrol for location of trouble and determining condition of conductor, devices, insulators, and crossarms due to better visibility.
Speedy location of faults and reporting via mobile radio has reduced loss of revenue due to line outages.
The net savings have resulted from reduction in personnel required for line patrol work and transportation costs of vehicles over mountainous and desert terrain.
This aircraft also proved excellent for reconnaissance and location work.
The increasing tempo of the national defense effort and the consequent shortages of critical materials made increasingly difficult the procurement of those materials needed to carry forward Bureau construction programs.
Current work of the Bureau was in general restricted to that work which contributed to the national defense and the building up of the civilian economy of the West.
The Defense Electric Power Administration was established as claimant agency through which the Bureau presents its requirements to NPA for materials for its power developments.
This agency screens our requirements in their relation to power needs and other materials requirements of the electric power industry.
No serious disruptions of the essential power programs occurred although a number of hampering delays were encountered.
Some delays resulted from the unavoidable hasty preparation of first submissions of our materials requirements.
The result was submission of less than fully adequate justifications in some cases.
To insure proper handling the Bureau established a number of material control offices in the field which were given the responsibility of collecting and compiling current requirements for critical materials and preparing full and complete statements of essentiality as justifications for requests for allocations.
All requests for allocations and for assistance in procuring critical materials were cleared through, and controlled by, these offices.
This proved to be the only feasible method of handling under this Bureau's decentralized plan of procurement and operation.
One of the most essential jobs of the Bureau, from the standpoint of early production of electric power to supplement the supply in a critical area, is the Hungry Horse project in Montana.
This project was granted a firm authorization to extend priority ratings to secure needed critical materials to be used in the structure in an amount not to exceed 8 million dollars.
Defense demands upon industry are having the effect of increasing the difficulty of procuring needed equipment particularly in the heavier items aside from the problems of critical materials.
Suppliers demanded extended time for deliveries and escalation provisions to cover possible changes in material and labor costs.
This required progressively earlier initiation of procurement for essential items in anticipation of program needs.
The national shortage of rail cars caused some serious delays in delivery to construction jobs of large quantity needs of materials.
Particularly cement and aggregate is required in large lots and in smooth flow to avoid disruption of construction work on the larger structures such as dams.
This flow of materials is dependent upon the availability of rail cars.
The result of extensive efforts made to divert some of the Bureau's business to small business concerns indicates that 30 percent of purchases made through formal advertising and 70 percent of open market purchases were made from small business firms.
Property inventory procedures were simplified by elimination of requirements for detailed inventory of all noncapitalized items.
This applies to property costing $50 or less per item.
Other similar changes were made and still others will be considered during the coming year for adoption wherever simplified procedures can be applied without adversely affecting sound accountability controls over property.
Continuing effort for the past several years to improve property accountability controls, and, particularly, utilization and management of the Bureau's movable property, which includes automotive equipment and motor vehicles, is showing definite results in improved field practices.
An inventory of the housing of the Bureau was completed during the year for the purpose of reviewing present rental rates and adherence to established policies for the fixing of proper charges to employees for such housing as has been provided.
The inventory indicated general consistency in rates and compliance with existing Departmental and General Accounting Office policies.
This study also showed that 20 percent of all Bureau housing is portable, i.
The result of this study will be used during the ensuing year to develop manual coverage of the subject of assignment of quarters to employees and rental rates to be charged employees for quarters where furnished.
The program for the review and selective screening of records and files and the disposal of records which have lost all administrative, legal, or historical value has continued at an increased pace.
During the year, 49 schedules, authorizing Bureau-wide disposal actions on more than 200 types of records, were issued by the Bureau.
A program for the protection of indispensable operating records of the Bureau in the event of a major disaster has been established and is now in operation.
Numerous revisions of the several chapters of the Bureau Manual devoted to records management operations were accomplished to keep pace with constantly changing operating requirements and improved operating procedures.
General investigations.
The planning program for the region included work on 5 reconnaissance investigations, 4 basin surveys, 30 project investigations, 10 studies of existing projects, 7 investigations classed as general engineering and research, and 2 advance planning studies.
Final project investigation reports were completed on the domestic water system, north unit, Deschutes project, Oregon, and the Kalispell project, Montana.
A special reconnaissance report was completed on the bypass channel, Deschutes project.
Reconnaissance reports on the Hartline project, Washington, and on Lewis, Cowlitz, and Chehalis River Basins in Washington were submitted to the Commissioner.
Preliminary project investigation reports were completed on Goose Lake project, Oregon, Fayette Heights unit, Fayette Division, Boise project, Idaho, Sequim project, Washington; Post Reservoir, Crooked River project, Oregon, and Supplemental Storage, Yakima project, Washington.
Special reports were completed on the McNary Gravity project, Oregon-Washington; Scriver Creek power facilities, Idaho; and Hells Canyon project, Idaho-Oregon.
A definite plan report on Hungry Horse project, Montana, was submitted to the Commissioner for approval.