Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the Congress: I have the honor to report to the Congress on the state of the Union.
At the outset, I should like to speak of the necessity for putting first things first as we work together this year for the good of our country.
The United States and the whole free world are passing through a period of grave danger.
Every action you take here in Congress, and every action that I take as President, must be measured against the test of whether it helps to meet that danger.
This will be a presidential election year-the year in which politics plays a large part in our lives--a larger part than usual. That is perfectly proper. But we have a greater responsibility to conduct our political fights in a manner that does not harm the national interest. We can find plenty of things to differ about without destroying our free institutions and without abandoning our bipartisan foreign policy for peace. When everything is said and done, all of us--Republicans and Democrats alike--all of us are Americans; and we are all going to sink or swim together.
We are moving through a perilous time.
Faced with a terrible threat of aggression, our Nation has embarked upon a great effort to help establish the kind of world in which peace shall be secure.
Peace is our goal-not peace at any price, but a peace based on freedom and justice.
We are now in the midst of our effort to reach that goal.
On the whole, we have been doing very well.
Last year, 1951, was a year in which we threw back aggression, added greatly to our military strength, and improved the chances for peace and freedom in many parts of the world.
This year, 1952, is a critical year in the defense effort of the whole free world.
If we falter we can lose all the gains we have made.
If we drive ahead, with courage and vigor and determination, we can by the end of 1952 be in a position of much greater security.
The way will be dangerous for the years ahead, but if we put forth our best efforts this year--and next year--we can be "over the hump" in our effort to build strong defenses.
When we look at the record of the past year, 1951, we find important things on both the credit and the debit side of the ledger.
We have made great advances.
At the same time we have run into new problems which must be overcome.
Now let us look at the credit side first.
Peace depends upon the free nations sticking together, and making a combined effort to check aggression and prevent war.
In this respect, 1951 was a year of great achievement.
In Korea the forces of the United Nations turned back the Chinese Communist invasion-and did it without widening the area of conflict.
The action of the United Nations in Korea has been a powerful deterrent to a third world war.
However, the situation in Korea remains very hazardous.
The outcome of the armistice negotiation still remains uncertain.
In Indochina and Malaya, our aid has helped our allies to hold back the Communist advance, although there are signs of further trouble in that area.
In 1951 we strengthened the chances of peace in the Pacific region by the treaties with Japan and the defense arrangements with Australia, New Zealand, and the Philippines.
In Europe combined defense has become a reality.
The free nations have created a real fighting force.
This force is not yet as strong as it needs to be; but it is already a real obstacle to any attempt by hostile forces to sweep across Europe to the Atlantic.
In 1951 we also moved to strengthen the security of Europe by the agreement to bring Greece and Turkey into the North Atlantic Treaty.
The United Nations, the world's greatest hope for peace, has come through a year of trial stronger and more useful than ever.
The free nations have stood together in blocking Communist attempts to tear up the charter.
At the present session of the United Nations in Paris, we, together with the British and the French, offered a plan to reduce and control all armaments under a foolproof inspection system.
This is a concrete, practical proposal for disarmament.
But what happened ?
Vishinsky laughed at it.
Listen to what he said: "I could hardly sleep at all last night .... I could not sleep because I kept laughing."
The world will be a long time forgetting the spectacle of that fellow laughing at disarmament.
Disarmament is not a joke.
Vishinsky's laughter met with shock and anger from the people all over the world.
And, as a result, Mr. Stalin's representative received orders to stop laughing and start talking.
If the Soviet leaders were to accept this proposal, it would lighten the burden of armaments, and permit the resources of the earth to be devoted to the good of mankind.
But until the Soviet Union accepts a sound disarmament proposal, and joins in peaceful settlements, we have no choice except to build up our defenses.
During this past year we added more than a million men and women to our Armed Forces.
The total is now nearly 3 ½ million.
We have made rapid progress in the field of atomic weapons.
We have turned out billion worth of military supplies and equipment, three times as much as the year before.
Economic conditions in the country are good.
There are 61 million people on the job; wages, farm incomes, and business profits are at high levels.
Total production of goods and services in our country has increased 8 percent over last year--about twice the normal rate of growth.
Perhaps the most amazing thing about our economic progress is the way we are increasing our basic capacity to produce.
For example, we are now in the second year of a 3-year program which will double our output of aluminum, increase our electric power supply by 40 percent, and increase our steelmaking capacity by 15 percent.
We can then produce 120 million tons of steel a year, as much as all the rest of the world put together.
This expansion will mean more jobs and higher standards of living for all of us in the years ahead.
At the present time it means greater strength for us and for the rest of the free world in the fight for peace.
Now, I must turn to the debit side of the ledger for the past year.
The outstanding fact to note on the debit side of the ledger is that the Soviet Union, in 1951, continued to expand its military production and increase its already excessive military power.
It is true that the Soviets have run into increasing difficulties.
Their hostile policies have awakened stern resistance among free men throughout the world.
And behind the Iron Curtain the Soviet rule of force has created growing political and economic stresses in the satellite nations.
Nevertheless, the grim fact remains that the Soviet Union is increasing its armed might.
It is still producing more war planes than the free nations.
It has set off two more atomic explosions.
The world still walks in the shadow of another world war.
And here at home, our defense preparations are far from complete.
During 1951 we did not make adequate progress in building up civil defense against atomic attack.
This is a major weakness in our plans for peace, since inadequate civilian defense is an open invitation to a surprise attack.
Failure to provide adequate civilian defense has the same effect as adding to the enemy's supply of atomic bombs.
In the field of defense production we have run into difficulties and delays in designing and producing the latest types of airplanes and tanks.
Some machine tools and metals are still in extremely short supply.
In other free countries the defense buildup has created severe economic problems.
It has increased inflation in Europe and has endangered the continued recovery of our allies.
In the Middle East political tensions and the oil controversy in Iran are keeping the region in a turmoil.
In the Far East the dark threat of Communist imperialism still hangs over many nations.
This, very briefly, is the good side and the bad side of the picture.
Taking the good and bad together, we have made real progress this last year along the road to peace.
We have increased the power and unity of the free world.
And while we were doing this, we have avoided world war on the one hand, and appeasement on the other.
This is a hard road to follow, but the events of the last year show that it is the right road to peace.
We cannot expect to complete the job overnight.
The free nations may have to maintain for years the larger military forces needed to deter aggression.
We must build steadily, over a period of years, toward political solidarity and economic progress among the free nations in all parts of the world.
Our task will not be easy; but if we go at it with a will, we can look forward to steady progress.
On our side are all the great resources of freedom--the ideals of religion and democracy, the aspiration of people for a better life, and the industrial and technical power of a free civilization. These advantages outweigh anything the slave world can produce. The only thing that can defeat us is our own state of mind. We can lose if we falter. The middle period of a great national effort like this is a very difficult time. The way seems long and hard. The goal seems far distant. Some people get discouraged. That is only natural. But if there are any among us who think we ought to ease up in the fight for peace, I want to remind them of three things--just three things.
First: The threat of world war is still very real.
We had one Pearl Harbor--let's not get caught off guard again.
If you don't think the threat of Communist armies is real, talk to some of our men back from Korea.
Second: If the United States had to try to stand alone against a Soviet-dominated world, it would destroy the life we know and the ideals we hold dear.
Our allies are essential to us, just as we are essential to them.
The more shoulders there are to bear the burden the lighter that burden will be.
Third: The things we believe in most deeply are under relentless attack.
We have the great responsibility of saving the basic moral and spiritual values of our civilization.
We can and we must increase our help to them.
This means military aid, especially to those places like Indochina which might be hardest hit by some new Communist attack.
It also means economic aid, both technical know-how and capital investment.
This last year we made available millions of bushels of wheat to relieve famine in India.
But far more important, in the long run, is the work Americans are doing in India to help the Indian farmers themselves raise more grain.
With the help of our technicians, Indian farmers, using simple, inexpensive means, have been able since 1948 to double the crops in one area in India.
One farmer there raised 63 bushels of wheat to the acre, where 13 bushels had been the average before.
This is point 4--our point 4 program at work. It is working--not only in India but in Iran, Paraguay, Liberia--in 33 countries around the globe.
Our technical missionaries are out there.
We need more of them.
We need more funds to speed their efforts, because there is nothing of greater importance in all our foreign policy.
There is nothing that shows more clearly what we stand for, and what we want to achieve.
My friends of the Congress, less than one-third of the expenditure for the cost of World War II would have created the developments necessary to feed the whole world so we wouldn't have to stomach communism.
That is what we have got to fight, and unless we fight that battle and win it, we can't win the cold war or a hot one either.
We have recently lost a great public servant who was leading this effort to bring opportunity and hope to the people of half the world.
Dr. Henry Bennett and his associates died in line of duty on a point 4 mission.
It is up to us to carry on the great work for which they gave their lives.
During the coming year we must not forget the suffering of the people who live behind the Iron Curtain.
In those areas minorities are being oppressed, human rights violated, religions persecuted.
We should continue to expose those wrongs.
We should continue and expand the activities of the Voice of America, which brings our message of hope and truth to those peoples and other peoples throughout the world.
I have just had an opportunity to discuss many of these world problems with Prime Minister Churchill.
We have had a most satisfactory series of meetings.
We thoroughly reviewed the situation in Europe, the Middle East, and the Far East.
We both look forward to steady progress toward peace through the cooperative action and teamwork of the free nations.
Turning from our foreign policies, let us consider the jobs we have here at home as a part of our program for peace.
The first of these jobs is to move ahead full steam on the defense program.
Our objective is to have a well-equipped active defense force large enough--in concert with the forces of our allies--to deter aggression and to inflict punishing losses on the enemy immediately if we should be attacked.
This active force must be backed by adequate reserves, and by the plants and tools to turn out the tremendous quantities of new weapons that would be needed if war came.
We are not building an active force adequate to carry on full scale war, but we are putting ourselves in a position to mobilize very rapidly if we have to.
This year I shall recommend some increases in the size of the active force we are building, with particular emphasis on air power.
