On June 17, 1952, the Bureau of Reclamation celebrated its Golden Jubilee—50 years of engineering accomplishment in the conservation, development, and utilization of the precious water and land resources of the West.
A notable contribution to this half-century of progress was made in the fiscal year 1952 construction record.
An investment of about 212 million dollars was translated into useful works on Reclamation projects during the year.
Although material shortages, staffing restrictions, and other limiting factors imposed difficulties in the design and construction workload, more than 640 construction, material, equipment, and supply contracts were awarded for the fiscal year period.
The contracts represented an aggregate of more than 123 million dollars.
Contracts for construction comprised 112 million dollars of this amount, or about 91 percent.
For the year the Bureau had a 271-million-dollar construction program under way.
Construction contracts in force at the end of the year totaled about 274 million dollars.
Reclamation construction during the year not only gave impetus to formal inauguration of water service to hundreds of thousands of acres of irrigable land, but it also made notable additions to the country's power supply.
A block of 241,700 kilowatts of hydroelectric energy was added to the Bureau's generating capacity.
Extension of the power system embracing hundreds of miles of new electrical transmission lines proceeded at an increasingly high rate.
The year was highlighted by the placing in service of three outstanding irrigation pumping plants, each the heart of a project greater than any in the Bureau's history—Columbia Basin in Washington, Central Valley in California, and Colorado-Big Thompson in Colorado.
The Bureau also initiated major construction on the Eklutna project in Alaska, its first undertaking outside the traditional 17- western-State sphere of Reclamation activities.
On the Columbia Basin project, first major delivery of water to project lands was begun, and completion of installation of remaining generating units at Grand Coulee power plant brought this world's largest hydroelectric power plant to its full name-plate capacity.
Hungry Horse Dam construction continued its rapid pace, and the goal of one million acre-feet of storage was reached by the end of the fiscal year.
Missouri River Basin project progress was notably identified with completion of Cedar Bluff, Shadehill, and Boysen Dams and Angostura power plant.
The Bureau's participation in the great expansion of foreign assistance activities extended Reclamation's influence to world-wide scope.
As part of this cooperation, engineer specialists were sent to numerous countries of both hemispheres to investigate development possibilities and to advise on projects.
The Design and Construction Division's administrative management practices received continued scrutiny, and its productive efforts in the direction of improved management was given departmental recognition.
Major contracts awarded during the year are summarized in table 1.
Among the features placed under contract for construction were Palisades Dam and power plant on the Palisades project in Idaho-Wyoming, and Eklutna tunnel on the Eklutna project in Alaska, Nimbus Dam and power plant and Folsom power plant on the Central Valley project in California, Alcova power plant on the Kendrick project in Wyoming, Jamestown Dam on the Missouri River Basin project in North Dakota, and 10 miles of the St. Vrain supply canal on the Colorado-Big Thompson project in Colorado.
Principal features completed on Bureau projects are shown in table 2.
These include 4 dams, 2 power plants, 4 pumping plants, 211 miles of main canals and wasteways, and 856.14 miles of transmission lines.
The 1952 fiscal year was outstanding because of the advancement of construction on several multiple-purpose undertakings to the status of project-wide completion of major structures and initiation of integrated development for irrigation, power production, and other functions.
On the Central Valley project, the Tracy pumping plant, Delta-Mendota canal, and Delta-Cross channel were completed, and first integrated operation of the project was begun, climaxing many years of intensive construction activity.
Four of the six giant pumps of the Grand Coulee pumping plant on the Columbia Basin project were installed and pumping of water for eventual delivery to 66,000 acres of irrigable land was started during the 1952 irrigation season.
The last three generating units were installed in the Grand Coulee power plant, bringing the plant's nameplate capacity to its total 1,974,000 kilowatts.
Completion of the Missouri River Basin project's Cedar Bluff, Shadehill and Boysen Dams, and Angostura power plant, virtual completion of Boysen power plant, and 300 miles of transmission lines for far-flung areas were significant advances on the huge basin-wide development.
With the installation of Generators A-4 and A-9 in the Hoover power plant on the Boulder Canyon project, the plant's capacity was brought to 1,167,300 kilowatts, second largest hydroelectric power installation on Reclamation projects.
Elsewhere on Reclamation projects, Platoro Dam on the San Luis Valley project was completed this year.
Several parts of the Gila project, including sections of the Mohawk and Wellton canals and the Wellton-Mohawk pumping plants were completed, thus bringing new areas into productive operation in time for the 1952 irrigation season.
Cachuma Dam on the Cachuña project in California was brought to within 30 feet of the crest elevation during the year and the outlet works was completed.
Good progress was maintained on the Colorado-Big Thompson project : Four important tunnels—Rattlesnake, Carter Lake, Olympus, and Pole Hill tunnels—were completed.
Construction of Hungry Horse Dam and power plant continued to set a fast pace throughout the year.
The record for concrete placement was established in July, comprising a daily average of 7,600 cubic yards, and a total placement of 235,650 cubic yards for the month.
At the end of the year a total of 2,706,000 cubic yards had been placed in the dam; only 250,000 cubic yards remained to be placed for the remaining 50 feet of the 564-foot-high structure.
Construction of the power plant proceeded rapidly, and installation of the first unit was started in March.
Although somewhat behind schedule, construction progress on Canyon Ferry Dam and power plant was generally satisfactory during the year.
By June 30 more than 268,000 cubic yards of concrete had been placed in the dam, or about 71 percent of its total volume.
On other projects, construction advanced on features under contract, indicating that such important works as Carter Lake, Rattlesnake, Willow Creek Dams and Pole Hill power plant on the Colorado-Big Thompson project, Trauger pumping plant on the Central Valley project, Cachuma Dam on the Cachuma project, Big Sandy Dam on the Eden project, and Keyhole Dam and Boysen power plant on the Missouri River Basin project, would be completed in fiscal year 1953.
Despite the severity of Alaskan elimatie conditions, intensified by rugged mountainous topography, and other diffieulties, construction advanced rapidly during the year on the Bureau's Eklutna project, a transmountain diversion development which is to provide defense and industrial electric power for the Anchorage and Palmer areas.
Since October 1951 when major construction activities began on the project, the gate shaft for the intake of the Eklutna tunnel was sunk to its full depth, excavation proceeded steadily in the tunnel and lower penstock portal, and'work was continued on the adit portal high on the mountain near the downstream end of the tunnel.
Construction of the 41/2-mile-long, 9-foot-inside-diameter pressure tunnel and companion facilities was carried out during the year under a contract awarded September 1951.
It is the first major contract ever awarded by the Bureau for construction on a Reclamation undertaking outside the mainland of the United States.
Other work on the project included construction of the 25-mile-long Eklutna-Anchorage transmission line and alterations of the existing Eklutna Dam.
Development of the Eklutna project marks the initial step in a comprehensive program for conservation and multiple-purpose use-of the water resources of Alaska to meet the needs of economic advancement and national defense as authorized by the Congress in 1949.
The project is to make available an estimated annual output of 143 million kilowatt-hours of firm and 16 million kilowatt-hours of secondary electrical energy to meet the eritical shortage of power in the Anchorage and Palmer areas, as well as to provide other water resource conservation benefits.
Major features on Bureau of Reclamation projects expected to be completed in fiscal year 1953 (as shown in table 3) inelude 4 dams, 2 power plants, 8 pumping plants, 133 miles of main canals, 327 miles of transmission lines, and pipe lines and laterals to serve 166,000 acres of land.
Among the principal structures expected to be placed under construction on Reclamation projects (table 4) during the next fiscal year are 10 dams and 13 detention dams, 1 power plant, 2 pumping plants, 295 miles of transmission lines for a three-State area, 200 miles of main canals, and laterals to serve more than 250,000 acres of land.
9 Courtland Canal detention dams, Kansas.
Crow Creek pumping plant, Montana.
19 miles Upper Meeker Canal, Nebraska.
Cachuma project, California: Ortega regulating reservoir.
Carpinteria regulating reservoir.
Laterals to serve 17,000 acres.
4 miles Lombard Canal, Montana.
16 miles Bartley laterals, Nebraska.
Laterals to serve 14,000 acres, Nebraska.
Laterals to serve 6,000 acres, North Dakota.
8 miles drainage system, Montana.
40 miles of canals.
Warden pumping plant.
Laterals to serve 82,000 acres.
Camp Creek diversion dam and Camp Creek tunnel.
Laterals to serve 114,000 acres.
Eden project, Wyoming Prospect diversion dam.
20 miles Eden Canal enlargement.
30 miles Eden laterals.
Solano project, California: Monticello Dam.
San Diego project, California : 61 miles second barrel, San Diego Aqueduct.
Weber Basin project, Utah: 12 miles Ġateway canal.
Gila_project, Arizona: Laterals to serve 14,500 acres.
Rehabilitation of Savage Rapids am.
All-American Canal System, California: Laterals to serve 4,600 acres.
29 miles of levee and floodway channel construction.
The pressure of field demands for construction details was augmented by requests for preliminary designs and estimates for project plans, various special investigations, and rehabilitation designs.
Following Congressional appropriation for dams on the Palisades, Missouri River Basin, and the Vermejo projects, intensive studies and designs were undertaken for earliest possible initiation of construction.
By increased efficiency of operations, improved coordination with feld forces, and by selection of new types of construction materials and adoption of new techniques, the design workload was facilitated and close adherence to the expedited program schedules was made possible.
Major economy in certain designs was a concomitant achievement.
Numerous design developments characterized the Division's work for the year.
Outdoor and semi-outdoor plant construction was investigated for several power and pumping plants.
For the Ringold pumping plant on the Columbia Basin project in Washington, an outdoor type of plant, individual removable steel housings were selected for protection of the indoor-type of motors, a design advancement which will be reflected in economy of construction.
Rising labor costs made it necessary to change from' reinforced concrete to other types of plant buildings.
Designs for the Palisades power plant in Idaho incorporated steel frame and brick curtain walls; for the Little Porcupine power plant in Montana, a steel frame and composite siding were selected.
These design changes will result in major economies in construction and will expedite building schedules.
Other design effort contributed to construction economy and conservation of critical materials.
Stainless steel and monel metal were conserved by adoption of rubber water stops for articulated concrete structures.
To conserve steel, structural designs called for "high bond" steel reinforcement bars in concrete buildings; the surface ribs on the bars reduce the length of anchorage embedment and permit shorter splices—significant improvements which will result in large reduction of steel requirements for Reclamation work.
Important economies were also effected in the development and adoption of a caisson type of footing for electrical transmission towers in place of the more costly pile type of footing.
Continued progress was made in the Bureau's lower cost canal lining program.
The practicability of applying underwater asphaltic seals to canals while they are in operation was under intensive study during the year.
A eritical inspection made of various canal linings on Northern projects indicated the importance of maintaining certain standards of constructon and maintenance if the lining installations are to remain serviceable.
Review of performance of heavy compacted earth linings led to the conclusion that it is a promising type of lining to reduce seepage, provided proper materials are incorporated in its construction.
To simplify operations and to strengthen design, location, and construction procedures, a thorough review of plans for the canals and distribution system on the Columbia Basin project was undertaken by the Division.
Improved procedures adopted involved relaxation, under certain conditions, of the conservative standards of canal location, simplification of surveying and mapping methods, and reduetion of other refinements.
An interesting design innovation was the development of a heating system in the Alcova power plant building in Wyoming which will utilize the hot water from adjacent springs.
Also at Alcova, the use of lightweight, precast concrete roof slabs and laminated, prefabricated metal and fiberglass wall panels resulted in savings in material costs and expedited the building's construction.
Designers’ operating instructions, which are prepared and issued to assure proper and efficient operation of installed equipment and machinery in Bureau projects, continued useful since their inception 2 years ago.
During the past year 30 such criteria were issued embracing those for operation of canal systems, storage and diversion dams, power and pumping plants, substations, and electrical transmission and radio communication systems.
Looking ahead to western electrical transmission needs for the next 2 decades or more, the staff undertook the investigation of technical problems involved in development of a super-grid to transmit electrical energy throughout the 17 western States; voltages proposed would be higher than any yet used in the United States.
Engineering and economic studies indicated that it may be practicable to establish generating plants in the coal fields of the Rocky Mountain States and transmit more than 20 million kilowatts of electrie power to load eenters up to 600 miles away; cost of such transmission may be competitive with methods of transporting coal to load-area steam plants.
In general, the national rearmament program and material shortages did not have an adverse effeet on bidding interest and competition for Bureau construetion work.
However, the strongest interest and greatest competition were apparent in work involving heavy construction and earthwork which required a minimum of critical materials.
Sufficient bids were received for most of the specifications advertised, and the majority of bids were within acceptable limits of thę engineers’ estimates.
Foreign manufacturers showed increasing interest in Bureau work and submitted bids on Reclamation equipment, especially electrical machinery.
To alleviate bidder's concern regarding availability of materials under the controlled materials plan, a specifications procedure was initiated to list controlled material allotments that have been requested or that have been approved and reserved for a particular job.
All specifications provided that for work delayed by operations of the controlled materials plan the time for performance would be extended to compensate for such delays.
During the year the standard specifications for construction of canal systems were revised and a second edition was issued.
The new edition was improved by incorporation of practical suggestions submitted by construction engineers, contractors, and material suppliers.
To expedite processing of contracts for minor construction work, an informal contract form was initiated for advertising and award purposes.
The new specifications were written to cover only the direct requirements of the particular work, thus encouraging small local contractors to bid on Reclamation work.
Specifications for precast concrete pipe systems were also revised to eliminate the majority of detail requirements and to provide for acceptance of guaranteed work on a performance basis.
Paralleling the reduction in appropriations, several organizational changes were effected during the year resulting in simplification of the over-all organization of the Division, better utilization of available personnel, and reduction in costs of supervision.
Among these changes, the major operating segments of the organization were reduced in number, a staff office level was established, and several units were shifted from one section to another to achieve a more consistent grouping of functions.
Continued attention was directed throughout the year toward developing greater flexibility and versatility of the staff.
Improvement in staff performance was noted as a result of the rotation plan initiated several years ago permitting junior engineers to work in various offices throughout the organization.
Areas of interchangeability as reflected in competitive levels established for professional and subprofessional personnel were under administrative review.
As a result of the broadening effect on staff development activities and change in administrative viewpoint brought about by experience, establishment of broader levels of competition was assured.
Another development directed toward lowering of administrative costs was the initiation of procedures to simplify preparation of technical field reports.
Several reports were eliminated, others were consolidated, and the frequency of reporting was changed to minimize the month-end-report burden of field offices.
In furtherance of their administrative potential manifested during their rotation assignments in the Division, two young engineers participated in the third management training program of the Department of the Interior.
Assignments to administrative work in various bureaus and offices were supplemented by formal university training.
The reciprocal detail of field engineers to the Denver offices for training in specialized fields during the winter season was conducted with marked success.
Engineers from the field were trained in contract administration, specifications writing, grouting, and other special types of work.
The value of the training course conducted by the engineering laboratories in concrete control and betterment of concreting operations was exemplified by better and more uniform concrete throughout Bureau projects.
To keep the staff abreast of changes in the national economy and the impact of the current defense effort on resources development, a representative group of supervisory engineers from the Design and Construction Division participated in a 2-week economic mobilization course held in Denver under the direction of the civilian committee of the Industrial College of the Armed Forces.
Principles and problems of mobilization and methods and procedures for making the best use of our natural resources in any emergency were discussed.
In keeping its staff informed of current problems in the operation and maintenance of Bureau project structures, the Division, through its liaison representative, conferred with officials on 19 projects and in 15 field offices during the year.
Information thus obtained was made available to the designing engineers through the media of written and verbal reports, photographs, and moving pictures.
The procedures of transferring completed works from construction to operation and maintenance status were coordinated by the Division, 30 such transfers having been effected for the year.
A major activity of the 1952 fiscal year was the collection and organization of data on safety features and practices in use on the Bureau's operating irrigation systems.
These data, together with information assembled by the Division, were compiled during the year in a report on safety in the operation of canals and other waterway structures.
This report will be made available during the next fiscal year to all Bureau offices and to others to acquaint design and construction engineers, operation and maintenance personnel, and officials of water-user-operated projects of the latest advances in safety practices for such structures.
To maintain the productivity of Reclamation projects and to safeguard the investment in such undertakings as well as the holdings of the water users, increased emphasis was given during the year to the protection of agricultural lands from seepage and high ground water and also to their protection from flood runoff.
The appointment of regional, district, and project drainage engineers, and the Division's participation in formulating the basic policies on drainage in relation to land classification, were indicative of the year's emphasis placed on drainage in Bureau developments.
Extensive consultations were held by the Division's specialists in drainage and ground water in connection with drainage problems and land classification as related to drainability of projects soils.
On the Oahe unit of the Missouri River Basin project in South Dakota, particularly, the problem of drainability of glacial till soils is without precedent, and comprehensive investigations and analyses were initiated to determine the drainability of the unit.
During the year the Denver Engineering Laboratories assisted design engineers and field forces in the solution of a widely diversified assemblage of complex problems associated with development of Reclamation struetures and their operation and maintenance.
In addition to this technical assistance, many worthwhile contributions were made toward improvement of field testing equipment and techniques.
Notable progress was made in soil test work.
Studies in the visual soil classification system advanced and a more definitive approach to methods of describing physical and structural properties of soil-rock mixtures was developed.
Much work was done in testing and identification and classification of expansive clays which caused heaving and dislocation of structures.
With the assistance of specialists in radioisotope techniques, an apparatus was designed and built and work was initiated on a test procedure for determining soil moisture and density in place by the scattering of neutrons and by gamma radiation.
This technique appeared to offer sizeable savings in time and cost of testing as compared with conventional methods.
Further research was conducted on electrical methods of reclamation and stabilization of soils.
As a result of a comprehensive research program on a special field test section at Bonny Reservoir in Colorado, soil cement and asphaltic concrete were found to offer possibilities as economical substitutes for rock materials (riprap) on earth dams.
These substitute materials may have great usefulness in construction of many earth dams, particularly in the Great Plains States where rock materials are unobtainable locally and must be shipped from distant sources.
Study of loess soils was prosecuted intensively.
Considerable data were compiled on load-carrying capacity of loessial soils as a result of the concerted soil driving and testing program, completed this year.
Proper procedures for driving piles in loessial soils were also developed as part of the program.
Hydraulic laboratory studies continued under the demands of design and construction problems.
Tests condueted on a full-scale weir box turnout pointed favorably toward the development of a low-cost water measuring device for open-ditch types of irrigation systems.
Model studies led to the design of an afterbay stilling basin which satisfactorily withstood the turbulent high velocity flows discharged from by-pass energy absorbers.
This design has already been applied to several power plants.
Progress was also made in the development of simplified stilling basins for small culverts.
Through hydraulie model studies, modification of preliminary designs resulted in improved flow conditions and in reductions in construetion costs.
A special result of such studies was determination that the maximum discharge through the proposed Yellowtail spillway tunnel will require only a 41-foot-diameter tunnel in place of the contemplated 45-foot-diameter tunnel; major savings in construction may be ascribed to this laboratory work.
Model studies of the Nimbus Dam led to reduetion of the spillway apron, thereby substantially decreasing concrete requirements.
In other fields of hydraulic laboratory research, much progress was made in resolution of sedimentation problems, particularly in the Missouri River Basin.
Hydraulic research advanced the salt-velocity method of measuring discharge of water through large conduits, and the method is now used in many pump-performance tests.
The salt-velocity method offers considerable savings in time and expense, and during the year it was used for discharge measurements in pump-performance tests for the large Granby and Tracy pumping plants.
Studies of structural behavior of mass and reinforced concrete were fully maintained during the year.
A comprehensive program for rock-core tests was conducted to supply designers with more complete information on foundation rock conditions.
To further knowledge of reinforced concrete design theory for Reclamation construction, a large reinforced concrete beam, 25 feet long and weighing 6 tons, was cast and subjected to exhaustive tests.
Completed tests of 10- year-old conerete cores taken from the Shasta Dam test block showed that the concrete has had a consistent gain in strength, which confirms confidence in the permanent strength of the Bureau's concrete structures.
Laboratory efforts emphasized control of concrete quality and economy in current construetion and the selection of cements, aggregates, and pozzolans for new structures.
The quality of concrete aggregates from numerous projects was determined by suitable tests.
Development of a chemical test to determine reactivity of aggregates by the use of sodium hydroxide was part of the year's work.
In connection with winter concreting operations, studies were made on heat of hydration of cement and on the use of calcium chloride to protect new concrete placement during cold weather.
Because of laboratory investigations, requirements for curing and finishing of conerete in power and pumping plants and for protection of concrete in cold weather were simplified and liberalized.
Considerable researeh was also done in the development and testing of methods of repairing cracks in concrete.
Testing, analyzing, and examining bituminous construction materials controlled the acceptance of approximately 11,000 tons of asphalt for Bureau construction, principally for canal linings.
To afford better control of heating of asphalt, specifications were revised to require use of automatic thermometers which will record the temperature during the entire asphalt heating operation.
Laboratory assistance was rendered in establishing improved methods of testing the efficacy of herbicides for cattails, salt cedars, and other noxious growths along canals, and in furthering the development of lower cost canal linings.
Testing and development of protective systems against corrosion of metallie members in numerous Bureau structures were also important activities during the year.
Aeceptance tests were conducted on 600 samples (representing 276,000 gallons) of paint, oils, and related materials.
This year was notable for the Division's numerous contributions of its technical resources and skills to the problems of other public agencies and of private agencies and foreign governments.
For the International Boundary and Water Commission, the staff prepared designs and specifications for completion of Falcon Dam and power plant, major undertakings of the Commission on the Rio Grande in Texas.
Work continued also on construction drawings and specifications for equipment for the dam and power plant.
In addition, the staff assisted the Mexican section of the Commission by installing instruments in the power penstock on the Mexican side of the Rio Grande which will record earth pressures of the dam on the conduit.
Under an agreement with the Navy Department, work was begun on the preparation of designs and specifications for 61 miles of the 72- mile-long second barrel of theSan Diego aqueduct.
Bureau engineers will also supervise construction of the pipeline which will extend from the Los Angeles Metropolitan aqueduct to San Diego.
The Bureau designed the first barrel of the San Diego aqueduct which was constructed between 1943 and 1945.)
For the city of Seattle studies of structural behavior of Ross Dam continued.
The Engineering laboratories also extended considerable technical assistance to numerous governmental agencies and private organizations.
On three occasions aid was given to state and local law enforcement agencies in the identification of certain forensic evidence by X-ray diffraction methods.
Assistance to the Atomic Energy Commission was given through acceptance tests of concrete aggregates, alkali-aggregate reactivity tests, and strength and elastic property tests of concrete cores for various installations of the Commission.
For the Bureau of Mines, the laboratories investigated the possibility of using spent oil shale in concrete mixes.
Tests of pozzolans were conducted for the Geological Survey, and aggregate tests were made for the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
Acceptance testing of paints, varnishes, oils, soaps, and waxes were carried out for the Federal Supply Service of the General Service Administration, a continuing activity of the laboratories.
Similar acceptance tests of paints and related materials were made for the Forest Service.
The Department of the Army was advised on the analysis of water samples at the Rocky Mountain arsenal; and the Corps of Engineers was given data on tests of asphaltic and concrete construction materials.
Concrete aggregate tests were made for the Tennessee Valley Authority, the Water Resources Authority of Puerto Rico, the Georgia State highway department, and the Kansas State highway commission.
The Colorado State highway department was given laboratory assistance in the study of foundation clays, and aggregate investigations and concrete mix studies were completed for the Denver Water Board.
Testing of concrete cores was undertaken by the laboratories for the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, and for the city of Seattle in connection with its Diablo and Ross Dams.
Hydraulic model studies and tests of aggegates and pozzolans for Falcon Dam of the International Boundary and Water Commission were further laboratory activities during the year.
An increased volume of technical studies and laboratory experiments was also accomplished during the year for foreign governments.
Technical services for the Snowy Mountains Hydroelectric Authority of Australia included the preparation of designs for the Tumut Pond Dam and for the Adaminaby tunnel and T-1 tunnels.
Designs and drawings were also prepared for related control structures and other hydraulic features.
For the Indian Government trial load analyses were carried out in design of a 680-foot-high concrete gravity dam, and stress analyses were initiated for the dam's appurtenant works.
The staff completed its review of the design of the Chao Phya diversion dam, dike, and navigation lock for the Government of Thailand.
Stability analyses and preliminary general arrangement layouts were made for the Chao Phya power plant.
The Engineering laboratories contributed to Bureau assistance abroad by conducting hydraulic model studies, concrete mix investigations, and other testing work for the Governments of Australia, India, Japan, Lebanon, and Thailand.
The laboratories were also called upon by private engineering firms for technical guidance and research investigations on projects in El Salvador and elsewhere.
The impressive increase in the Bureau's foreign activities program called on the Division to expand its services to in-service foreign engineers and visitors, supply technical services to foreign countries, provide publications on Reclamation practices and works for their use, and detail engineers to foreign missions.
The training program for foreign engineers was improved during the year to assure better education in Bureau practices and procedures, and better coordination with field offices was achieved.
In addition, a schedule of weekly lectures covering general engineering practices and design work as carried on within the Bureau was inaugurated during the year for the benefit of foreign trainees.
Technical "backstopping" services increased in volume and scope as expanded Reclamation-engineering missions in foreign countries progressed in their work.
Officials from 20 foreign nations participated in the first International Reclamation Conference at Yakima, Washington, held early in June 1952 in conjunction with the Columbia Basin water festival.
In Denver, following the conference, the foreign engineers attended a special seminar on irrigation practices conducted by the Division.
Construction costs showed an over-all rise during the year of about 61/2 percent.
This was due in large part to increases in labor rates, as equipment costs rose only slightly and materials prices were generally stable.
Toward the end of the fiscal year nonferrous materials came into better supply, and in some instances lower prices were experienced on electrical items.
Uncertainty prevailed in steel and steel products prices.
Because of the strike in the steel industry the supply of steel was short and prices rose accordingly.
Bidding interest in most construction was substantial and active competition resulted in favorable prices.
In several instances, little interest was shown to bid on projeet completion work, and high unit prices were experienced for this type of construction.
Unusually high prices were also experienced on several projects located in or near areas where active defense industries were located; these prices may be attributed to inadequate labor supply and resulting high labor costs.
Table 5 lists costs indexes for Bureau of Reclamation construction work based on the combined costs of materials and labor supplied by contractors and material and labor supplied by the Government.
Major technical publications issued during the year were a revised tentative edition of the Earth Manual and a reprint of the fifth edition of the Conerete Manual.
The Earth Manual records engineering practices and procedures developed in earth materials, investigations, testing, and construction.
The Concrete Manual is an authoritative handbook of information and instruction on concrete control and construction technique.
Also published were three engineering monographs which discuss discharge coefficients for irrigation overflow spillways, photoelastic stress analysis of concrete conduits, and stresses around galleries in concrete dams.
Preparation of technical records of design and construction gained in momentum during the year.
These records provide comprehensive information on design and construction of specific Bureau structures.
The final design report for Angostura Dam was published, and the report for Heart Butte Dam was completed and is to be issued early in the next fiscal year.
Technical records of an additional 32 major struetures were in preparation, and about 10 of these records are planned to be duplicated or published during the following year.
Under preparation this past year were: The sixth edition of the (oncrete Manual; first editions of the Earth Manual, Paint Manual, Manual for Measurement of Irrigation Water, and the Welding Manual; an additional 15 monographs planned to be issued in the next fiscal year; and a revised edition of Dams and Control Works.
Under way also was the compilation of an exhaustive index of all Bureau specifieations which have been issued since inception of Reclamation activity in 1902.
To record the methods used and the accomplishments in the Bureau's lower cost canal lining program for a wide range of readership, an illustrated semitechnical bulletin entitled,"Canal Linings and Methods of Reducing Costs" was published.
A Golden Jubilee Fact Book describing Reclamation's accomplishments in the past 50 years was also printed for nontechnical readers.
The Advance Construction Bulletin and Advance Equipment Bulletin which report Bureau work proposed for the following 3 months were given increased circulation as requests from contractors and subcontractors were received.
The annual forecast edition of The Advance Construction Bulletin which describes work to be undertaken for the remainder of the fiscal year was issued in increased numbers to promote competitive interest among wider numbers of prospective bidders.
Participation of design and construction engineers in professional activities and their contributions to technical literature continued at high level, with more than 100 papers and articles published or presented, including a number before international organizations.
A Bureau of Reclamation symposium commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of Reclamation, held in conjunetion with the summer convention of the American Society of Civil Engineers at Denver in June, was highlighted by presentation of many technical papers by Bureau engineers and by open house events held on June 17.
Se ble.
Hors oms.
The Bureau of Reclamation again this year assumed an even greater role in the operation of the technical assistance programs of the United States.
Each year since the end of the Second World War, the Bureau has received an increasing number of requests from abroad for technical services.
In response, the Bureau, through the Office of Foreign Activities, has arranged to send technical personnel overseas, and has acted as host to trainees, official observers, and accredited visitors.
Most of the work of this nature which the Bureau has done has been carried out in conjunetion with the Technical Cooperation Administration of the Department of State under the terms of Pub.
Law 400, 82d Cong.
Although the foreign technical assistance programs of the United States Government are directed primarily at benefiting other countries, the Bureau of Reclamation nevertheless profited a great deal from the resulting exchange of technical and general information about the development of water resources the world over.
During the last fiseal year, there were 33 missions overseas in 22 different countries involving 92 Bureau technicians.
All of these technical assistance projects came about as a result of specific requests from the countries concerned and approved by the Department of State or by MSA.
Under the point IV program, missions were sent to Costa Rica, Ecuador, Ethiopia, India, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Nicaragua, and Pakistan.
Other Bureau personnel went on technical assistance assignments to Australia, Ceylon, Chile, and New Zealand under the provisions of Pub.
Law 402, 80th Cong.
In fiscal year 1952, the Bureau received from the various agencies which direct the foreign assistance programs a total of $1,845,000 for its contribution to these programs.
This amount contrasts vividly with the $247,000 which was paid to the Bureau for its participation in the program for the fiscal year 1951.
In terms of newly irrigated acres and installed hydroelectric capacity, the Bureau in its foreign activities work is concerned with a program of water resource development which is larger than all it has done in the United States in the last 50 years.
During this past fiscal year, increased emphasis was placed on active participation by the Bureau of Reclamation in the various international meetings connected with the development of water resources.
Conference, Large Electric High-Tension Systems, International Commission on Large Dams, International Association of Hydraulic Research, United Nations Economic and Social Council Conference on Flood Control, International Geographical Union, and the Sixth International Grasslands Congress.
In November 1951, the Commissioner delivered a series of 16 lectures on the Administration and Execution of Natural Resources Development at the FAO Latin American Training Center in Santiago, Chile.
Since that time, these lectures have been prepared for use by colleges and universities, and they have been translated into several foreign languages so that they might be employed in the point IV program overseas.
Continued efforts to establish a United States National Committee of the International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage met with success, and definite plans were made to hold the organizational meeting early in fiscal year 1953.
The Bureau also accorded strong support to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization in its fight against world food shortages and in its land reform programs.
The International Reclamation Conference was one of the high spots of the year.
Planned by the Office of Foreign Activities, the meeting was attended by 30 high reclamation officials representing the governments of 24 nations.
Papers were given on planning, construction, economies, and agriculture by the foremost authorities of the Bureau.
The Columbia Basin was used as a laboratory, and this distinguished group of engineers and administrators participated in one of the most extensive and detailed examinations ever attempted of a basin development project.
The Bureau of Reclamation continues to play a very important part in the training of foreign nationals in water resource development.
During fiscal year 1952, 350 foreign officials and engineers representing 60 nations toured various projects and visited Bureau field offices to observe Reclamation practices.
Of this number, 71 were in-service trainees who studied engineering and administration in the Denver engineering offices and laboratories or at other Bureau installations.
A number of Bureau trainees returned to their countries, and they are now working side by side with Bureau employees on point IV and other projects.
At the request of several foreign governments and with the approval of the Department of State, the Bureau performed testing, research, design review, and other similar services in connection with various development projects abroad.
The Bureau is continuing to review for the Government of Thailand the design work for Chao Phya Dam which has been done in that country under the supervision of two Bureau men.
The exchange of technical and general information about the development of water resources continued at an increasing rate during fiscal year 1952.
The Bureau received requests from foreign nationals for information, publications, photographs, and similar material.
Insofar as facilities permitted, these materials were supplied.
Exchanges of publications with the agencies of foreign governments also increased in volume.
For several months it has been evident that a central clearing house was needed to collect, compile, analyze, and correlate the available data on geography, topography, hydrology, water and land use, electrie power, irrigation, water laws, land tenure, and related engineering practices of the world over.
Data of this type have been continually in demand by other government agencies as well as by the personnel involved in the Bureau's own foreign program.
In order to prepare personnel who were going abroad on technical missions, country reports were assembled on Chile, Ecuador, Ethiopia, and Peru.
With the inereasing need for material of this nature, a Branch of Technical Analysis was established in the Office of Foreign Activities to assemble data on all of the TCA countries.
It is planned that the Branch of Technical Analysis will prepare additional country reports which, with the others, will be continually revised to insure the inclusion of all the latest available information.
During fiscal year 1953, when the Branch of Technical Analysis has been completely staffed, it will be possible to increase the flow of water resources development information into this office through cooperation with the Foreign Service, correspondence with Bureau personnel overseas, and through continuing contacts with foreign engineers who have visited or have trained with the Bureau of Reclamation in the United States.
It is anticipated that there will be a further increase in the scope and magnitude of the part the Bureau of Reclamation will play in this Government's foreign technical assistance programs during the coming fiscal year.
It is estimated that during fiscal year 1953, the cost of the technical services which the Bureau will be requested to supply will be in the neighborhood of $2,700,000.
The Bureau's participation in these foreign aid projects will continue insofar as the domestic program will permit it, and as the funds are made available by the Technical Cooperation Administration and the other sponsoring agencies.
The Division of Operation and Maintenance is responsible for keeping irrigation water flowing down the ditch to 125,000 farms consisting of 6,713,000 acres on which 410,000 settlers live, as well as making certain that the irrigation facilities on 69 projects are kept in good repair to assure the best and most economical use of the water.
These facilities include 108 storage and 71 diversion dams, more than 18,000 miles of canals and laterals, more than 5,500 miles of drains, 331 major pumping plants and an estimated 10,550 miles of operating roads.
Actually the Reclamation family numbers almost 2,000,000.
In addition to the number of settlers on the projects, at least 1,500,000 persons living in nearby towns and villages are dependent on the Reclamation program.
Bureau facilities were extended in 1951 to make full or supplemental water service available to an additional 688,000 acres, making the total 6,713,000 irrigable aeres, compared with 6,025,000 acres in 1950.
Farmers on Reclamation projects raised crops with a new all-time all-high gross value, $821,722,000 or an increase of $243,484,000 over the 1950 return, the previous all-time high, which was $578,238,000.
This marked the sixth consecutive year that crop values exceeded the half billion dollar mark and brought the cumulative value of Reclamation crops produced since 1906 to $7,983,529,000.
This is approximately four times the amount invested in all Bureau projects to date.
The average gross crop value per cultivated acre was $138.29 for 1951.
This was an increase of $26.86 over the $111.43 average value for 1950 and marked the seventh successive year of average crop values in excess of $100 per acre.
More than 22 million tons of food, forage, fiber, were produced on Reclamation lands in 1951 as compared with 16 million tons plus in 1950.
Of the 1951 total, 4,674,267 tons consisted of fruits, nuts, vegetables, and pulses—the so-called protective food.
The acreage distribution of crops shows that hay and forage constituted the largest acreage group with 41.5 percent of the total, followed by cereals with 22.7 perceut, and cotton with 10.3 percent.
The irrigation of western desert lands makes possible the production of high value crop specialties.
Among the top money makers were fresh market tomatoes on the Coachella division of the All-American Canal which grossed $2,500 per acre, strawberries on the Salt River averaged $2,200 per acre and a small acreage of hops on the Umatilla project averaged $1,980 per acre.
Thirty-four projects or divisions of projects reported over 93,000 acres producing crops with values in excess of $500 an acre.
Specialty crops grown on this acreage were valued at over $65,000,000.
The ability to produce this almost endless bounty year after year through a controlled and assured water supply will always remain one of the greatest attributes of Reclamation development.
The types of crops raised on western irrigated lands inelude many products not available in other places in the United States and thus fall in the noncompetitive category.
Relative amounts of water supplied from Bureau works varied widely due to differences in crop requirements, rainfall, soils, extent to which adequate supplies from other sources exist, and other factors.
The highest amount was reported on the Yuma Mesa division of the Gila project in Arizona where nearly 15 acre-feet per acre were delivered to farmers' headgates.
The lowest average supply was furnished on the Malta division of the Milk River project in Montana where records show about one-half acre-foot per acre was supplied to Bureau works.
Water supplies were generally adequate except in the Southwest where shortages were experienced on the Rio Grande, Carlsbad, and Salt River projects.
During the fiscal year 1952 the Bureau opened for settlement 12,351 acres, comprising 201 farm units on the Columbia Basin and the Gila projects.
The farm units on the Columbia Basin project were sold under the provisions of the Columbia Basin project act, while the farm units on the Gila project were opened for homestead entry under the provisions of the Reclamation and Homestead laws.
The land openings on the Columbia Basin included nine full-time farm units and 53 part-time farm units, comprising 694 aeres of land in the Quincy Columbia Basin irrigation district, 80 farm units, comprising 4,759 acres in the East Columbia Basin irrigation district and 32 farm units, comprising 2,868 acres in the South Columbia Basin irrigation district.
The opening on the Gila project involved 4,030 acres of land, comprising 27 farm units.
While the number of farm units opened to settlement during the fiscal year was slightly in excess of the number opened the previous year, the number of applications received for these farm units was greatly in excess of those received in former years.
A total of 16,321 applications were received for the 148 family-sized farm units or an average of 110 applications per farm unit.
A large proportion of the irrigation facilities now under construction or scheduled for future construction by the Bureau will serve privately owned lands.
The amount of public or Government-acquired lands which is to be served by irrigation facilities is becoming relatively scarce, while the demand on the part of veterans for this land appears to be increasing.
However, it is anticipated that in each of the next few years from 100 to 200 farm units will be available for settlement.
Limited finances have always been and continue to be a problem for new settlers; however, the credit situation has been greatly alleviated during the past few years through loans made to new settlers on Reclamation projects by the Farmers Home Administration of the Department of Agriculture.
Under the provisions of Public Law 361, Eighty-first Congress, the Farmers Home Administration can grant loans to entrymen prior to the time they obtain patent to the land.
On several projects from 60 to 80 percent of the settlers have obtained loans from this source.
The size of the individual loans ranged from $500 where water facilities only are involved to $20,000 or more where land development, housing and farm operating loans are granted.
This increase in available credit has resulted in a more rapid development of the new farm units.
Whereas it formerly required a number of years to bring a new farm under irrigation development, many new settlers have developed 80 percent or more of their irrigable area by the end of the second year.
Excellent cooperation exists between the Bureau of Reclamation and the Farmers Home Administration, and the Bureau has worked closely with the Administration in supplying it with information relative to land which is to be opened for settlement and in assisting it in estimating the credit needs of new settlers.
Sixteen development farms have been established in new irrigated areas of the Columbia Basin, Missouri Basin, Gila, and Riverton projects to determine and demonstrate, for the benefit of new irrigation farmers, the most efficient methods of irrigation, the best cropping practices and the crops best adapted to these areas.
Five of these farms were established during the year.
A part of each farm is generally devoted to research which is conducted by State experiment stations and U. S. Department of Agriculture agencies on water use, fertilizers, crops, and other subjects.
Field days and tours are conducted on the farms each year for the benefit of the new settlers.
The findings of the research are reported annually and already have proved of great value to the new farmers in these areas.
The development farms are established as far as possible in advance of irrigation on the project so information will be available when the settlers start to cultivate and irrigate their lands.
A fundamental prineiple of Reclamation law is that the cost of project construction be repaid by the water users and other beneficiaries.
In keeping with that principle, during fiscal year 1952 repayment contracts having a face value totalling $90,513,600 were entered into with 12 irrigation districts to assure the return of the cost of construction of irrigation works on new projects.
In addition, delivery of water to 6 new contracting entities is provided for by water service type contracts executed during the year with various irrigation districts and municipalities.
Further substantial progress was made during the year, pursuant to sections 4 and 7 of the Reclamation Project Act of 1939, in modifying repayment contracts with irrigation distriets in financial difficulties to assure sound repayment arrangements based on economic and land classification surveys.
Amendatory repayment contracts were entered into with 22 irrigation districts on 7 Federal reclamation projects involving the repayment of some $45,170,000.
The Congressional approval necessary in connection with the amendatory contracts with 18 of the 22 irrigation districts was provided in specific legislation enacted during the year.
In accordance with the act of October 7, 1949, as amended, reimbursement of the cost of rehabilitation and betterment work was provided for in contracts negotiated with 4 irrigation districts in the total amount of $1,796,000.
The rehabilitation and betterment program of the Bureau of Reclamation was continued during fiscal year 1952 in order to take care of extensive items of deferred maintenance on some of the older Reclamation projects.
This program, in accordance with the act of October 7, 1949, as amended, requires full reimbursement by the water users of all funds expended.
A total of $2,852,450 appropriated by the Congress for this work during the year was allotted to eleven projects.
All work contemplated under the rehabilitation and betterment program for accomplishment of the Grand Valley project, in Colorado, and the Yakima project, in Washington, was substantially completed by June 30, 1952.
The work on the various projeets ineluded replacement of old wood structures; repair or replacement of old concrete and steel structures; cleaning and repair of canals, laterals, wasteways, and drains, installation of canal lining to prevent excessive water losses; construction of drains; and the construetion and repair of operating roads, cattle guards, fences, and many other items as required to place the projects in first-class operating condition.
Under the Bureau's program of soil and moisture conservation operations, efforts were continued on the control of erosion on public lands under Reclamation jurisdiction; protection of reservoirs, canals, and other irrigation works from siltation; and prevention of water losses detrimental to irrigation projects.
This work is accomplished throughout the 17 Western States by individual effort of the Bureau of Reclamation and through effective cooperation with all other interested agencies in each of the areas concerned, particularly with the Bureau of Land Management, the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the Forest Service, the Soil Conservation Service, and soil conservation districts.
Representative of these activities are the stabilization and conservation of public lands in the Columbia Basin, and on watershed areas tributary to reservoirs of the Central Valley project, through revegetation, structures, etc.
One major area of maintenance not yet fully current, and which may become increasingly critical, is the improvement of project drainage and seepage control.
In recent years, there has been general intensification of drainage activities on older projects.
Cleaning and improvement of existing drains and extension of the system to additional areas has been a paying proposition in these years of high farm prices.
On older projects, canal lining, in a number of cases, is being used with good effect to reduce seepage.
A number of the projects now in the construction program present especially important drainage problems.
In some cases, these new projects include substantial areas of soil that is easy to waterlog and difficult to drain.
In certain other cases, the terrain aggravates difficulties of waste water and surface runoff disposal.
In a large number of cases, the costs of drainage construction and maintenance are a major problem of project finances.
To a major extent, drainage can be provided only after a period of actual irrigation.
Generally, a good system of the ground water level observation has been established on all projects.
Close collaboration of the Chief Engineer, Operation and Maintenance, and the regional and project staffs provides ready attention to technical drainage problems as they develop.
By and large, however, progress is slow in improvement of the use of water which often is a major cause of seepage.
This special investigations program, aimed at a determination of materials, methods, and procedures that will result in the most economical canal linings, was initiated in 1946.
The investigations have included laboratory work in Denver and experimental field installations.
The work was continued during the past year by the Bureau of Reclamation directly and by utilization of the resources and experience of State colleges and the Soil Conservation Service, in cooperative studies.
Utilization of the findings and developments under this program in design and construction of new projects and in rehabilitation and betterment of older, existing projects has resulted in definite worth-while savings to the Government.
Evidence that costs of canal linings have been materially reduced and economical seepage control obtained in spite of general rising construction costs may be found in the construction records and reeords of bid prices over the past 6 years.
In 1946, the bid price of 3- to 4-inch thick reinforced concrete lining averaged elose to $3 per square yard.
In 1949 and 1950, the average bid price of the same thickness of unreinforced conerete lining was about $2.20 per square yard, and reports from the projects indicate that some 3-inch linings were actually being placed by Government forces in small laterals and farm ditches with subgrade-guided slip-forms for as little as $1.13 per square yard.
On the Delta-Mendota canal in California, an estimated saving of $2,850,000 resulted from elimination of reinforcing steel in the concrete linings of that job alone.
Costs of many miles of concrete and other hard-surface types of lining in the Central Valley, Columbia Basin, Gila, and other projects have been similarly reduced.
Progress of the investigations was reported in a bulletin titled, "Canal Linings and Methods of Reducing Costs" that is available to the general public through the Superintendent of Documents, U. S. Government Printing Office.
During the 50-year history of the Bureau of Reclamation perhaps no greater advancement in any operation and maintenance activity has been achieved than in the control of weeds on irrigation systems.
The hand seythe, hoe and mattock, and horse-drawn mowers, with their labor-consuming, expensive, temporary results are a far cry from the specialized efficient equipment and the methods of control developed, especially during the past decade.
These new methods have resulted in materially reducing the weed problems and water losses, and are annually saving many hundreds of thousands of dollars to the Government and the water users.
Many of these methods have been developed as a result of our cooperation with the Bureau of Plant Industry Soils and Agricultural Engineering, Department of Agriculture, and with State colleges.
The BPISAE has stationed a plant physiologist at our Denver laboratory to work with Bureau of Reclamation chemists and weed specialists and has established four weed-control stations in the West.
Perhaps the most outstanding development made in the Denver weed laboratory was the adaptation of aromatic solvents for controlling water weeds which, if uncontrolled, choke irrigation channels.
Working out methods and equipment for applying 2, 4-D to ditchbanks has solved the serious willow problem as well as giving control of annual weeds which impede the flow of water, cause large losses of water through transpiration and create other operation problems.
This new chemical is also being tested in the Southwest for the control of salt cedar (tamarisk) which has spread throughout that area and has caused considerable concern because of its encroachment on range and other areas, the potential flood hazard it creates and its enormous waste of water through transpiration.
The use of TCA and IPC for controlling grass weeds is being demonstrated on many projects.
Special aromatic oils for controlling Johnson grass is showing promise in the Southwest.
Rosin amine D acetate is being used to solve some of our algae problems.
Other new herbicides like CMU are coming in for their share of research to adapt them to the control of other weeds.
Active participation has been maintained in the inter-departmental weed control committee, composed of agencies of the Departments of the Interior and Agriculture, and which has as its function the exchange of weed control information and the coordination of weed control programs to prevent duplication of activities.
The grass-planting program on ditchbanks has been continued to prevent future weed problems and to furnish extra pasture for project farmers' livestock.
Grasses use less water than most weeds, they prevent erosion of ditchbanks and are excellent weed competitors.
À systematie program of seeding grasses has been formulated with the aim of establishing a grass sod on all projects as soon as possible after contruction is completed.
Maintenance costs and water losses due to weeds have been reduced to a minimum where this practice has beef followed.
The new poisonous weed halogeton has been found in a few areas on lands under the Bureau's jurisdiction.
Plans have been made to cooperate with other agencies in the control of this weed under the authority of the Halogeton Glomeratus Control Act which was approved by the President on July 14, 1952.
Construction of dams and reservoirs for irrigation and power development provides incidental but very definite benefits to the public through the creation of exceptional recreational opportunities.
This is particularly true in the more arid parts of the West.
Except in the Missouri River Basin, the Bureau of Reclamation is not authorized to expend funds for recreational development of reservoir areas.
At certain reservoirs where recreational possibilities are deemed to be of national significance, such as Lake Mead, on the Colorado River between Arizona and Nevada; Franklin D. Roosevelt Lake, on the Columbia River in Washington; Millerton Lake, on the San Joaquin River in California; and Shadow Mountain and Granby Lakes on the Colorado River in Colorado, responsibility for the development and administration of recreational facilities has been delegated to the National Park Service.
At certain other reservoirs which are located within the National Forest boundaries, recreational facilities are administered by the United States Forest Service.
There is an urgent need for legislation to provide authorization for the expenditure of nonreimbursable funds for the coordinated planning, development, and administration of the recreational resources at Reclamation dams and reservoirs.
During the past year, the Bureau of Reclamation also worked closely with the Fish and Wildlife Service and with the various State fish and game agencies for the protection, and where possible, enhancement of fish and wildlife values at reservoirs and on project lands.
In response to the request of the Chairman of the House Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs, a special report was prepared and published, in a 63-page booklet, outlining some of the significant values to recreation and fish and wildlife conservation that have resulted from developments of the Bureau of Reclamation throughout the 17 Western States.
During recent years, the flood control functions of Bureau reservoirs have added new operating responsibilities.
During the past year there was serious flood threat on virtually every stream on which there is a Bureau reservoir, with the exception of the Rio Grande and the Pecos Rivers.
By the high caliber performance of the field officials, reservoir operations in the spring throttled down flood crests with significant reduction of flood damages.
In region 1 in spite of the unusual amount of snow cover, Bureau operations on the upper Snake River held the discharge at Heise to 26,000 cubie feet per second, well below the normal flood stage.
In region 2, on the Sacramento River, with record snow storage above Shasta reservoir, the spring floods were completely controlled, leaving the reservoir full without spill.
In region 6, the new Shadehill Dam, barely finished, completely contained a flood of record, significantly minimizing damage to downstream areas.
Floods, particularly in the Salt Lake City area, and also along the Humboldt River, required very complicated control operations this spring.
The impressive summary of the spring's flood control operations emphasizes the importance of this function and forecasts that in the years ahead it will increase.
Associated with reservoir operations is channel work such as performed in region 3 under the Colorado River Front Work and Levee Act.
Those operations have the primary objective of correcting or preventing damage associated with downstream effects of reservoir storage and releases.
The first major reach of new channel was completed a year ago and it has functioned satisfactorily since.
Improvement of the second reach of channel is still in progress.
Operation and maintenance activities have been essentially of a cooperative character.
Basically, they depend on cooperation with the water users.
There also is continued need for cooperation with the construction forces to assure that project facilities will meet operating requirements with maximum feasible efficieney and economy.
Each year it is gratifying to report inereasingly close collaboration between the experienced operation and maintenance personnel who operate the existing projects and the design and construction staff who are building the new ones.
Another important field of cooperative work is with the agricultural agencies.
The Bureau's working relations with the State colleges and extension services and with the agencies of the Federal Department of Agriculture have continued to improve.
During the year, 51 memoranda of understanding or cooperative agreements with State colleges or other agencies were executed.
This brings the total of agreements now in effect to 151.
In the field and in national gatherings such as the Association of Land Grant Colleges and Universities, Bureau representatives have been welcomed as working partners.
In turn, the Bureau is utilizing the agricultural agencies increasingly for specialized technical information and for assistance to settlers in new irrigation areas.
The joint program on the Columbia Basin project is an outstanding example for all time of close teamwork to bring about maximum early development of project lands.
The inerease in the wealth of the Nation through Reclamation development can be measured in part by the direct contribution of reclamation projects to the national treasury.
Payments on the construction account by project water users or revenues from the sale of hydroelectric power are obvious expressions of this phenomenon.
The greatest single contribution of Reclamation projects, however, is through the payment of the various Federal taxes by the recipients of project benefits rather than through deposits made by them in the liquidation of some specific contractual obligation.
Income taxes paid into the Federal Treasury directly or indireetly as a result of Reclamation development since 1916 on fifteen selected project areas represent a return of over 31/2 times the total Federal construction cost of these units.
These Federal tax revenues in a sense constitute a return on the Federal investment in addition to the repayment of construction costs.
Significantly, much of the area included in Reclamation projects would have produced little or no Federal tax revenues in their native States.
Much of the land now irrigated would have remained a part of the great American desert and, if used for grazing or pasture purposes, would have only meager net income per acre.
Total Federal tax revenues from all Reclamation projects providing a full or supplemental irrigation water supply based on a projection of the 15-project analysis now exceed 2.5 billion dollars.
The effect of major Reclamation projects, such as the Columbia Basin, Colorado-Big Thompson, Missouri Basin, and the Central Valley, on Federal tax revenues will not be felt for many years to come.
No a t e ion.
Installation and production of hydroelectric power capacity took great strides on the multipurpose projects of the Bureau of Reclamation during fiscal year 1952.
By June 30, 1952, the total installed capacity in power plants constructed and operated by the Bureau of Reclamation was 4,181,200 kilowatts.
This increase of 241,700 kilowatts, together with the existing facilities, served market areas in the western United States with much-needed electric energy for industrial and domestic purposes.
The sales of electric energy during the fiscal year totaled 25,332,204,310 kilowatt-hours, which brought in revenues of $43,310,035 to the Treasury.
During fiscal year 1953, the Bureau is scheduled to increase power produetion capacity 342,950 kilowatts.
A summary of fiseal year 1952 power sales and revenues by projects is shown in table 9.
Bureau plants.
Applications for power service continued to mount and contracts for the sale of energy are being processed to provide for the widespread distribution and integrated use of power to be produced from plants now under construction.
Many applications from industrial and rural areas for blocks of power have been received by the Bureau of Reclamation but many of the demands could not be met because the present power production is fully utilized and a good deal of the future production committed.
This has a great bearing on the defense production of the country.
The continuing demand by preferential customers in the rural areas is still a major factor contributing to the increasing power requirements in many areas.
These requirements are being met by transmission-line construction where necessary and financially feasible and by wheeling arrangements with other utilities already in the area.
The Bureau of Reclamation is continuing to plan the development of power consistent with multipurpose development of the West's valuable water resources.
During the fiscal year ending June 30, 1952, the Bureau had 24 power plants with a total nameplate capacity of 4,181,200 kilowatts, an increase of 241,700 kilowatts capacity over the fiscal year 1951 figure.
Power plants operated by other agencies, principally water users' organizations, on Reclamation projects totaled 16, of which 9 were originally constructed by the Bureau.
These nine plants have an installed capacity of 30,827 kilowatts; the seven other plants constructed by th water users' organizations have an installed capacity of 72,500 kilowatts.
At the end of fiscal year 1952, the Bureau of Reclamation had under construction 14 new power plants, which will have an ultimate installed nameplate capacity of 842,050 kilowatts.
The United States Army Corps of Engineers is proceeding with the construction of its plants on the Missouri River Basin project.
The Bureau of Reclamation will be the marketing agent for energy generated by all plants constructed by the Corps on the Missouri River Basin project.
Authorized to be construeted by the Bureau of Reclamation as of June 30, 1952, are 22 power plants, with a total capacity of 869,300 kilowatts.
The status of hydroelectric power plants on Reclamation projects is shown in table 10.
By June 30, 1952, the Bureau of Reclamation had 6,418.1 miles of high-voltage transmission lines in operation.
It was accomplished by the completion of construction and placing in operation 856.14 miles of line and dismantling 18.84 miles of line during fiscal year 1952.
Transmission lines placed in operation during the fiscal year are shown in table 11.
Construction was continuing on approximately 2,500 miles of transmission lines at the end of fiscal year 1952.
A great number of these lines are scheduled to be placed in operation during fiscal year 1953.
During fiscal year 1952, 130 contracts for delivery of power were executed.
Included among these are 22 contracts with private utilities, 53 contracts with REA cooperatives, 11 with municipalities, 26 with other Federal agencies, 4 with irrigation districts, 4 with public power districts, 2 with State authorities, and 8 miscellaneous-type contracts.
Fourteen of the 26 contracts with other Federal agencies were contracts with various Department of Defense agencies throughout the western area of the United States.
A number of contracts executed were renewals of operating contracts or revisions of existing contracts resulting from changed operating conditions.
The Bureau continued its policy of contracting whenever possible with private utilities and cooperatives for wheeling power and energy over existing facilities.
The Bureau also entered into several interchange agreements with cooperatives and utilities.
In the Bureau's region 5 area, which covers Texas, New Mexico, and part of southern Colorado, the Bureau is actively negotiating and has executed several contracts for the sale of supplemental power and energy to augment its hydroelectric generation in the area.
A summary by classification of customers served by Reclamation during 1952 is shown in table 12.
The Bureau of Reclamation at the end of fiscal year 1952 has 431 contracts under negotiation.
In this number are ineluded 192 contracts with municipalities, 131 with REA cooperatives, 32 with private utilities, 29 with public-power districts, 21 with other Federal agencies, 10 with State authorities, 7 with irrigation districts, and 9 miscellaneous-type contracts.
A number of these are to renew existing contracts or to revise contracts in existence due to changes in operating conditions.
A large number of contracts under negotiation are for future power deliveries at such time as additional generating capacity now under construction is placed in operation.
Seventeen of the 21 contracts with other Federal agencies are contracts with various agencies within the Department of Defense.
The project-planning program of the Bureau of Reclamation provides for the planning of basin and project developments for utilization of the water resources of the West and of Alaska.
Except in the area in the Missouri River Basin project, the activities in the projectplanning program are financed with appropriations for general investigations.
Recent appropriations for general investigations have been less than the amounts requested in the President's budgets.
The size of the appropriations has varied in amount from year to year.
Consequently, the program also has been fluctuating in size, whereas it is in the interest of economy and efficiency that the investigation program be kept upon a substantially, constant rate basis.
There have been outstanding increases in the population in the West and in Alaska during and since World War II which have aggravated deficiencies in water and electric-power supplies in these regions.
In certain areas heavy defense installations have caused new and large demands for additional power and municipal and industrial water, so that the needs for investigations of potential water and power developments are increasing.
As a result, there is constant demand from local and State interests throughout the West to continue investigations in progress or to initiate new investigations, or to resume uncompleted investigations deferred because of lack of funds.
The needs for planning are critical throughout the West and Alaska.
In the Pacific Northwest, the Bureau's current construction program for development of water and related resources consists almost entirely of the Palisades project and the irrigation features of the Columbia Basin project.
The construction of Hungry Horse Dam is nearing completion.
Aside from these, the Bureau has no authorized projects other than the relatively small Kennewick Division of the Yakima project and portions of the Minidoka project.
In California the initial features of the Central Valley project are practically completed, and construction is continuing on the Folsom Power Plant.
In this area, only the Sly Park and Sacremento River canal units, and the Solano project remain authorized for construction.
In the entire Colorado River and inland basins, some very small items are under construction, and only the Deer Creek Power Plant, the Weber Basin project, and a few miscellaneous minor items are authorized for construction.
In the Southwest, which also is practically without a construction program, the only projects eligible for construction without authorization or reauthorization are the Middle Rio Grande and the Canadian River projects.
Thus it is clear that the investigation program is barely keeping ahead of the present reduced construction program, and any further curtailment of the investigation program is sure to have adverse repercussions in the character and size of the future construction programs which are of such great importance in the development of water and related resources of the West.
The general investigation program should proceed undiminished even during times of national stress, as at present, because of the longrange aspects of the program.
It requires considerable time to make adequate investigations, and maintenance of an adequate program of investigations is essential to insure the availability of projects for construction in future years.
Many of the projects being investigated are needed now, and others will be needed in the future to maintain the essential civilian economy.
During fiscal year 1952 the Bureau of Reclamation has continued the Arkansas, White, and Red River Basin investigations in cooperation with the other interested Federal agencies under the field committee established by the Federal Interagency River Basin Committee on June 12, 1950.
The report on the survey of the Washita River, Okla., a subbasin of the Red River Basin, was completed, reviewed by the affected States and Federal agencies, and transmitted to the President.
The Bureau has under way a number of other basin surveys of western streams.
The report on the Deer Creek Power Plant, Deer Creek division, Provo River project, Utah, was completed and was forwarded to the President by the Secretary with a finding of feasibility authorizing the project under Reclamation law.
The reports on the Collbran project in Colorado were submitted to the Congress and were printed as House Document 216, Eighty-second Congress.
Reports on the Hells Canyon division and the Scriver Creek power facilities of the Mountain Home division of the Snake River project, Idaho and Oregon, were submitted to the Congress by the Secretary in fiscal year 1952 with recommendations for authorizations of the projects by Congress.
Bills were introduced in Congress to authorize these projects, and hearings were held in fiscal year 1952.
The bill to authorize the Collbran project was passed by both Houses at the end of the fiscal year and transmitted to the President for signature.
A reconnaissance report on the potential development of the water resources in the Territory of Alaska was submitted to the Congress in July 1951, and is being printed as House Document 197, Eightysecond Congress.
Reports on the Central Valley project (ultimate plan), Kings River division, North Fork Kings unit; Deschutes project, Oregon, domestie water system; Fryingpan-Arkansas project, Colorado (formerly called Gunnison-Arkansas project, Roaring Fork diversion, initial development) ; and lower Nueces River project, Texas, after review by the affected States and Federal agencies, were forwarded to the President.
Interstate-compact activity during fiscal year 1952 was somewhat less than in the previous year.
The Bureau of Reclamation continued to give assistance in every way practical to the State and Federal representatives on those compacts in the active stage.
Congressional approval was obtained for the compacts covering the Canadian River in New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Texas, and the Yellowstone River in Montana, North Dakota, and Wyoming, which were ratified by the appropriate State legislatures last year.
There was no activity during the year on the Cheyenne River Compact, negotiations for which were completed, but ratification by the Wyoming legislature not obtained.
There was little activity on the Bear River Compact.
Congressional approval was obtained for Texas and Louisiana to negotiate a compact on the Sabine and Neches Rivers, and Col. L. W. Prentiss, of the Corps of Engineers, was appointed as Federal representative.
The Bureau of Reclamation is interested in this stream because of possible water service to the Coastal Plain to the west.
Legislation was passed by the Congress at the close of the year, and Presidential approval has since been given, permitting Idaho, Montana, Oregon, Washington, and Wyoming to enter negotiations toward a compact for the Columbia River and its tributaries.
An interstate suit was brought by Texas against New Mexico in the Supreme Court to require compliance by New Mexico with terms of the Rio Grande Compact.
This matter vitally affects the Bureau's Rio Grande project in New Mexico-Texas, below Elephant Butte Reservoir, and the Bureau's Middle Rio Grande project above the reservoir.
Hydrologic studies are vital to the planning and operation of irrigation, hydroelectric power, flood-control or drainage works.
During fiscal year 1952 the impounding of 1,000,000 acre-feet of water, on schedule, behind Hungry Horse Dam in Montana, while still under construction, serves as an example of applied hydrology.
Some basic hydrologic studies being conducted by the Bureau of Reclamation include investigations of observed flood peaks and water yield, porosity, and infiltration and retention capacities of soils, meteorology of rainstorms, transportation and deposition of sediment, behavior of ground water, and characteristics of snow.
The results of these studies are used to determine the required reservoir and spillway capacities, and the flood frequencies, and for flow forecasting and general operational purposes.
Other studies include special surveys and the development, testing, and improvement of methods of utilizing basic data for more precise determination of required capacities.
Among these were extensive infiltration surveys made in Wyoming and Montana.
Uncertainty regarding the required capacities of reservoirs and spillways may result in overdesign for safety, and infiltration tests provide better information for eliminating some of these uncertainties.
A new procedure for computing the daily discharge resulting from snowmelt, based on daily maximum temperatures, is being developed and has already been given a limited application.
In general, studies of improved methods are of great importance because the improved procedures will allow greater safety and probably will result in reduced construction costs.
Hydrologic studies of streams in the western United States were continued for the purpose of obtaining the maximum possible beneficial use of the waters of the West for irrigation, power, municipal and industrial uses, fish and wildlife conservation, stream-pollution abatement, recreation, and other incidental uses.
In order to improve the bases for its technical work, the Bureau of Reclamation has compiled data and is making studies of the use of water on Federal irrigation projects, and a report on these studies will be issued in fiscal year 1953, which recommends a course of action for improving estimates of water requirements.
Other research and special studies were conducted as a basis for solution of the unusual problems accompanying water-resource development.
Collaboration was intensified with the Corps of Engineers and the Weather Bureau upon data-reporting networks.
This includes intimate details of hydrologic studies aimed at advanced precision in reservoir and river regulation by the expanding facilities of the Missouri River Basin project.
A radio-reporting stream-flow network in the Pecos River drainage basin in New Mexico was activated in cooperation with the Geological Survey.
A series of tests were conducted on an experimental radio-transmitting rain and snow gage in the Sacramento River drainage basin below Shasta Dam.
The groundwork is being laid for future reservoir and river regulation of the complex system developing in the Columbia River drainage basin, through detailed consideration of hydrologic data-reporting networks.
These illustrate the advancements in the hydrology of operation of reservoir and river systems.
The second progress report, covering the 1949 snowmelt season, on studies of snowmelt in the headwaters of the Colorado River was distributed.
These studies were conducted in collaboration with the Forest Service.
Detailed evaporation field investigations which were conducted in cooperation with the United States Navy Electronics Laboratory, the Geological Survey, and the Weather Bureau at Lake Hefner, near Oklahoma City, Okla., were terminated at the end of August 1951, and much of the equipment used on these studies was transferred to Lake Mead for use in making a more accurate determination of the evaporation loss from Lake Mead.
The Bureau has continued investigations on development of water resources on international streams on the border of the United States and Canada.
The Canadian Section of the International Joint Commission presented to the United States Section a draft of a proposed treaty for apportionment between the two countries of the waters of the Waterton and Belly Rivers in Montana and Alberta.
The United States Section, through its engineering board, field committee, and the State of Montana, took the Canadian proposal under consideration.
Project-planning feasibility reports made to secure authorization of a potential project present a comprehensive plan for orderly development and conservation of the water and related resources, with sufficient data and studies to determine probable engineering and financial feasibility to a degree sufficient to enable recommendation for or against proceeding with the potential development.
Considerable detailed studies and exploratory work usually remains to be done following this stage before sufficient data are available to start the preparation of final designs and specifications.
Therefore, following the authorization of a project, there is need for a report on the additional studies, including investigations and negotiations consummated prior to construction that are required to determine the definite plan of development for the project.
Such a report, known as the definite-plan report, is prepared for internal or administrative use on the whole project, or for a unit of the project, depending on the size and complexity of the plans for development of the project.
Gila project, Arizona, Wellton-Mohawk division.
Hungry Horse project, Montana.
Kendrick project, Wyoming, Aleova power plant.
Missouri River Basin project, Frenehman-Cambridge division, Nebraska.
Drafts of several other definite-plan reports were under review at the end of the fiscai year.
Legislative action on artificial precipitation and salt-water conversion progressed considerably during the second session of the Eighty-second Congress.
The two subjects were considered individually, and two new bills (S. 2225 and H. R. 6578) on artificial precipitation and salt-water conversion, respectively, were acted upon.
S. 2225 was passed by the Senate and was under consideration by the Interstate and Foreign Commerce Committee of the House when the session ended.
The Bureau has been represented on the departmental committee on artificial precipitation and has continued to keep abreast of developments in this field of interest to Reclamation.
H. R. 6578 was passed by both Houses in the closing days of the fiscal year and was sent to the President for signature on June 30, 1952.
The bilī prcvides for the Seeretary of the Interior to conduct a program of research and development to evolve more economical methods of saline-water conversion, the majority of the technical work to be conducted by private organizations.
Provision is also made for participation and cooperation by other civil and military agencies of the Federal Government.
The bill authorizes the expenditure of $2,000,000 over a period of 5 years to finance the program.
With the substantial completion of the conversion to the new accounting system at hand, as fiscal year 1952 began, the chief efforts of the system's personnel during the fiscal year were focused on improvements and refinements in techniques dictated by experience with the new system and certain qualifications contained in the Comptroller General's approval of the system dated October 6, 1950.
Continuous attention was directed to maintain the modern and utility recognized practices as applied to Government accounting and to provide management at the various administrative levels in the Bureau with operational data readily available in the accounts for improved administration of work.
Accounting techniques for depreciation were accorded special consideration, and procedures applicable to revenue-producing property of the Bureau were formulated during the fiscal year and tested in pilot installations.
Formal adoption of these procedures in finance offices of the Bureau was made effective July 1, 1952.
The Bureau's procedures conform to the depreciation concepts promulgated by the Federal Power Commission and will result in financial statements comparable with those of public-service corporations.
The Bureau of Reclamation has a twofold objective in properly estimating and accounting for depreciation.
First, in accordance with the Bureau's continuing policy of adopting sound business practices, it is necessary that the Bureau's statements of financial operations reflect the real cost of rendering service (including depreciation as an expense) rather than reflect only out-of-pocket costs which exclude depreciation as a current expense.
Secondly, that the maintenance accounts include only those costs which neither materially add to the value of the property nor appreciably prolong its life, but merely keep it in efficient operating condition, thus enabling administrators to make reasonable comparisons of such costs from year to year.
In order to improve the power-accounting methods of the Bureau, reviews were made in the applicable finance offices to determine the extent of uniformity of the data yielded.
In addition, the poweraccounting methods and techniques were compared with modern utility-accounting practices.
This has resulted in the preparation of cost data which enable the Bureau's administrators to compare the results of operation among power projects and also with that of private utilities in their respective areas.
The increasing attention being given by the Congress to the cost of operation of the various offices of the Bureau, particularly the cost of administrative and general expenses (and personal services as a segment of these expenses), caused the launching of a monthly cost report during the fiscal year on these matters.
Each finance office prepares a report from the accounting records which contains prescribed detail accounts to accumulate the data.
It is contemplated that the managerial personnel of the Bureau will utilize the information in the reports to obtain necessary data for appraising staffing and operational costs of the activities and offices under their jurisdiction.
In addition, the source of financing for defraying the expenses of their various endeavors will also be revealed in the reports.
In assembling the reports from the various offices of the Bureau, the regional offices and the Commissioner's office, at their respective levels, are provided ready data for comparing the operating burden in the different areas.
Generally, it is expected that reporting of this type will prove a dynamic instrument in aiding the managerial employees of the Bureau to reduce operating costs or improve the effectiveness of controlling them.
In conformance with the emphasis on streamlining the accounting operations of the Federal Government, the on-site audit program of the GAO was expanded'in geographical scope during the fiscal year, and effective January 1, 1952, all finance offices of the Bureau were encompassed under it.
The Bureau has received reports from the General Accounting Office resulting from the on-site audit of finance offices prior to January 1.
These reports were carefully studied by the responsible administrators for appropriate action.
In the main the reports disclosed that the accounts of the offices audited are being maintained in a satisfactory condition.
A factor in the effectiveness of the Bureau's Finance Manual is the manner in which its provisions are kept current with changing regulations prescribed by the Treasury Department, General Accounting Office, Bureau of the Budget, and the Congress.
During this fiscal year numerous revisions were made in the manual based on promulgations of these bodies of the Government.
In addition, the systems personnel directed their efforts toward self-designed changes and improvements in the manualized procedures resulting from experience gained in actual practice in finance offices and from finance conferences and joint studies conducted by members of the Washington and field staffs.
In the 4 years existence of the new accounting system of the Bureau, many inquiries have been received from individual offices seeking interpretations of the procedures covering special transactions.
Hence, in order to coordinate the interpretations and obtain uniform treatment under similar circumstances, the Bureau's Finance Manual is undergoing expansion to incorporate an appendix covering these interpretations.
This is another step on the part of the Bureau to conform its accounting and financial practices to those recognized by the various public regulatory commissions, such as Federal Power Commission, which have prescribed uniform systems of accounts.
During the 50 vears of the Bureau's existence voluminous files of accounting records and financial documents have been accumulated.
The disposition of the accounting material is being approached with careful planning and an eye to probable future need of old records and documents for sundry research and analytical purposes.
The first step taken has been to determine the condition of the files and the extent to which these copies can be isolated for disposal.
The General Accounting Office and the General Services Administration have approved for use by the Bureau of one Federal Records Center in Denver for all records and documents.
Also, the General Accounting Office is instituting a procedure whereby the Bureau will be formally notified of the completion of on-site audits and thereafter the finance offices can proceed with established regulations for retaining and disposing of accounting documents.
The uniformity and standardization expected from a manual are the functions of how the procedures are applied by operating personnel.
In full cognizance of this fact regional programs and finance conferences were continued during the fiscal year.
These symposiums have produced healthy interest in the Bureau's procedures and have promoted uniformity in the application of programing, budgeting, accounting, and reporting procedures.
The practice broadens the perspective of operating personnel with respect to the purposes of the Bureau's manual and permits these employees to appraise the effectiveness of programs and finance beyond the immediate microcosm of the working detail in their offices.
This has encouraged self-analysis and has resulted in a marked improvement in the data contained in financial statements and reports.
In recognition of these developments the monthly reporting has been considerably simplified and less analysis and review work is required.
Machine accounting was further expanded during the fiscal year to encompass several more finance offices.
The benefits anticipated from bookkeeping machines in prior installations have materialized into significant savings in the accounting operation.
Particular attention was devoted to the problem of uniform interpretation and application of those procedures as well as the elarification of points of ambiguity and misunderstandings of the instructions.
Substantial progress was made in solving this problem primarily by the visit of Washington office personnel to the field offices and the detail of regional personnel to the Washington office.
During the fiscal year particular attention was also devoted to the problem of improving the realism and accuracy of both the estimating of costs and the scheduling of flag actions.
Much greater emphasis and attention was paid to apportionments of funds than in previous years.
This additional workload resulted from the use by the Bureau of the Budget of the apportionment procedures as a means of controlling the Bureau of Reclamation's program in accordance with Presidential policies and criteria.
This necessitated closer review and coordination with both the programming and accounting documents.
The only major change in programing procedure was to provide for the identification on the operation and maintenance schedules of the cost of operating multipurpose facilities with an allocation of those costs to all applicable project functions, both reimbursable and nonreimbursable.
Be bie.
The Bureau of Reclamation's regular and supplemental appropriations for fiscal year 1952 amounted to $234,408,522, a decrease of $37,- 135,478 under fiscal year 1951.
With the unobligated balance of $34,145,355 from the previous year, the money available for Reclamation totaled $268,553,877.
The unobligated funds at the end of fiscal year 1952 totaled $49.5 million.
This unobligated balance resulted principally from the shortage of materials needed for the construction of power facilities and unanticipated delays in executing repayment contracts of which some are pending validation by the courts.
Another factor having a bearing on the unobligated balance was the limitation on the amount that could be expended for personal services which was placed on each of the four main appropriations of the Bureau.
Obligations for fiscal year 1952 totaled $217.6 million or 86.5 percent of the obligations programmed in 1952, as compared with 90.4 percent of the obligation program accomplished in fiscal year 1951.
In addition to the personal services limitation previously mentioned, the 1952 Appropriation Act imposed certain other restrictions on the Bureau, one of which prohibited the initiation of construction of transmission facilities in areas covered by power wheeling contracts unless the power company in such an area was unable or unwilling to construct them.
The limitation on the amount of money which may be used for performance of work by Government forces (force account work), first imposed upon the Bureau in 1949 Appropriation Act, was included again in the 1952 Appropriation Act.
The 1952 act carried the same limitation as appeared in the 1951 and 1950 Appropriation Acts, viz, not to exceed 12 percent of the allotment for any one project with a maximum of $225,000 to be used on any one project or unit of Missouri River Basin.
A limitation of $150,000 in the general administrative expenses appropriation was imposed upon expenditures for information work in 1952.
This is the same limitation as appeared in the 1951 and 1950 acts.
During fiscal year 1952, collection and compilation of the Bureau's basic statistical data on allotments and appropriations from 1902 through 1952, by projects and activities, by years, by funds, by functions and by States was practically completed, together with pertinent data on investments, costs, revenues, funds, and related items.
This information has been assembled for publication in 1953 in the form of a statistical appendix to the Secretary's annual report for administrative use.
Refinements were incorporated in the Bureau's basic summary cost and progress report including the establishment of "total cost" common base relating programs to accounts and reporting thereon.
Monthly reporting on year-end estimates of unobligated funds was supplemented with monthly reporting of year-end estimates of unliquidated obligations; the combination of both representing estimates of year-end unexpended funds for budget and programing purposes.
In addition to providing for all official reports on employment, a system was installed for carrying out the Jensen and Ferguson amendments of the 1952 Appropriation Act which placed limitations on personnel and personal services.
From July 1, 1951, to June 30, 1952, total employment dropped from 16,836 to 14,037.
Upon expiration of these limitations at the year-end, the Commissioner's personnel ceiling was reinstated for fiscal year 1953 to serve the same purposes in a more practical manner.
The personnel roster which lists all personnel of the Bureau by name, title, grade and salary was coded to show function, post of duty, and organizational unit of each employee for use in conjunction with both the Commissioner's personnel ceiling and the administrative and general expenses reports.
Program Briefs, a monthly summary of narrative high-light comments on construction accomplishments by projects and MRB units, was introduced in 1952 to keep top officials promptly informed on conditions, particularly where their assistance is required, and will be expanded in 1953 to include all other Reclamation activities.
Processing of the administrative and general expenses reports was undertaken in late 1952.
These reports, which replace the activity and object expenditures report in effect 1950 through 1952, provide management with adequate monthly information or organization, positions, employment, personal services, and other expenditures.
Coupled with the coded personnel roster, these reports will be used for improving the efficiency of Bureau operations during 1953.
The Washington Report, a biweekly periodical on newsworthy items and Bureau policies as expressed at the Commissioner's staff conferences, met its schedule in 1952 and will be continued in 1953; the monthly Programs and Finance Division report likewise.
Federal Power Commission FPC No. 1 reports on power projects were filed in accordance with instructions.
For 1953 these (1952) reports will be prepared to conform to the Bureau's accounting system, currently reflecting multipurpose plant and will be limited essentially to power data details.
The consolidated operating statement of Bureau of Reclamation power system is scheduled for publication early in 1953 covering fiscal year 1952.
A specaial publication program for 1953 was undertaken in late 1952 consisting of printed supplements to Bureau of Reclamation Appropriation Acts and Allotments and Bureau of Reclamation Project Feasibilities and Authorizations; a new edition of How Reclamation Pays; a revised edition of The Reclamation Program (for 1953-59), and the Statistical·Appendix.
In each instance published data will be up to date of June 30, 1952.
Serving as a center for clearing statistical data, various releases of the Bureau were checked and data compiled for numerous inquiries of Members of the Congress and to meet requests of other agencies and the public for information.
1 Prior to fiscal year 1916 funds were made available from the Reclamation fund by allotment authorized by the Secretary of the Interior.
Allotments made prior to Fallon, Nev., conference on July 27, 1907, were canceled and summary allot ments issued.
Original amounts excluded from total column.
Credit.
The Office of Comptroller has effectively discharged its delegated functions for unbiased evaluation of the financial affairs of the Bureau.
For the fiscal year 1952 the Comptroller has completed more assignments, rendered more reports, and covered a greater diversity of financial review than in any year since the office was founded.
The audit performance has been consistently such as to elicit expressions of confidence and commendation from those in a position to make a professional appraisal.
A total of 88 reports were issued by the Comptroller covering (1) comprehensive project audits, (2) varied special audits dealing with selective segments of the project accounts and operations, (3) water users' organizations, (4) surveys to ascertain compliance with prior audit and survey findings, and (5) review of data requisite for amendatory repayment contract negotiations.
During the year the comprehensive surveys by the Division of Audits of the Ġeneral Accounting Office have been expanded to provide total Bureau coverage.
4. The improvement of the reporting system to afford more effective presentation to top management, and to insure more frequent and rapid reporting.
In addition to the audit activity the Office of Comptroller continued to discharge its functions of financial policy and review in matters of repayment contracts, analyses of rate schedules, municipal finance and management, interagency agreements, external audit and investigational reports and legislation.
In summary, the Comptroller has effectively operated its small staff to insure adequate and comprehensive audit coverage of Bureau projects and ably discharged his function as financial adviser of the Bureau.
The fiscal year 1952 can record but few enaetments by the Congress of bills to carry forward the Reclamation program.
Two river compacts negotiated by the various affected States were consented to by the Congress.
The consent of the Congress to the Yellowstone River Compact among the States of Montana, North Dakota, and Wyoming was granted by the act of October 30, 1951 (Public Law 231, 82d Cong.).
In connection with the plan of this Department for improvements in the Yellowstone River Basin, as set forth in our Missouri River Basin plan, it is believed that the Yellowstone River Compact is an important step toward the harmonious realization of the contemplated developments.
The second compact concerns the waters of the Canadian River and was negotiated by the States of Oklahoma, Texas, and New Mexico.
The consent of the Congress to this compact was necessary before construction may be initiated on the proposed Canadian River project, Texas.
The act of March 6, 1952 (Public Law 273, 82d Cong.), is of importance to the Bureau of Reclamation in connection with the orderly administration of the amendatory repayment contract program.
That act continues until December 31, 1954, the authority of the Secretary to negotiate with water users' organizations amendments to repayment contracts and other form of obligations which had been entered into prior to August 4, 1939.
Also, it continues until that time the authority of the Secretary to grant deferments of construction charges in certain circumstances.
During the fiscal year five more amendatory repayment contracts, negotiated pursuant to section 7 of the Reclamation Project Act of 1939, were authorized by the Congress to be signed by the Secretary.
The contracts authorized to be executed by the Secretary on behalf of the United States by the act of June 23, 1952 (Public Law 402, 82d Cong.), concerned water users on the Owyhee, Riverton, Milk River, and Frenchtown Federal reclamation projects.
The act of Mareh 5, 1952 (Public Law 269, 82d Cong.), removed the requirement in section 3 of the act of September 27, 1950 (64 Stat. 1072), that the organization contracting with the United States for the return of the reimbursable cost of the Vermejo project have the power to tax personal property.
However, the organization must have the power to tax real property.
Notwithstanding the recommendations of the Department of the Interior, the Congress, by the act of June 27, 1952, removed the application of the excess-land provisions of the Federal reclamation laws to certain lands in the San Luis Valley project, Colorado.
H. R. 2813: To authorize the Secretary of the Interior to construct, operate, and maintain the Collbran Reclamation project, Colorado.
H. R. 6578: To provide for research into and development of practical means for the economical production, from sea or other saline waters, of water suitable for agricultural, industrial, municipal, and other beneficial consumptive uses.
H. R. 6163: To provide for authorization of a study and report of irrigation works in connection with Chief Joseph Dam.
H. R. 6723: To authorize the execution of certain amendatory repayment contracts negotiated pursuant to section 7 of the Reclamation Project Aet of 1939.
S. 3333: To authorize the acquisition of certain lands of the Shoshone and Arapaho Indian Tribes of the Wind River Reservation needed for the construction and operation and maintenance of the Boysen unit of the Missouri River Basin project.
Workin connection with litigation affecting the Bureau of Reclamation appeared to reach an all-time high during the fiscal year 1952.
Attorneys of the Bureau participated in such litigation, as amici curiae, by filing briefs and making oral argument, and by assisting attorneys of the Department of Justice in the conduct of trials and in the preparation and review of legal briefs, arguments, and stipulations.
1. In connection with the action Will Gill v. The United States, and three related cases in the Court of Claims, a settlement was approved by all the parties and judgment was entered providing for payment of approximately $195,900 to the plaintiffs.
These actions involved water rights of owners of land located along the San Joaquin River between Gravelly Ford and Mendota Pool, Central Valley project, California.
2. Judgments were entered in accordance with a stipulation in the action W. F. Brush v. The United States, and sixteen related cases, in the Court of Claims.
These actions involved the water rights of owners along the San Joaquin River below the mouth of the Merced River, Central Valley project, California.
The sum of the judgment plus interest amounted to approximately $250,000.
3. In regard to the attempt on the part of the objectors to obtain an injunction restraining the Board of Directors of the Kansas Bostwick Irrigation District for proceeding with the confirmation proceeding of its repayment contract with the United States, the Kansas Supreme Court handed down a decision to the effect that the contract should be confirmed.
After confirmation of the contract by the lower court, the parties opposing the confirmation served notice of an appeal to the United States Supreme Court.
That court denied the appeal on the grounds that no Federal question was involved.
1. Everett G. Rank v. Julius A. Krug, No. 685–ND, United States District Court for the Southern District of California.
This is a purported class action filed in 1947 to enjoin certain named Federal officials in the operation of Friant Dam and Reservoir, Central Valley project, California.
During the early part of the fiscal year 1952, the plaintiffs filed an amended complaint and a motion for a preliminary injunction which.
On August 4, with the consent of defendants, a temporary restraining order was made by the court providing for the release of 2,000 cubic feet per second of water from Friant Dam until certain channelization and pump rectification work was accomplished.by the defendants.
This work was immediately undertaken, and reduction in releases were made.
Further hearings were held and a new order was made by the court allowing further reductions in the amount of water released on condition that certain specified work be performed along the 37 miles of river below Friant Dam.
The court also ordered that proposed plans for a physical solution be submitted by the parties and that the merits of the case would be tried on January 19, 1952.
Pretrial hearings were held and proposed plans were submitted by the plaintiffs, the State of California, and the Bureau.
The trial was reset to begin on January 29, 1952.
The trial has been in session since that date and has continued into the fiscal year 1953.
2. Hollister Land and Cattle Co. v. Krug, No. 680–ND, United States District Court for the Southern Distriet of California, is an action brought by a purported class composed of all owners of land within the boundaries of the Grass Lands Water Association, an area of approximately 106,000 acres lying below Mendota Pool.
A motion for a preliminary injunction was filed July 27, 1951, coincident with a similar motion in Rank v. Krug.
Hearings on this motion were held in Fresno concurrent with the Rank v. Krug hearings.
On August 29, in court, the Bureau offered the plaintiffs a contract for delivery of project water under which the plaintiffs would ultimately pay only for that water to which they were not legally entitled.
Because of this offer the court refused to issue any temporary injunction and set the case for hearing on the merits at the same time as Rank y.
Krug.
This offer was not accepted by the plaintiffs.
A pretrial hearing was held on December 20, 1952, and the court entered an order that further hearings in this case would not be held until the hearing on the merits in Rank v. Krug was concluded.
3. Also pending in the United States Distriet Court for the Southern District of California are 11 inverse condemnation proceedings brought by owners of land in the Friant to Gravelly Ford area.
These cases are numbered 670-ND to 679-ND and 682-ND.
The plaintiffs are members of the purported class action in Rank v. Krug, and the cases have been taken off the calendar until that case is concluded.
4. Pacific Gas and Electric Company v. United States, No. 47972, filed in the Court of Claims, involves claims of the plaintiff company for a taking of a proposed steam-plant site in the Friant to Gravelly Ford area.
It is anticipated that hearings will be held before a commissioner in the near future.
5. Cotton Land Company et al. v. United States, No. 46422, filed in the United States Court of Claims in April 1945, was an action seeking to recover $890,596 for alleged flood damages to plaintiff's lands as a result of the construction and operation of Parker Dam, Parker Dam project.
Following the court's decision of January 5, 1948, holding the Government liable, and the court commissioner's supplemental report filed May 29, 1951, plaintiff's attorneys submitted an offer of compromise settlement on July 30, 1951, which was under consideration during the balance of that year.
Negotiations resulted in the filing of a stipulation for judgment and contract of settlement, in which plaintiffs agreed to convey to the United States approximately 1,675 acres of land, and to accept $82,264.33, plus interest at 4 percent per annum from December 15, 1951, in full settlement of all their claims, of which amount the Metropolitan water district of southern California agreed to pay 60 percent.
Judgment pursuant to the stipulation was entered in February 1952.
6. A report of the special master, and proposed finding of fact, conclusions of law, and decree were filed in the case of the United States v. Alpine Land & Reservoir Company, pending in the Distriet Court of the United States for the District of Nevada.
This suit was instituted to determine the priority and extent of water rights of the United States acquired for the Newlands project on the Carson River, California and Nevada.
Motions have been filed by various litigants to reopen the case for the taking of additional testimony and for intervention.
An effort is being made to stipulate a decree, and the court has granted extensions of time for the filing of objections to the proposed findings of fact, conelusions of law, and decree pending negotiations for a settlement.
7. The action United States v. Sierra Valley Water Company was filed in the District Court of the United States for the Northern District of California, northern division, to enjoin excessive diversions of water of the Little Truckee River in violation of the water rights of the United States acquired for the Newlands project, Nevada.
The case is at issue and ready for trial.
However, negotiations for settlement and for a stipulated decree are pending.
1. Ivanhoe Irrigation District v. All Parties and Persons, No. 39627, filed in the Superior Court of the State of California, in and for the county of Tulare, which is a proceeding for validation of the waterservice and distribution-system construetion contract between the district and the United States.
Hearings on demurrers by objectors to the contract continued through 1951.
After a trial of the facts in April 1951, the court asked for submission of briefs.
Oral arguments were made and final memoranda were filed at the close of the fiscal year 1952.
2. Madera Irrigation District v. All Parties and Persons, No. 8502, filed in the Superior Court of the State of California, in and for the county of Madera, which is a proceeding for validation of the waterservice and distribution-system construction contract between the district and the United States.
It is similar to Ivanhoe proceeding, but has additional complexities arising from the fact that excess landowners in the district claim vested rights to project water by virtue of the distriet's former ownership of certain lands and water rights.
Hearings were held and briefs were filed.
3. United States of America, petitioner v. Federal Power Commission, Pacific Gas and Electric Company, and Fresno Irrigation District, for itself and as trustee for others, No. 13265, filed in the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, is an action requesting review by the Cireuit Court of the proceedings had before the Federal Power Commission on application of the Pacific Gas & Electric Co., for license to develop power sites on the North Fork and main stem of the Kings River, and a similar application by the Fresno irrigation district et al. for a preliminary permit.
Case should come on for argument late in 1952.
December 22, 1947, for construction of the lateral distribution system and other works, Coachella division, All-American Canal system.
Defendant filed its answer May 31, 1952.
On June 30, the case was set over to July 7, 1952, for pretrial hearing on factual matters put in issue by defendant's answer.
5. The action Hudspeth County and Reclamation District No. 1 v. Howard E. Robbins et al. (regional director, region 5, Bureau of Reclamation), in the United States District Court for the Western District of Texas, El Paso division, is a suit for declaratory judgment to establish Hudspeth district water rights and to enjoin offices of the United States from impounding and diverting certain waters allegedly belonging to the district.
The defendants' motion to dismiss was overruled by the court shortly after the close of the fiscal year 1952.
6. The case of State of New Mexico and City of Truth or Consequences v. Labon Backer et al. (an officer of the Bureau), is a suit to enjoin defendants from draining Elephant Butte Lake.
After removal of the case from the State court to the United States District Court for New Mexico, the suit was dismissed.
An appeal was taken to the Court of Appeals, where the case was pending at the close of the fiscal year.
Various other actions affecting the Bureau of Reclamation were settled, continued, or filed during the fiscal year, including condemnation cases and tort and contract claims.
In collaboration with the regions and central-office divisions and offices, continued effort was made to identify specific problems in the operations, methods, and management of Reclamation activities.
These problems were scheduled and attacked by the field and headquarters staffs, and a number of important solutions were developed and placed in operation.
In compliance with the President's management-improvement program, this effort will be continued to improve operations and management throughout the organization.
The office participated in a Bureau-wide program to train and assist supervisory personnel at all levels in diseharging their responsibility to provide adequate guidance to subordinate staffs, the objective being to promote and develop the ability of supervisors and employees to do their work correctly and avoid subsequent extensive revisions.
Self-appraisal methods developed last year were applied with good success and will be extended.
Under this plan, each regional staff division reviews regularly and with management participation the activities under its jurisdiction at each operating office in the region.
In addition to guiding the operating employees in the application of principles and techniques, the regional and management staffs become better acquainted with basic problems confronting the operating offices and the Bureau in the execution of programed functions and activities.
Substantial progress was made in the development of Bureau-wide methods for determining the ratio of employees to given workloads in selected Bureau activities.
With further improvement, these methods of determining personnel requirements will be of great value as workloads shift within regions or between regions, and as Bureau programs increase or decrease by reason of congressional action.
During the past year emphasis has been placed on improving and consolidating the content of the Reclamation Manual, which now includes all continuing instructions for the guidance of employees in executing the Reclamation program.
The demand for the Reclamation Manual and related management reports and documents continued particularly among universities and foreign governments.
Under the incentive-award system, wide participation among employees was achieved with consequent benefits both to the Bureau and to the employees who developed the improvements in operations and methods.
The increased interest in the program was due largely to the decentralization of award authority to the field level, thus permitting prompt action upon employee proposals for procedural and other improvements.
The office initiated a system to provide standardized organization charting and functional descriptions throughout the Bureau, with corresponding automatic staffing data for the headquarters and regional staffs.
Through tho review of reports and forms, particularly at the regional level, operations were improved through the consolidation or elimination of like or similar reports and forms and through the revision of the procedures relating to their use.
The general policy of“no new starts" created a problem of possible large-scale force reductions in certain areas, while limited recruitment, mostly at a lower grade, was necessary in others.
Turn-over was high, the Bureau having a total of 16,595 full-time employees at the beginning of the year and 13,846 at the closing.
This turn-over, coupled with aggressive internal placement activities, enabled us to avoid the demoralizing effects of large-scale reductions in force and to come within the money limitations for personal services; at the same time, it presented many problems of employee utilization, adjustment, reorganization, and consolidation of functions incident to the gradual shrinking of an organization of the Bureau's size.
No particular difficulty was encountered in the comparatively small amount of recruitment done at all levels during the fiscal year.
However, serious difficulties are now being encountered in recruiting engineers at the GS–5 and GS–7 levels.
Labor-management negotiations arriving at mutually satisfactory hourly rates of pay and working conditions were successfully carried out for the Columbia Basin project.
A collective-bargaining agreement with the Colorado River Power Trades Couneil, representing all ungraded employees at the Parker Dam power project and the Davis Dam project, was executed in December 1951.
Negotiations are presently under way for the development of similar agreements at the Central Valley project in regions 6 and 7.
Authority was delegated to regional directors and the chief of personnel, field division, to approve wage rates for ungraded employees.
This has resulted in more prompt alinement of the Bureau's wage schedules with local prevailing rates.
A plan for personnel management review and improvement was formulated and a successful "trial run" conducted in one district.
The plan provides for measuring the effectiveness of the personnel program in terms of actual operating practices and offers an avenue for employee participation in the development or modification of management policies.
It will have Bureau-wide application in fiscal year 1953.
The tempo of the Bureau's position elassification program, including an over-all review of position allocations, was conditioned by the availability of trained technicians and funds, the need to coordinate with the Department and the Civil Service Commission, and the Bureau-wide support of management.
Contacts with field installations were continued.
Work also continued in the review of proposed Civil Service position classification standards, and with various regional Civil Service classification audit teams which visited Bureau offices.
The foreign-activities program added substantially to the workload, and a similar effect was realized by the consolidation of wage administration with the classification function in the Washington office.
Manual revisions were accomplished as required in order to reflect current policies, practices, and procedures.
Considerable work on staffing and ratios was done during the year.
The personnel ratio of 1: 115 contained in the Interior Appropriation Act of 1952 was administered in the Secretary's office on a Departmentwide basis.
The ratio was based on the number of employees engaged 50 percent or more of their time in personnel activities.
This resulted in a reduction of personnel employees in some of our offices.
A critical examination was made of all our personnel offices for achieving manpower conservation, our target being to achieve greater results with fewer people.
At every level in our program the personnel staff devoted itself to assisting management in the establishment, development, and maintenance of a work force which would most effectively meet the Bureau's operational needs.
Forecasting staffing requirements and programing placement of available employees according to workload was again emphasized.
The Bureau's safety program was continued and further intensified especially on organization and maintenance operations.
Safety evaluations and inspections were performed on all Bureau operations.
A program of safety education, by means of safety conferences, training courses, films, posters, and periodicals, was continued.
Accidents were reduced 27 percent for Bureau employees and 6 percent on contract operations, as compared to the 1951 experience.
The severity of accidents likewise reflected a decrease of 86 percent and 2 percent, respectively, during the same periods.
The Federal employee-health program continued to operate in its pilot stage at the Denver Federal Center.
During the year 45 Bureau employees were assigned to duty in foreign countries under the President's point 4 and TCA programs.
Staff personnel officials from the Washington and Denver offices made several trips to regional and field offices to give on-the-spot guidance and assistance.
On June 30, 1952, the Bureau had on the rolls 13,846 full-time employees, 11,172 of whom were under the Classification Act; 2,674 were under wage board; 7,266 were entitled to veterans' preference; and 1,988 were women.
2 twin-engine, 5-passenger Beechcrafts; 4 single-engine, 3-passenger Ryan Navions; and one Bell helicopter.
This fleet of aircraft has proved very successful inasmuch as it was used to transport Bureau and departmental staff personnel to areas not generally served by commercial transportation.
The Bell helicopter was used in connection with inspection of proposed transmission line rights-of-way, inspection of power lines, aerial photographic surveys of features of various Bureau projects, surveillance of floodwater conditions, and general reconnaissance work.
As a whole, the Bureau has been able to obtain priorities and allotments of critical materials in accordance with construction needs.
Trenton Dam's Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railroad relocation did suffer due to the inability to obtain steel at time it was required for construction.
The Bureau is also unable to obtain nickel-bearing stainless steel which was most desirable for the turbine runners for the Flatiron Power Plant.
It is apparent that, due to the steel strike, shortages will exist to the effect that many of our projects will be unable to obtain material in accordance with our present construction schedule.
It appears that plate steel and heavier structural shapes will be the most difficult to obtain.
The field Material Control Offices, which were established and given the responsibility of collecting and compiling current requirements for critical materials and preparing full and complete statements of essentiality as justifications for requests for allotments, have done an exceptionally fine job in presenting those requirements for issuing the allotments and priorities to suppliers and contractors.
An intensive campaign was conducted to expedite disposal of all possible accumulations of metal serap in view of the critical metal shortage.
This program resulted in the return to trade channels, for reuse, of 1,575.4 tons of ferrous, and 117 tons of nonferrous scrap metals.
During the year excess and surplus usable personal property having an acquisition value of $1,022,917 was disposed of by sale and transfer; $317,668 was realized from the disposal of this property.
The work of further refinement and streamlining of our property accountability procedures and improvement of procedural instructions of property management manual was continued.
Following receipt of Bureau of the Budget Circular A–45 and departmental regulations covering the subject of establishment of rates for quarters and utilities furnished employees, instructions in compliance therewith were issued, following which a program of complete review of all Bureau rates was begun late this fiscal year.
An appraisal of all Bureau housing will be involved as well as a study of rates charged commercially for comparable housing in adjacent communities.
Any changes in rental rates as a result of this review will be made effective within the first part of the following year.
In the disposition of records, 56 new, revised, or extended Bureauwide schedules were issued which established standards for the retention and disposal of over 400 types of specifically described records.
Approximately 1,350 cubic feet of separated employee personnel status records were transferred to the custody of the Federal Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.
Considerable work has been imposed upon the Supply Division in performing supply services for the Office of Foreign Activities.
This has been a rapidly expanding activity which has introduced unprecedented problems in furnishing the equipment and supplies and services needed by Bureau personnel on foreign missions.
General Investigations.
The planning program for the region included work on 3 reconnaissance investigations, 3 basic surveys, 24 project investigations, 6 studies of existing projects, 4 advance planning studies, 5 studies classified as general engineering and research, plus special studies.
Final project investigation reports were made on the Payette Heights unit of the Boise project, Idaho; Savage Rapids Dam of the Grants Pass project, Oregon; Sequim project, Washington; and Goose Lake project, Oregon.
A special report was prepared on the Rogue River Irrigation Association's proposal for the Rogue River Basin development along with a reconnaissance report on the Okanogan River Basin, Wash.
A definite plan report on the Palisades project, Idaho-Wyoming, was submitted to the Commissioner, but was returned to the regional office for further revision.
Special reports were also prepared on “Prediction of Snowmelt Floods Through Forecasted Temperatures" and on “Preliminary Studies of the Investigations of the Third Power Plant at Grand Coulee Dam, Columbia Basin Project, Washington."
A water management officer was appointed to carry out the Bureau's participation in the water management subcommittee of the Columbia Basin Inter-Agency Committee, and Bureau representatives continued to assist in developing an over-all operating plan.
Engineering data was reviewed and summarized for the Interstate Compact Committee, which had been operating informally since 1950 but which Public Law 572, Eighty-second Congress, second session, now authorizes.
Construction.
As the Columbia Basin project entered its nineteenth year of construction, it was 58 percent completed.
The total investment was $439,854,000 with $318,847,000 yet to be expended to complete facilities for irrigating the project's 1,029,000 irrigable acres.
The highlight of the year's activities was the initial delivery of water to the first block of project lands.
Arrival of the longawaited water was marked by an 11-day celebration sponsored by the State of Washington.
The ceremonies, particularly the "Farm-In-A-Day" (in which an 80-acre piece of sagebrush was in 1 day transformed into a fully developed farm, including a house and farm buildings) drew national attention.
Fiscal year 1952 was a testing year, in which water was made available for approximately 927 farms in 6 irrigation blocks.
It was the beginning of a 7-year program, which is aimed at completing facilities for irrigating 500,000 acres or roughly one-half the project.
Among the major structures completed during the year were the Grand Coulee pumping plant, the second and third sections of the East Low Canal, spillway bucket repairs, and riverbank protection.
At the end of the year contracts were let to build laterals and other project structures in blocks which will receive first irrigation water in 1954.
Seven other contracts, covering laterals that will deliver first water in 1953, were nearing completion at the year's end.
The second of the huge irrigation pumps was put into operation in July 1952 and two other units were close to completion at the end of the fiscal year.
Another significant event of the year was the completion of the last three of eighteen 108,000-kilowatt generators at Grand Coulee Dam, bringing the total installation to 1,974,000 kilowatts, largest in the world.
At the close of the fiscal year, Hungry Horse project was 86.5 percent complete on the basis of expenditures.
All major phases of construction at Hungry Horse continued on or ahead of schedule, with the first major project goal—1,000,000 acre-feet of usable storage in the reservoir—reached at year's end.
Hungry Horse powerhouse construction pointed toward first power delivery from the first and second 71,250-kilowatt generators on October 1 and December 1.
Concrete placement totaled more than 1,306,000 cubic yards, bringing the total vardage in place on July 1, 1952, to 2,865,000.
The completed project will contain about 3,000,000 cubic yards of concrete.
Mass placement was due to be completed in October 1952.
The prime contract is expected to be completed by the end of fiscal year 1953, 5 months ahead of schedule.
First major construction work on Palisades Dam in eastern Idaho was started in June 1952 under a $29,180,346 prime contract.
A contract for excavation of power and outlet tunnels, which will be used for diversion of the Snake River, was awarded the previous December.
At the end of the year construction aetivities were gaining momentum, the prime contractor being engaged in constructing his camp, clearing, stripping of borrow and stockpile areas, building a bridge and haul roads, and relocating highway and Forest Service roads.
All principal features at Anderson Ranch Dam of the Boise project were completed.
The second 13,500-kilowatt generator was placed in operation on July 25, 1951.
On the Payette division of the Boise project, emergency repairs were made on Black Canyon Dam, involving drilling drainage holes to reduce uplift pressures and construction of a concrete apron at the toe of the overflow spillway.
In the Cascade Reservoir area, the relocated state highway was completed except for surfacing.
Reservoir clearing continued with completion schedule for early fiscal year 1953.
On the Deschutes project, clearing of Wickiup Reservoir neared completion.
Construction on the North Side pumping division of the Minidoka project, Idaho, was limited to completion of six observation wells to determine the effect of pumping on the water table.
On the Roza division of the Yakima project, 2,000 feet of main canal was lined, and rehabilitation of Kachess Dam outlet works channel was completed.
Rehabilitation of the spillway at Keechelus Dam is scheduled for early in fiscal year 1953.
Operation and maintenance.
Operation and maintenance activities in region 1 were highlighted by a record gross crop value and initial delivery of water to the Columbia Basin projeet.
Crops valued at $230,462,400 were produced in 1951 on 2,035,039 acres under cultivation in the region.
The previous high gross of $225,235,236 was made in 1946.
The average 1951 gross per aere return was $113.25.
Approximately 927 farms were ready to be served for the first time on the Columbia Basin project by summer 1952, and water became available in 1951 to irrigate 120 new farms on the second unit of the Payette division, Boise project, and 144 on the Roza division, Yakima project.
The latter two new land areas totaled 18,686 acres.
Some 87,000 acres of land were to be served on the Columbia Basin project in 1952.
Five sales of Government-aequired land were held on the Columbia Basin project, making available 53 part-time farm units and 121 fulltime units.
The latter sales drew 12,022 applications.
Farm unit layouts have been completed on 7,250 acres of irrigable lands to be opened to homesteading soon on the North Side pumping division, Minidoka project.
This includes land eurrently under agricultural lease that is served by 11 wells and land which will be irrigated by five new wells authorized for construetion in fiseal year 1953.
Creation of a fifth “development" farm on the Columbia Basin was begun.
Cooperative settler assistance programs were continued in Oregon, Washington, and Montana in accordance with the Bureau's policy of cooperating with land-grant colleges and universities.
Amendatory repayment contracts were made effective with four irrigation districts of the Boise project (Boise-Kuna, Big Bend, Nampa-Meridian, and Settlers).
In addition, a contract was completed with the Okanogan district for rehabilitation work on Conconully Dam.
Congress approved contracts with the Frenchtown and Owyhee projects.
Negotiations on amendatory contracts were continued with the Payette division of the Boise project, Roza division of the Yakima project, North unit, Deschutes project the Riverside district of the Boise project.
The New York irrigation district of the Boise project made final payment on its construction cost obligation on Arrowrock Dam in May 1952 and Sunnyside Valley irrigation district of the Yakima project completed pay-out of its obligation to the Government in June 1952.
Power.
The Bureau's six hydroelectric plants in region 1 established a new record generation of 14,812,858,340 kilowatt-hours during the fiscal year.
Gross revenues from power operations amounted to $12,324,321.
Grand Coulee Dam's nameplate capacity was increased to 1,974,000 kilowatts with the installation of the last 108,000 kilowatt units of the presently authorized plant.
A world's record peak load of 2,226,000 kilowatts was carried in December 1951 and generation for the year was also a record—14,465,350,000 kilowatt-hours.
A monthly world's record was established in August—1,358,714,000 kilowatthours.
Installation of the second unit at Anderson Ranch Dam's power plant in Idaho was completed.
The unit is rated at 13,500 kilowatts.
Production from that plant, together with that from the 8,000-kilowatt Black Canyon, 1,500-kilowatt Boise River, and 5,000-kilowatt Minidoka unit 7 plants, totaled 245,943,100 kilowatt-hours, and gross revenues totaled $703,055.
Gross revenues for the 8,400-kilowatt Minidoka 1–6 plant amounted to $459,093.
This plant generated 76,100,300 kilowatt-hours.
The 2,400-kilowatt Prosser plant of the Yakima project produced 25,465,450 kilowatt-hours to earn $62,172.
General investigations.
Planning work continued on 6 basin surveys, 13 project investigations, one study of an existing project, and one advance planning study.
Regional director's reports were completed on the Trinity River Division; Sacramento Canals unit, Sacramento River Division; North Fork Kings unit, Kings River Division; and Santa Maria project.
Definite plan reports on Cachuma project, Klamath Straits unit, and Solano project were transmitted to the Commissioner.
A fourth definite plan report covering the Sly Park unit was completed in draft form.
Final investigation reports on Pine Flat Power unit, Kings River Division, and Clikapudi unit, Sacramento River Division, were scheduled for completion early in fiscal year 1953, proposed drafts having been finished in 1952.
In addition to these reports, work was accomplished on a variety of hydrologic, geologic, engineering, and economic investigations for the over-all Central Valley Basin and subdivisions, including Upper American River Basin; Feather River Basin; Black Butte unit, Stony Creek Division; Folsom Canals unit, American River Division; Upper San Joaquin Division; San Luis Division; and San Francisco Bay Division.
In the Klamath River Basin a comprehensive survey is continuing in which Reclamation is cooperating with the Fish and Wildlife Service and the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and a Butte Valley project investigation was started.
A Santa Ynez Basin survey also is continuing.
A special study was prepared for inclusion in the report on drought conditions in the Southwest.
Substantial progress was made in 1952 in the following investigations with reports scheduled for completion in the 1953 fiseal year: Pajaro River Basin; Sacramento Canals power plant unit; Stony Gorge power unit; Union Valley unit, American River Division.
Construction.
The most significant accomplishment of the year in region 2 was the first integrated operation of the Central Valley project made possible by completion of initial features of the Delta Cross Channel, Tracy pumping plant, Shasta-Tracy transmission line, and the final reach of the 117-mile-long Delta-Mendota canal.
On the CVP two sizable construction contracts were awarded during the year: for the 162,000-kilowatt Folsom power plant at $5,772,959 and for Nimbus Afterbay Dam and power plant of 13,500- kilowatt capacity at $6,067,353.
Construction of Folsom power facilities is being closely coordinated with construction of Folsom Dam by the Corps of Engineers so that power generation may begin in fiscal year 1955.
In the Shasta-Keswick area construction activities during 1952 were limited to completion work.
Construction of a road on the west side of Shasta Reservoir will proceed in fiscal year 1953 under terms of a contract between the Bureau and Shasta County.
The Columbia and Mowry pumping plants and delivery systems above Mendota-Pool were virtually completed at the close of the fiscal year.