When the new administration took office on January 20, 1953, it assumed as one of its vital functions the responsibility for providing leadership in the conservation and development of the Nation's natural resources.
This responsibility, largely vested in the Department of the Interior, was accepted with a keen realization of the importance of assuring that the natural resources of the United States are developed as efficiently and used as wisely as possible.
The crucial significance of American's natural resources in providing a firm foundation for the growth of our industry, the expansion of our employment, and the constant improvement of our American way of life is readily evident.
However, it is not enough that our resources be maintained to meet the day-to-day needs of the American people.
In addition, we must be sure that they are adequate to meet any emergency challenge in the future.
The importance and magnitude of our resource responsibility demands the full cooperation of all of the American people.
The sound conservation and development of our natural resources is not a task for the Department of the Interior alone.
Nor is it a task for only State and local agencies, or for free enterprise alone.
Rather, it is a task in which we can succeed only through a program of close teamwork in which Federal agencies, State and local agencies, and free enterprise work together, each performing the function for which it is best fitted.
Maximum State and local sponsorship and participation in resource programs will be a continuing objective of the Department.
The Department of the Interior, however, has been given certain responsibilities by Congress to provide leadership in this common task.
It will carry out these responsibilities, and those that may be assigned to it in the future, in accord with the expressed will of Congress.
The paramount purpose shall be to guarantee that our tasks will be performed in a manner which will assure the most efficient and wisest utilization of our natural resources.
In achieving this objeetive, the magnitude and variety of the problems assigned to the Department by Congress makes efficient and sound business management essential.
The Department administers 275 million acres of publie land in the United States and 300 million acres in the Territory of Alaska.
It markets electric power produced by plants having an installed generator capacity of approximately 6,600,000 kilowatts.
This represents 7.76 percent of the total installed capacity of generating plants in utility service in the United States as of June 30, 1953.
It has constructed facilities which in 1952 were capable of providing a full supplemental water service to approximately 7 million irrigable acres.
It is responsible for the welfare of about 400,000 Indians.
It inereases the national minerals potential by developing and improving mining and beneficiation techniques, and by promoting better health and safety conditions in our mineral industries.
It administers 180 national parks and monuments, 6 Territories, certain island possessions, and 96 trust territory island units.
1i It promotes the conservation and development of vital fish and wildlife resources.
It conducts extensive geological surveys of mineral and water resources of the United States, and carries on a far reaching program of topographic mapping.
To carry out these and other assigned functions, too numerous to summarize briefly, the Department of the Interior employs about 50,000 persons and spends about $425 million, annually.
Clearly, in an enterprise of this size and importance, the difference between efficient management and wasteful and unsound administration can be of vital importance to every taxpayer.
In the period of less than 6 months between January 20 and June 1953, the Department moved forward rapidly in adopting policies in keeping with the twofold objective of: (1) Maximum cooperation among Federal, State, and local interests in developing the Nation's resources; and (2) management techniques to assure maximum economy and efficiency in carrying out legitimate Federal functions.
By the end of the fiscal year, the pattern of policy and organizational management was already to a large degree established, although many details necessarily remained to be spelled out in subsequent decisions and announcements.
In the following sections this pattern will be briefly summarized in connection with the prime responsibilities of the Department.
A study of the organization of the Department which was promptly launched when the new administration took office showed that through the years the Department had grown up as an aggregation of separate bureaus, each tending to go its own way, and to resist coordination from the Secretary's office.
The devices established for coordination at the departmental level were found to be cumbersome and far from fully effective.
There were no less than five staff divisions in the Secretary's office responsible for coordinating planning and operations.
Although these divisions were supposed to act only as staff facilities to the members of the secretariat, without any independent responsibilities, they in fact exercised considerable authority on their own.
Furthermore, there was wasteful duplication of effort among these divisions, which was reflected also in inadequate coordination of the activities of the various bureaus.
Coordination of departmental programs at field level through the departmental field committees was similarly not fully effective.
1) The Program Staff and the Divisions of International Activities, Minerals and Fuels, Land Utilization, and Water and Power were discontinued, and the responsibility for advance planning, and for coordination among bureaus was placed in the line of operations—that is, in the bureaus and the Assistant Secretaries' offices.
Each Assistant Secretary continued direction and supervision over a specific group of bureaus and offices, as in the past, in the Minerals Resources, Public Land Management, and Water and Power Development fields, respectively.
Overall coordination of the Department's activities was reserved to the Secretary and Under Secretary.
2) A Technical Review Staff was established in the Office of the Secretary which is available to assist the Secretary as requested, and to provide independent review of problems referred to it by the Secretary, Under Secretary, Assistant Secretaries or bureau chiefs.
This staff exercises no independent responsibility or authority, but its facilities are available to the secretariat to aid in obtaining overall coordination as required.
3) The field committees of the Department were reconstituted by secretarial appointment of a responsible regional official of a bureau in each region as chairman to replace the former full-time chairman and staff.
Needed staff facilities were provided largely from the bureaus, supplemented by some assistance from the Secretary's office.
In the Missouri Basin, special circumstances related to the Department's program for the basin, dictated continuance of the full-time field committee chairman, although with a reduced staff.
4) All liaison with other Departments and with Congress pertaining to legislation other than appropriation bills has been coordinated through the new Office of Legislative Counsel responsible directly to the Secretary.
This office maintains regular contact with appropriate congressional committees and necessary intermittent contact with other departments and committees, and is kept fully advised of all legislation and departmental contacts made by the bureaus.
By supervising the preparation of the Department's legislative program and its presentation, this office assures coordination within the Department and avoids duplicating of bureau activity.
5) All publicity and public relations have been coordinated through an office operating under the Secretary.
Formerly each bureau operated independently.
6) All legal activities have been coordinated under the Solicitor in order to establish a direct line of authority and responsibility for all legal actions in the Department.
The new procedure provides that while routine legal matters may be passed on finally by the chief field attorney, determination of novel or nonroutine legal questions must be submitted to the Solicitor for review and approval.
These organization changes have placed more direct responsibility on operating bureaus and the Assistant Secretaries for coordination of planning and operations.
They have clearly established coordination responsibilities for legal activities, legislative liaison and public relations, and have eliminated much duplication of effort.
Significant savings in the Department's administrative costs are expected to result.
Significant improvements have already been made in coordination of the Department's activities with those of other Federal agencies, and studies are proceeding on effecting further improvements.
A program of frequent meetings of members of the Secretariat with their countérparts in the Departments of Agriculture and the Army was instituted, to consider mutual problems in the field of natural resources, and to agree upon a single course of action.
A critical evaluation of existing interagency machinery in the field of water resources was started with a view toward improving coordination of work among the agencies.
In addition, a detailed review of the organization and operating procedures of each bureau and agency of the Department has been started with a view to developing the most effective and efficient means of accomplishing the Department's programs.
These reviews are being conducted by highly qualified teams carefully selected for their knowledge of efficient administrative procedures and of specific problems in the areas involved.
The teams include top-level management personnel from industry and expert professional consultants as well as selected personnel from within the Government but outside of the bureau being surveyed.
Upon the completion of these surveys, the necessary bureau reorganizations are being undertaken with the objective of realizing savings in the Department's budget.
These surveys involve intensive studies of organizational structure; operating policies, standards, and procedures; programs and commitments; delegation and redelegations of authority; relations with other bureaus of the Department, other Federal agencies, and State and local governments; and public relations.
In general, the surveys are designed to accomplish greater streamlining, coordination, and efficiency and are not intended to develop policies affecting the type or scope of activities conducted by the various bureaus.
An overall management improvement program has also been instí- tuted to supplement on a continuing basis the surveys being conducted by the Secretary's Office.
Under this program a review system has been established in each of the bureaus to provide a means through which the opportunities and the need for improvement in each bureau can be systematically identified and a definite program of action developed to effect these improvements as scheduled.
In this program advantage will be taken of the audits of the Civil Service Commission, the General Accounting Office, and other outside agencies.
The United States has been_blessed with stands of great forests, millions of acres of fertile land, abundant water and fuel resources, and a generous supply of most essential minerals.
Throughout our history, the richness of these natural resources has eontributed greatly to our growth and prosperity as a Nation, and to an increasingly full life for our people.
The very abundance of our resources, however, has sometimes led us to unwise and wasteful exploitation of nature's gifts.
In earlier periods, we have cut our forests recklessly without regard to the needs of tomorrow.
We have permitted vast numbers of our fertile acres to erode and wash away.
We have plundered our precious hoard of essential minerals by using wasteful extractive and recovery methods.
We have failed to make maximum recovery and use of our resources of coal and natural gas.
Fortunately, we have recognized many of our errors.
The great conservation movement started at the turn of the century by Theodore Roosevelt and Gifford Pinchot pointed the way.
Over the years we have corrected many of the early mistakes.
We have increasingly adopted sustained yield policies in managing our forests.
We have learned to conserve our irreplacable topsoil by better methods of farming.
We have improved our extractive and recovery procedures for both minerals and fuels, thus reducing our lost and wasted supplies.
We are improving rapidly, but with the consumption of all of our resources growing by leaps and bounds, and destined to increase even more rapidly in the years ahead, we dare not relax our efforts.
However great, our resources are not unlimited.
As long as our resource ledger shows an annual deficit our balance for future withdrawals is inevitably reduced.
We must continue to improve the conservation of our natural resources by every method available.
While all Americans are united in favoring the wise use and conservation of our great natural resources, too much emphasis has been placed in recent years upon Federal responsibility in this field, as though only the Federal Government were competent and had the necessary financial ability to do what is right and required.
Too little attention has been given to the role that the States and local governments and free enterprise are willing and able to play.
The Department has therefore begun a reappraisal of its resource and development programs.
The first steps translating this point of view into policy and legislative recommendations have been taken.
Legislation was introduced and passed in the 1st session of the 83d Congress confirming and establishing the rights of States to all lands and resources beneath navigable inland and offshore waters within their historic boundaries and providing for the exercise of Federal responsibility outside these borders.
A new policy with regard to Federal development and marketing of electric power was promulgated.
It further reflects the need for cooperative effort in resource development which is being emphasized by the Department.
The President and the Congress have set the wheels in motion for further progress.
Through legislation setting up a new Committee on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government and a Commission on Intergovernmental Relations, the Congress has provided for careful review and advice in the natural resources field, as in other fields of governmental activity, looking toward changes in organization and programs that will make for better operation of the Federal Government and a better balance of responsibility between Federal, State, and local governments, and free enterprise.
The ability of States and local governments and free enterprise to finance their proper natural resources responsibilities independently of the Federal Government is, of course, crucial to the achievement of better balance.
The national interest in the development and conservation of our great resources will no doubt require that a large area of responsibility should continue to be exercised by the Federal Government.
Some clear Federal responsibilities, indeed, have not always been emphasized as much as they should have been.
The agencies of the Department of the Interior will have an important part to play in synchronized private and public programs for the development and conservation of our natural resources.
The foundation for any sound conservation program, for example, is knowledge of the resources which we have available.
Only by a continuing inventory showing the extent and state of our resources can we develop wise programs for use on a sustaining basis.
The Geological Survey and the Bureau of Mines with their extensive surveys and analyses of our resources of minerals, fuels, land, and water can provide much of the data which are the starting points for overall resource planning by both private and public agencies.
The field investigations and exploration programs of these agencies also make possible large additions to our available supply of resources by discovering new deposits and new sources of minerals, oil, natural gas, and coal.
Resources which are unknown are useless and every new discovery is a real, net gain on our resource balance sheet.
Our Interior agencies are also making substantial contributions to national conservation programs by their research activities which make possible more complete extraction and recovery of mineral and fuel resources, thus again adding to the credit side of our resource balance.
These research activities also are being directed with increasing success to the development of technological processes which make possible the substitution of metals in ample supply for those in short supply.
While this type of activity clearly contributes to a positive program of conservation, it must be recognized that conservation calls for a full though orderly development of our resources, whether of water, land, minerals, fuel, timber, fish, or wildlife.
We cannot continue to grow as a Nation and as a prosperous people if we adopt the narrow view of conservation as requiring the locking up of our resources.
Such a program of hoarding our resources is a negative approach which, if long continued, can result in artificial and unnecessary shortages.
While we must be alert to provide the reserve supplies which may be critically required in a national emergency, our paramount efforts should be directed to a constant expansion of our resource base rather than merely to hoarding what we have.
Orderly resource development should not be halted or unduly delayed by Federal mandate.
One of the more pressing tasks which the new administration in the Department of the Interior faced was the formation of a sound policy to guide the Department's activities in the production and marketing of surplus hydroelectric power.
A new approach to this problem was urgently needed in order that the Department could effectively carry out the mandate of Congress and not usurp legislative prerogatives by administrative orders.
By June 30, 1953, considerable progress had been made in the formulation of policies compatible with the new administration's aim to encourage participation of the States, local communities, and private citizens.
A careful analysis was made of the policies laid down by Congress to direct the activities of the Department with respect to hydroelectric power.
Congress, beginning with the Reclamation Act of 1906, had established three major statutory mandates to govern the Department's power policies.
1) To dispose of federally produced electricity in a manner conducive to the welfare of the project and the water users and the liquidation of the project power costs.
2) To dispose of such energy for the most widespread distribution of benefits to the largest number of domestic and rural users.
The Reclamation Act of 1906 established the pattern which fundamentally is still the law, with this provision : "whenever a development of power is necessary for the irrigation of lands under any project undertaken by the said Reclamation Act or an opportunity is afforded for the development of power under such project, the Secretary of the Interior is authorized to lease for a period not exceeding ten years, giving preference to municipal purposes, any surplus power or power privileges, and the monies derived from such leases shall be covered into the Reclamation Fund and be placed to the credit of the project from which such power is derived, provided that no lease shall be made of such surplus power or power privilege as will impair the efficiency of the irrigation project."
Subsequent legislation by Congress, including the Boulder Canyon Act of 1928, the Reclamation Project Act of 1939, the Bonneville Power Administration Act of 1937, the Fort Peck Act of 1938, and the Flood Control Act of 1944, all served to confirm the intent of Congress that the Department's statutory power policy should be limited to the disposal of hydroelectric power which is generated incident to the construction of irrigation works or of navigation or flood control dams.
In the act of 1935 authorizing the construction of the Grand Coulee Dam, for example, it is stated that the project is being built for "the purpose of controlling floods, improving navigation, regulating the flow of streams of the United States, providing for the storage and for the delivery of the stored waters thereof, for the reclamation of public lands and Indian reservations, and other beneficial uses, and for the generation of electric energy as a means of financially aiding and assisting such undertaking."
The Department of the Interior recognizes that many proposed present-day hydroelectric projects are of such huge scope and tremendous cost that only the Federal Government is in a position to finance them.
Many of them are multipurpose projects involving, in addition to hydroelectric power, such diverse features as recreational area development, fish and wildlife conservation, irrigation, improved navigation, flood control, municipal water supply, and water storage.
These multipurpose projects are also frequently interstate in character and some of the functions fall primarily in the Federal zone.
For these and other reasons, it is clear that in many cases these large multipurpose projects must be constructed by the Federal Government.
In engaging in these projects, however, the Federal Government should not assume the primary responsibility for supplying the power needs of an area.
This responsibility properly rests with the people locally.
The Department of the Interior does not assume that it has the exclusive right or responsibility for the construction of all the hydroelectric projects in the United States.
On the contrary, it will not oppose the construction of these facilities by local interests—public or private—which are willing and able to undertake them under appropriate licenses from the Federal Power Commission.
As long as such projects promote the most effective development of the natural resources of a particular region, the Department will follow a policy of encouraging rather than discouraging their construction by local interests.
In addition to specifying that the hydroelectric features of Department of Interior dam projects are incidental to the irrigation features, Congress has also provided that the power produced by such projects should be disposed of in a manner designed to give preference to public organizations and to assure the most widespread distribution to domestic and rural users.
The obligation of the Department of the Interior with respect to power as expressed by Congress may, therefore, be summarized as selling an incidental Government product in a manner designed to help recoup a Government investment, to give preference to public agencies, and cooperatives, and to benefit the largest number of domestic and rural consumers.
In administering the Department's power projects in accord with this threefold congressional mandate, however, a number of problems arise, particularly when conflicts between the three congressional directives develop.
Legislation providing for repayment of the investment for irrigation purposes without interest, and for power and municipal water supply and miscellaneous purposes with interest, and providing that flood control and navigation investments may be largely nonreimbursable, imposes the task of allocation and assignment of the costs of multiple purpose projects.
Due to (1) rising construction costs, (2) changes in the scope and size of project, (3) delays in construction, and (4) inadequacy of cost estimates, rates, based upon project cost estimates, have been promulgated which, in some cases, may not provide sufficient return to meet the statutory requirement for repayment of actual costs.
The Department of the Interior is considering all of these problems carefully with an earnest desire to provide solutions which will be fair and equitable both to the taxpayer and to the users of the water and power distributed from Department projects.
The policies which the Department proposes to follow in planning, constructing, and operating facilities for the production, transmission, and sale of electric energy are in the process of formulation.
However, the broad outlines of these policies have already been indicated.
The trend toward Federal monoply must be halted.
State, local groups, and private organizations should be encouraged and assisted in providing facilities for supplying electric power, thus leaving to the Federal Government those projects which are too large and complex to be undertaken by smaller groups.
Transmission lines necessary for the proper intergration of Federal generating facilities will be constructed by the Federal Government.
It will also build and operate the necessary facilities for carrying power to load centers within economical transmission distance unless other public or private agencies provide such facilities upon reasonable terms.
In disposing of electric energy, the Department will give preference to public bodies and cooperatives, and privately owned utilities serving domestic and rural consumers will be given preference over industrial users.
Rates for the sale of power shall be based upon costs providing for recovery of the Federal power investment with interest generally in not more than 50 years.
Ordinarily, the Department will not include any resale rate restrictions in its contracts for the sale of power to public agencies and cooperatives.
Provisions will be made in contracts with private utilities for passing on to retail consumers the savings in cost resulting from the purchase of federally generated power.
The Department is moving forward in line with the new power policy of the Administration.
Of the total Bureau of Reclamation construction program of $174 million for the 1954 fiscal year, for instance, more than one-third, about $63,400,000, will be spent on hydroelectric power development and distribution facilities or on construction of multipurpose dams which will have power production as a major function.
The Department has recommended appropriation of as much money as can be used to continue work at the most economic rate of construction.
The present transmission line program is such that, in combination with various wheeling agreements, facilities will be available to transmit all power from Reclamation or Army engineers hydroelectric plants now under construction as soon as they are placed in operation.
The development of irrigation water to meet the growing needs of the West is one of the most critically important responsibilities of the Department of the Interior.
Providing water to make fertile millions of acres of otherwise semi-arid and unproductive lands as required to meet the needs of our growing economy is clearly a function that is in the national interest.
The Department fully supports this vital reclamation program and intends to push forward with new projects as they may be justified and needed.
The Bureau of Reclamation, the Interior Department agency charged with the primary job of developing our national water resources for irrigation purposes, is now supplying water to almost 7 million acres in the 17 Western States.
This program has paid, and will continue to pay, rich dividends to all of us.
The lands made productive by water from Bureau of Reclamation projects today are sending to the market crops valued at almost $1 billion or an average crop value of more than $155 per acre.
Not only are these reclaimed lands thus aiding in a major way in meeting our growing food requirements, but the added national income and broadened tax base which they make possible are of tremendous indirect benefit to the Nation.
Congress has wisely provided that water users themselves should assume the responsibility as quickly as possible for the operation of facilities for irrigation constructed by the Bureau of Reclamation.
Out of 267 Federal reclamation projects or divisions of projects, only 28 are operated in entirety by the Bureau of Reclamation and the Department of the Interior is anxious, in keeping with its conviction that such functions can best be performed by local interests, to turn over the few remaining projects to the local water users.
It is expected that this can be accomplished in the next year with respect to several important projects.
Water users have contracted to repay nearly $690 million of the cost of Federal reclamation projects and the future of the entire reclamation program may depend to a large degree on the ability of the water users to fulfill these contracts successfully.
The Department is, therefore, cooperating fully with water-user organizations in carrying out an active rehabilitation and improvement program to assure the usefulness of existing irrigation facilities over a longterm period.
In furthering the progress of the reclamation program, the Department of the Interior will give full recognition to the role that can be played by State governments and other local public agencies.
The financial resources of the several States, added to the resources of local free enterprise, can, with the cooperation of the Federal Government, provide the broad base which will make possible sustained and orderly progress.
The need for a continuing reclamation program in the Western States is undeniable and by pushing ahead on a cooperative basis with this program we can keep advancing western growth and prosperity.
The Department believes that the reclamation program, like all others, can be well served by increasing efficiency in the operation of the responsible Government agencies.
Already, large strides have been taken in this direction.
In June 1953, for example, the Bureau of Reclamation experienced the second highest month of construction activity of the 1953 fiscal year at the same time that improved organizational efficiency was making possible annual savings of nearly $7,400,000.
During the closing months of the fiscal year, a program was developed for fiscal 1954 under which the Bureau of Reclamation is undertaking a construetion program totaling more than $174 million.
This program has as its goal providing irrigation water for over 248,000 acres of land and the installation of almost 300,000 kilowatts of hydroelectric capacity by June 30, 1954.
Depending on the availability of funds, construction to be carried out in fiscal year 1954 will also enable the Bureau to complete irrigation facilities to serve 385,000 additional acres in fiscal year 1955 and 228,000 acres in fiscal year 1956, plus installation of 241,500 kilowatts of generating capacity in 1955.
Of the land for which irrigation facilities will be completed in fiscal year 1954, 139,714 aéres are now irrigated partially but require a supplemental supply.
The bulk of this supplemental irrigation will be provided on the Colorado-Big Thompson project which will be ready to serve an additional 122,000 acres early in calendar 1954, bringing the total served by this trans-Continental divide water diversion project to 410,000 acres.
The remaining 205,000 acres are scheduled to be served with water by the end of 1955 fiscal year.
The Colorado-Big Thompson project will also complete work on the Pole Hill and Flatiron power plants in fiscal year 1954, adding another 104,750 kilowatts capacity to the hydroelectric system.
The Columbia Basin project in central Washington, which already has facilities for the irrigation of 131,000 acres of new land, will add facilities for another 55,000 acres by the end of fiscal 1954, and has scheduled the completion of facilities for another 61,000 acres of new land in each of the succeeding 2 fiscal years.
All publiely owned land or land which is purchased by the Government on this project is offered for resale in family-size units as rapidly as water becomes available.
Additional lands for publie settlement will also be made available on the North Side pumping unit of the Minidoka project in southern Idaho and on the Gila project on southwestern Arizona, which have programs of $1,068,000 and $4,500,000, respectively, seheduled during the 1955 fiscal year.
This partial summary of the scheduled construction program of the Bureau of Reclamation reflects the Department's vigorous support of the policy of reclaiming the arid and semiarid lands of the West.
In carrying out this program the Department believes the water-development projects must be based on long-range and basin-wide plans to assure maximum effectiveness.
And, most important of all, the Department will be diligent in insuring that projects are undertaken only if they are supported by the people in the local areas which will be benefited.
The Department is pressing forward with the new saline water conversion program, authorized by Congress in June 1952, to develop practicable methods of converting saline water to fresh water.
This program is important both in inland areas and on the coasts.
In inland areas, constant re-use of water from irrigation projects has in some cases increased the salinity of the water to a degree that development of an economical means of de-salting has become important.
In coastal areas, of course, the long-range objective is the development of means of converting sea water into fresh water to assure more adequate water supplies for heavily populated areas which face growing water problems.
The research authorized under this program is being carried out, as provided by law, primarily by private institutions.
Definite progress, including the promise of a reduction in the cost of de-salting an irrigation supply, has been made.
This pioneer work may play a part in revolutionizing many concepts of water use and development.
Because of the importance of a coordinated, soundly conceived program of water development, the Department believes that the formulation of a national water policy is in the public interest.
Since the turn of the century, a number of national laws dealing with water resources have been passed by Congress.
Various agencies of the executive branch of the Government, each with responsibilities in the water resource area, have adopted varying policies in carrying out their assigned functions.
As this process has continued at an ever more rapid pace, confusion, duplication, and lack of coordination has inevitably resulted.
Today there are three principal departments of the Federal Government operating in the water resources field, each under different laws.
Engineers is primarily interested in flood control and navigation; the Department of Agriculture has important responsibilities in soil conservation; and the Department of the Interior is the agency responsible for reclamation.
Because of basic conflicts among the laws of Congress as well as in the policies of the three agencies, waste, and in some cases, retarded development of our water resources has resulted.
It appears clearly desirable, therefore, that a positive overall program be developed to replace the existing patchwork of conflicting laws and policies.
The Department of the Interior is working with other affected agencies of the Federal Government to achieve the early development of a national water resources policy which will afford a firm foundation for real progress in conservation and development of our water resources.
Minerals are one of the indispensable foundations of our dynamic industrial economy.
The critical demands of modern technology and mass production have created vastly increased requirements for many essential, well-known minerals, as well as developed new and vital uses for some metals which only a few years ago were virtually unknown outside of experimental laboratories.
Our dependence upon minerals of all kinds is so great, indeed, that the Department of the Interior's activities in aiding in minerals' exploration and research must be deemed one of its most crucial responsibilities.
While we have exhausted some of our easily discoverable mineral deposits, and our imports of some minerals are steadily increasing, this country has by no means reached a critical point of diminishing returns with respect to its domestic mineral resources.
Modern geological research methods are pointing the way to new sources, hitherto unsuspected, and improved technology is making it possible to utilize some mineral reserves previously considered unsuitable for profitable development.
This merely serves, however, to underline the importance of the program of exploration and research being conducted by the two principal technical mineral bureaus of the Government, the Bureau of Mines and the Geological Survey.
New areas of potential ore bodies are constantly being found as the result of new techniques conceived and perfected by the Geological Survey.
The Survey has found, for example, that valuable clues to new deposits exist in the form of trace elements found in soils, waters, and surficial deposits, and new and improved geophysical instruments are being developed to aid in the search for mineral wealth.
Through its basic studies in applied physics and chemistry, the Survey is adding almost daily to our store of scientific knowledge essential to continued progress in minerals' investigations.
Bureau of Mines engineers and metallurgists are devoting their energies to testing and improving mining techniques and developing new methods of ore concentration and beneficiation.
From a lowgrade deposit, the Bureau has produced material acceptable for making ferromanganese and research is being conducted in the recovery of cobalt, nickel, tungsten and other critical and strategic metals from domestic sources.
Amazing progress is being made in extracting metals which occur in abundance but which previously have been unused commercially.
Within this category is the Bureau's work on zirconium at Albany, Oreg.
The limited supply of high-grade sheet mica has imparted urgency to the development of substitutes or syntheties and the Bureau of Mines has succeeded in making several synthetic mica products that show promise as substitutes for natural mica in some of its applications.
The development of ductile titanium is an example of how the Bureau of Mines and industry have acted as complements in the technology and technique of the production and utilization of important new materials.
This metal, because of its high resistance to corrosion, great strength, and light weight, undoubtedly will find many uses.
The Bureau of Mines has developed the process for production of ductile titanium on a pilot-plant scale and industry is now beginning production.
A quick inventory of our national mineral resources would indicate that the United States has an adequate supply for many years to come of such important minerals as coal, sulfur, salt, molybdenum, potash, phosphate rock, and sand and gravel.
Although our supplies of highgrade iron ore are being depleted, our iron ore reserves are still substantial.
Our use of copper, lead, and zine has been lavish and intensified development of new sources may be required to meet future needs.
Tin, nickel, quartz crystals, industrial diamonds, and platinum metals are produced in this country only in small amounts and it appears likely that we shall be forced to rely upon imports to fulfill our requirements.
Tungsten, manganese, chromium, mercury, vanadium, and a sizable list of other less known minerals are also in short supply although the need for them is growing steadily.
Although our minerals position affords no reason for a defeatist attitude, we would be foolish to be complacent.
We are becoming less self-sufficient with respect to some minerals, and only by developing and carrying out a clear-cut national minerals poliey can we assure the fullest development of the mineral resources we possess.
Only by the application of the wisest policies can we assure the needed imports of those we lack.
Guidance for the formation of a national minerals policy has been provided by Congress in the Stockpiling Act, enacted in 1939 and amended in 1946.
In this legislation Congress directed Government agencies to encourage the conservation and development of sources of needed materials within the United States as a means of decreasing our costly dependence upon foreign sources of these materials in time of emergency.
With respect to minerals and metals, the Secretary of the Interior, through the Bureau of Mines and the Geological Survey, was authorized to carry out certain functions to aid in determining and developing domestic sources of supply.
In 1950 the Congress enacted the Defense Production Aet which provided that the President, in achieving the purposes of the act, was to encourage the exploration, developing, and mining of critical and strategic minerals and metals, within, as far as practicable, the framework of the American system of competitive enterprise.
These laws provide a statement of purpose and indicate specific courses of action to achieve fuller development and utilization of this country's mineral resources base.
A broad legislative program to clarify the continuing responsibilities of the Federal Government with respect to mineral resources is needed, however.
Existing legislation relates either to defense mobilization functions or to long-range objectives and attention to immediate problems of great importance to a healthy mining industry is frequently only indirectly possible.
The responsibility for formulating policies affecting minerals production is so widely dispersed throughout the Government that no single Department has the necessary broad mandate to develop the positive programs that may be required.
It is the purpose of the Department of the Interior, therefore, to work toward a national minerals policy which will contribute to a strong and vigorous mining industry by intensifying exploration, discovery, and full utilization of our mineral resources.
One of the keystones of this national policy must be less intervention, support, or control by the Government in keeping with the achievement of a maximum of free enterprise.
Temporary surpluses at home and abroad in the past year have created serious problems in some segments of our mining economy.
These maladjustments, arising in part out of the need for accelerated production following Communist aggression in Korea, should not lull us into a false sense of security concerning our material supplies.
In the long run, our strength to resist aggression as well as our ability to provide improved standards of living will depend upon ready domestic sources and increasing levels of mineral production.
Efforts to expand the resources base through exploration and development must be continued and improvements in technology aimed at wider and more efficient utilization of our mineral wealth cannot proceed at too fast a pace.
In the Government's appropriate role of servicing and aiding, but not supplanting, the responsibility of free enterprise, it should continue to provide geologic and other information basic to the solution of the problems ahead.
Direct exploration by the Government should be confined to clearly essential projects that industry is not prepared to undertake and industry projects involving materials in short supply and of importance to national security should be aided.
The valuable research and development work carried on by Government scientists and engineers, which has proven fruitful in the past, should be strengthened and directed toward the most important problems of the future.
In recent years we have witnessed a phenomenal expansion in our consumption of oil and natural gas, and the growth of these industries is continuing at a steady pace.
The needs of our national economy for these fuels has become so great, in fact, that discovery and development programs must be pushed at a record pace in order to keep step with the demand.
This vital task is largely and properly the responsibility of private industry.
Agencies of the Department of the Interior have supplemental roles, however, involving basic geological exploration and research, and the administration, of the mineral leasing laws governing oil exploration and development on public lands.
Since its organization nearly 75 years ago, the Geological Survey has devoted a large part of its efforts to basic geologic studies which have helped lay the foundations for modern methods of oil and gas exploration.
In the West the Survey conducted a significant part of the early mapping of potential oil regions.
Later, the Survey expanded its program and is now engaged not only in surface geologic mapping but in broad studies of such features of geology, significant in the search for oil and gas, as surface and subsurface stratigraphy and structure, the constitution or petrology of the sedimentary rocks, and the series of events that have resulted in their present distribution and structure.
The Bureau of Land Management of the Department of the Interior shares with the Geological Survey the responsibility for administering the mineral leasing laws which govern oil exploration and development on public lands.
In the past 6 months the Bureau of Land Management, which is responsible for issuing oil and gas leases on public lands, has succeeded in eliminating undue and unnecessary delays in the issuance of leases and is attempting to liberalize the laws governing oil operations on the public lands in a manner which will be of public benefit.
Oil and gas development on public lands has shown a remarkably steady growth during the 33 vears since the enactment of the Mineral Leasing Act of 1920.
At the end of the fiscal year, the Geological Survey had more than 89,000 oil and gas properties under supervision in 31 States and the Territory of Alaska, comprising about 63,000 acres of public, acquired, and Indian lands.
Oil and gas production from 15,000 producing wells on these properties during fiscal year 1953 was valued at more than $305,000,000 and returned royalties exceeding $36,000,000.
The Bureaa of Mines is continuing to make a substantial contribution to oil and gas development by research aiding the industry in solving the intricate problems of securing maximum recovery of these fuels in the most economical and effective manner.
Much of this research, such as the current study of sulfur in petroleum at the Bureau's Laramie Station Office, is being conducted in cooperation with industry.
The Bureau also provides an important statistical service to the public by collecting and publishing data relating to production, refinings, transportation, inventories, consumption, etc., of petroleum, natural gas, and natural gasoline.
The groundwork for future development of the Nation's extensive resources of oil shale is being laid by the experimental research being carried on by the Bureau of Mines at Rifle, Colo., and Laramie, Wyo.
Oil shale is an important potential source of not only synthetic liquid fuels but of chemicals.
The high yield of low-boiling aromatics produced from oil shale in the high-temperature retort at Laramie, Wyo., opens up new horizons for the chemical utilization of this resource.
Indeed, it is apparent that before the establishment of a sizable synthetic fuels industry, the chemical industry will apply the results of current research to the production of bulk organic chemicals.
In carrying out the Department's oil shale research program, it is recognized that while the Government should carry on important fuel research activities, the commercial development of our fuel resources should be left to free enterprise.
The viewpoint of the new administration with respect to local rights and obligations was translated into law with the approval by Congress of legislation confirming and establishing the rights of the States to all lands and resources beneath navigable inland and offshore water within their historical boundaries and providing for the exercise of Federal responsibilities outside these borders.
This legislation, the Submerged Lands Act, placed upon the Department of the Interior the responsibility for administering Federal interests in oil, gas, and other minerals in the submerged lands of the Continental Shelf, outside the traditional State boundaries.
Long a mainstay of our energy resources, coal's importance has been viewed by some observers as greatly diminished in recent years.
But a more searching examination demonstrates that this is not the case.
While oil and natural gas have captured substantial parts of coal's traditional markets, coal remains the leading supplier of the Nation's requirements for heat and energy for uses in which it is competitive with other fuels.
And for some uses, such as a source of metallurgical coke without which the manufacture of steel would be impossible, coal is indispensable.
As our energy demands continue to grow, we shall need to rely increasingly upon our vast coal resources.
As a boiler fuel for electric utility plants in particular, coal's virtually unlimited resources provide assurance of the tremendous future supplies which will be needed.
Coal also seems almost certain to become of augmented importance as a source for synthetic liquid fuels and for chemicals.
Experimental work in coal hydrogenation by the Bureau of Mines has demonstrated the increasing feasibility of the production of gasoline and important chemicals by this process.
Similar important research has been conducted by the Bureau in other important methods of extracting liquid fuels and chemicals from coal.
During the fiscal vear, the Bureau's work on the coal hydrogenation process, conducted primarily at the Louisiana, Mo., plant, was deemed to have reached the point of diminishing returns and the plant was elosed and declared surplus.
The results of the extensive research at the plant have been made available to industry and private concerns have indicated that they will carry forward the research.
Thus savings of about $10,000 a day in Government expenditures have been achieved while at the same time it is assured that the Government's previous expenditures will not be wasted and the research leading to commercial use of coal to oil conversion techniques is carried on in the most efficient and appropriate manner.
Our extensive public lands, totaling more than 500 million acres, including Alaska, must be viewed as an invaluable heritage.
These lands provide vital resources of soil for farming and forage as well as minerals and timber for many uses.
In addition they offer rich opportunities for recreation and for the conseryation of fish and wildlife.
The Bureau of Land Management of the Department of the Interior is charged with a number of vital responsibilties with respect to the publie domain.
It is responsible for the management, leasing and disposal of the vacant public lands and their timber and other resources; the execution of laws relating to the prospecting, locating, appropriating, entering, reconveying, and patenting of public lands within the public domain, ineluding national forests and other reservations; and the conduct of scientific and professional work in the fields of land and mineral economies.
The Bureau also administers the mining and leasing laws on land in the publie domain and purchased lands under the administration of the various Federal agencies, supervises grazing on about 160 million acres of Federal rangeland located in the Western States and administers about 30 million acres of timber and woodland areas.
In carrying out these responsibilities, the Department must assure, through wise planning and administration, that our public lands are used in a manner which will promote the economic stability and development of the entire Nation.
The sound conservation and development of public lands clearly can contribute greatly to the prosperity of this and succeeding generations.
Over the years, Congress has enacted a host of laws designed to assure the private segments of our economy equitable treatment in the use of resources of the public domain.
Under these laws, it is the basic mission of the Department to dispose of or to integrate the public domain with the private economy as rapidly as is feasible with the continuing objective of the wisest and soundest use.
The fact that more than one billion acres of public land have been disposed of directly to the States or to private individuals or associations of individuals is symbolic of the national policy of relying upon private initiative and ingenuity for developing the land and its resources.
Under present-day conditions, nevertheless, the Department is aware that the attainment of this aim must be coordinated with our efforts to obtain the greatest possible use out of each acre of land.
While this policy of multiple use will make continued Federal ownership and management essential in certain areas, it must be recognized that the Federal Government has no monopoly of wisdom, financial ability, or skill with regard to the proper conservation of land resources.
The Congress, in fact, has supported this concept by confirming and establishing the rights of the States to all lands and resources beneath navigable inland and offshore waters within their historic boundaries.
The value of our public domain resources is indicated, although inadequately, by the uses which free enterprise has made of these resources.
In terms of timber, for example, the open public domain administered by the Department has an annual producing capacity of over a billion board feet of lumber and other forest products.
Livestock, principally cattle and sheep, foraging on the public domain in the west number more than 9 million.
Public revenue from leases of public land for oil and gas development and for other purposes amounts to about $67 million, and all of the activities involving use of public lands represent at least a $10 billion segment of our gross national product.
These indicators, however, measure only the present uses which are evaluated in the market place.
They do not describe the great unused potential of the public domain which only the future will reveal.
Nor do they include the relatively intangible and indirect benefits which are constantly being realized as private individuals enter a new area of the public domain and create an economic enterprise and all of the auxiliary community activities which go with it.
New settlement and new development mean new homes, new businesses, new community facilities, the opportunity, in short, for the kind of progressive development which has made America.
In gaging every possible new development, therefore, we must not confine ourselves to strictly dollars and cents considerations, but continue to rely on the initiative of private individuals in a free society to make maximum use of the opportunities afforded by the resources for which the Department is merely the steward on behalf of all of the people of the United States.
The Department is conducting classification studies and other basic surveys to provide the factual basis for a careful reappraisal of our Federal public lands.
This reappraisal is needed to determine which of the Federal public lands should be retained in Federal ownership and which can be more economically and satisfactorily administered by transfer to State or private ownership.
In the meantime, public land development and use will be intelligently and efficiently managed on a businesslike basis and with due regard for proper principles of conservation and for the rights and interests of States and private users.
The laws and regulations which govern private development and use of public lands will be continuously examined in terms of their practical effects.
The abuse of these laws will be eliminated to the greatest possible extent, and the need for any changes in the laws will be carefully studied.
Disposals of Federal lands in fulfillment of pledges made to the States on their admission to the Union are in many instances long overdue.
The speeding of these disposals will be a continuing objective.
When these lands are surveyed and transferred to the States, local communities will realize substantial benefits in form of additional revenues to provide needed public improvements such as schools and roads.
In addition, the local communities will obtain a measure of increased local control and responsibility.
The Department of the Interior is responsible for a total of 57 million acres of forest and woodland in the United States, including 13 million acres classified as commercial forest.
In addition, the Department controls 125 million acres of forest and woodland in the Territory of Alaska.
The administration of this critically important forest responsibility is divided among four Interior agencies, the Bureau of Land Management, the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the Fish and Wildlife Service, and the National Park Service.
Each of these agencies has certain basic objectives in their administration of their forest areas in accord with their own basic missions, but they share the overall aims of protection of the forests from fire, insects, and disease; the improvement of the quality of timber produced from the Department's commercial lands; and the maximum development on all our forest lands of fish and wildlife, range, recreation, and other special resources.
As in the case of other public lands, the Department supports the development of a desirable pattern of ownership of Federal, State, and private forest, range, and other conservation lands and the formulation by Congress of policies to guide the action of public agencies in this regard.
The forest lands administered by the Bureau of land Management fall into three major categories: (1) The revested Oregon and California Railroad grant lands and other areas generally identified as the O. and C. lands; (2) the public domain forest lands in the continental United States; and (3) the publie domain forest lands in the Territory of Alaska.
It is the policy of the Department, in accord with the Act of 1937, to restrict the cutting of timber on the O. and C. lands to a total volume of 640 million board-feet a year and to direct all timber-cutting operations under approved rules of forest practice, established after full consultation with a local advisory group.
The general management objectives for the commercial public domain timber in the West are generally the same as for the O. and C. lands.
In Alaska, a major problem faces the Department in determining the proper management procedures for the Territory's tremendous areas of forest lands.
Forest management plannings for the Territory will be greatly aided by the inventory of Alaska's available timber resources which will be undertaken by the Forest Servicé of the Department of Agriculture under the authorization approved by the 1st session of the 83d Congress.
In administering about 6 million acres of forest lands in the United States.
Similarly, the Fish and Wildlife Service is interested in both using the timberlands found on the refuges to demonstate practical means of developing and maintaining optimum game populations and in obtaining maximum timber yields in accord with this purpose and with sound forest management practices.
Since the Indian forest property, including about 6,250,000 acres considered commercial, is closely interrelated with the welfare of the Indians themselves, plans for forest management of this property must be coordinated with the whole Indian Service program of social and economic betterment.
This necessitates a far greater flexibility in long-term forest management plans than is customarily required or considered ideal from a purely technical standpoint.
For Indian forest lands as whole, however, the present rate of cutting is approaching the maximum under sustained yield principles unless or until more accurate inventories indicate that an increase in the cutting rates is warranted.
Despite the need for economy in Government, it would be unwise to close the door on further prudent investments that will maintain and expand the opportunities afforded by our national parks for recreation.
The extent to which public agencies provide the means for recreation and the intelligent guidance for its proper use and enjoyment is of continuing, if not greater, importance today as our Nation continues to grow in population and to have more time for leisure and recreation.
In 1952, more than 42,500,000 people visited our national parks and monuments—twice the number in the last prewar year of 1941.
Any national park is an economic, social, and spiritual asset to the Nation.
We can only estimate its economic value and still less are we able to put a price on its cultural and spiritual values.
We do know that these values exist and that the opportunity to enjoy them is a modern-day necessity.
The primary function of the National Park Service is to provide for the enjoyment of our national parks and monuments in such manner and by such means as will leave them unimpaired for the enjoyment of future generations.
This broad responsibility, assigned by Congress in 1916, has since been supplemented with additional responsibilities involving close cooperation with other Federal, State, and local agencies.
One of these is the task of assisting other agencies, if requested, on all levels in the development of a plan for coordinated and adequate public-park, and recreational-area facilities for the people of the United States.
The Department is keenly aware of the importance of this tremendous job and is cooperating fully with other responsible agencies to assure its early accomplishment.
In its cooperation with other agencies, the National Park Service also works closely with the Army Corps of Engineers and the Bureau of Reclamation in appraising the recreational value of reservoirs built by these two agencies.
To insure that reclamation projects will provide for the development of recreational opportunities, the basic plans of all major reclamation projects include provisions for outdoor recreation.
Virtually every reservoir built today is stocked with fish through the cooperation of State authorities or of agencies of the Federal Government.
Similarly, these man-made lakes offer opportunities for boating, bathing, and picnicking.
It has been estimated that this extra recreational resource has an economic value of over $36 million a year in addition to the intangible values of health and human enjoyment.
An important phase of the Department's work is the Fish and Wildlife Service's leadership in the management of the priceless fish and wildlife resources of our country.
These resources are becoming more important as the public in seeking satisfactory recreational outlets is turning increasingly to the opportunities to hunt and fish.
Recent reports show that these forms of recreation exceed all other outdoor sports in popularity with 1 out of every 5 persons interested in either hunting or fishing.
In the national wildlife conservation programs, the Department, in cooperation with Canada and Mexico, manages the continental waterfowl resources to provide a sustained opportunity to hunt for more than 2 million duck hunters annually.
An additional 4 million people take advantage of the opportunity offered by the national wildlife refuge program and more than 17 million enjoy sport fishing.
Federal aid to the States for fish and wildlife conservation, financed by the Nation's hunters and fishermen through excise taxes on hunting and fishing equipment, duck stamps, and licenses, has produced remarkable results since it was authorized by law in 1938.
Under this program, the States have been able to purchase land and water areas and to develop them in a manner which increases fish and wildlife.
The activities of the Fish and Wildlife Service in promoting development and use of the Nation's commercial fishery resources are both varied and widespread.
Offshore salmon research was conducted in the past year near the western Aleutian Islands as part of the preliminary investigations in connection with the new convention for North Pacific fisheries.
Explorations were also conducted in the northeastern Pacific, the Gulf of Mexico, and the Gulf of Maine for tuna and other fish.
Experiments in locating commercial fish by means of underwater listening devices were continued and an underwater television camera was developed for studying fishing gear in operation.
Commercial-scale tests during the year demonstrated that the new method of freezing whole fish at sea for later thawing, filleting, and refreezing ashore is mechanically feasible.
This project will be extended to include a production-cost study of the operation on a commercial basis.
In Alaska, the Fish and Wildlife Service is responsible for the protection and conservation of the fishery resources which form the basis for the Territory's most important industry.
The intense exploitation of the fisheries in the Territory continues to demonstrate the need for sound and vigorously enforced regulatory controls.
It is the Department's intention to watch carefully over our great fish and wildlife resources and to take the necessary measures to assure their conservation.
Research and exploratory fishery investigations are being pressed to make possible the opening up of vast unused marine resources.
Both fish and wildlife resources will be protected to the greatest practicable extent, in cooperation with private, local and State interests, as reclamation and other natural resource development programs go forward.
Hunting and fishing opportunities will be preserved.
Regulation, insofar as it is a Federal responsibility, will be reasonable in its extent and administration.
The American Indian and the land and its related resources to which he has an established right are a potentially vital part of the Nation's productive capacity.
The more than 50 million acres of tribal and individually owned Indian lands have a value in excess of more than $400 million for agricultural, grazing, and forestry purposes, exclusive of unestimated mineral resources.
These resources with a potentiality of providing a growing degree of self-sufficiency for the Indian population have been barely tapped.
It is the belief of the Department that its policy of terminating Federal responsibility for administering the affairs of individual Indian tribes as rapidly as the circumstances of each tribe will permit should promote the wider and more efficient development of Indian land and its related resources.
More important, however, is the conviction that this poliey will bring to the American Indian the status that is rightfully his, with all of the rights, freedoms, and responsibilities of other American citizens.
The Department is working to accomplish the termination of Federal responsibilities for the administration of Indian affairs by promoting arrangements with the proper public bodies of the State and local units of Government to assume responsibility for the services customarily enjoyed by the non-Indian residents of such political subdivisions.
Policies are also being developed to govern the distribution of tribal assets to the tribes as a unit or by division of the tribal assets among the individual members, whichever may appear to be the better plan in each case.
In addition, responsibility for trust properties should be transferred to the Indians themselves, either as groups or individuals as soon as feasible.
The Department recognizes that this objective of terminating Federal responsibility for Indian affairs, as desirable as it may be, cannot be achieved overnight.
The unusually complex set of relationships between the Federal Government and the more than 200 Indian tribes or tribal groups, which is embodied in thousands of laws and hundreds of treaties enacted and ratified over a period of more than 100 years, alone makes the achievement of the objective a difficult task.
But there is a growing recognition among both Indians and non-Indians that the keynote of any successful program of Indian administration must be the progressive elimination of these special relationships between the Indian people and the Federal Government.
Recognizing that there are tremendous and significant differences among Indian tribes, the Department will carry out its policy of withdrawal only as rapidly as the circumstances of each tribe will permit.
The plans and programs which may be sound and necessary for the Navajos, for instance, may be wholly unsuitable for the Sioux, and vice versa.
In some cases Federal supervision over tribal affairs has already been relaxed to permit many important decisions affecting the welfare of the group to be made by the Indians themselves.
In other cases, however, tribes are almost completely dependent on Federal supervision.
And between these two extremes there are many significant gradations.
Obviously, therefore, these differences must be carefully considered in determining just when Federal responsibility can be withdrawn from any particular tribe.
While avoiding the error of terminating Federal responsibility before the economic maturity of the tribal group and its capacity for managing its own affairs have been demonstrated, the Department is equally anxious to avoid postponing independence for an Indian tribe because some individual members are not ready to assume the responsibilities that go with the new status.
There are, of course, differences in capacity for economic self-sufficiency among Indians as well as among non-Indians.
If the termination of Federal supervision is delaved until every member of a particular tribe has demonstrated his ability to earn a livelihood or to manage his own resources, an unrealistic criterion would be unduly postponing the transition.
It is also true that the Indians will only learn to manage their own affairs and to exercise all of the prerogatives of full citizenship as they are given the opportunity.
With this thought in mind, therefore, the Department will press actively for the earliest feasible termination, resolving doubts in favor of Indian freedom rather than Federal paternalism.
An essential part of the transition, of course, is the satisfactory completion of arrangements with State and local Governments to guarantee that the Indians will receive from these political subdivisions the services customarily provided to non-Indian residents.
These services, such as education, public health protection, law enforcement.
About two-thirds of the Bureau's emplovees, in fact, are now engaged in health, education, and welfare work and these services account for a similar proportion of the Bureau's budget.
There can be no dispute about the necessity for Indians to receive such services.
The need for such services, in fact, particularly for education and health, is more pressing among Indians than other racial groups, and it is the aim of the Department to bring services up to a level more commensurate with the needs of the Indians.
Substantial obstacles must be overcome before all of the Indians will be receiving these social services from the same sources as non-Indians.
We must recognize, for example, the tax-exempt status of Indian lands in Federal trusteeship and the overburdened budgets of many State and local agencies, as well as the lack of adequate facilities in some of the remote Indian lands.
The transfer of these responsibilities nevertheless will be pressed in order to achieve the many rewards which the changeover will bring.
It will help to bring the Indians more closely into the fabric of community life at the grass root level as it breaks down the old reservation walls that have set them apart and which in some cases have undermined initiative and self-respect.
In addition, it should bring about a pattern of services more responsive to the Indians' actual needs since the level of services will be determined locally rather than by some remote official.
In making decisions as to the ultimate disposition of tribal assets, the Department will be guided largely by the expressed wishes of a majority of tribal members.
We know that in some cases the majority of the members would favor dividing the tribal assets and permitting individual members to take their places in the local community on an equal footing with other Americans.
A number of tribes, however, may oppose such a plan because the tribal assets consist mainly of forest or range lands which can be more effectively operated as a unit or in large blocks.
Other types of assets may also be of a nature which will not permit sale or subdivision without the danger of serious losses.
The problem, moreover, is not strictly one of economics.
We recognize that there are many Indians, deeply attached to their tribal organizations, who will want to have these organizations continue to function even after Federal services and supervision have been withdrawn.
Whenever such sentiments exist, they should be given the fullest possible consideration.
It must be emphasized, nevertheless, that the needs of the Indians for cultural and social group activity should not be used as a pretext for keeping them indefinitely under Federal paternalism, however benevolent and enlightened.
Notable progress is being made in moving toward termination of Federal responsibilities in Indian affairs.
The 1st session of the 83d Congress provided for the transfer of the responsibility for maintaining law and order on Indian reservations from the Federal Government to the appropriate county agencies of California, Minnesota, Nebraska, Oregon, and Wisconsin.
The 1st session of this Congress also repealed the Federal laws which discriminated against Indians as a minority group by denying them the right to buy and possess intoxicants.
In the fiscal year ending June 30, 1953, the Bureau of Indian Affairs transferred 19 of its schools, with a combined enrollment of about 1,100 Indian children, to local Government agencies.
One hospital and the responsibility for maintaining 75 miles of roads on various Indian reservations were similarly transferred.
This is a good beginning but the Department is hopeful that even faster progress can be made in the future without creating conditions which would constitute a default of our obligations to our Indian citizens.
To assure that each step in the transition is made with full knowledge of the desires and interests of our Indian citizens the Bureau of Indian Affairs will continue to maintain close contact with each Indian group.
Plans for the termination of Federal supervision of a number of Indian groups are being completed and are being submitted to Congress.
Legislative measures aimed at reducing Government controls over Indian Affairs, generally, are also being considered.
Recognizing the many vital contributions that areas outside the United States for which it is responsible can make to our overall welfare, the Department is working actively to promote the economic, political, and social development of the Territories of the United States, its Territorial trusteeship, and dependent areas under its jurisdiction.
This vital task is being carried on in full cooperation with the Governments of the Territory of Alaska, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, the Territory of Hawaii, Guam, and American Samoa, and the Trust Territory of the Pacific and the Pacific Islands.
The Department's Territorial activities, involving the services of most its bureaus coordinated through the Office of Territories, are all directed toward achieving the development of the areas in a manner which will make possible a maximum of self-government.
In Hawaii, for example, the people have already realized a degree of economic, political, and social development which eminently qualifies them for the full privileges of American citizenship which statehood would confer.
During the 1st session of the 83d Congress, legislation enabling statehood for Hawaii passed the House of Representatives and was considered by the Interior and Insular Affairs Committee of the Senate.
The Department strongly supports the prompt enactment of Hawaiian statehood with the hope that election of State officials can be held in November 1954 under the provisions of the enabling legislation.
Although the Territory of Alaska has made great progress in economic growth in the past 10 years, the uncertain status of Alaska native land claims constitutes a cloud over many land titles in Alaska thereby deterring land settlement and rapid development.
In fairness to both the native and other claimants and to solve the existing uncertainties, the Department believes that legislation is required to provide for the early adjudication of such claims.
Committees of Congress have carefully considered a thoroughgoing revision of the Organic Act of the Virgin Islands.
Organic legislation for the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands is also needed to provide an appropriate guide in carrying out the obligations of the United States as administering authority of the trust territory under the trusteeship agreement with the United Nations.
In view of the functioning of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico for more than a year under a constitution drafted and adopted by the people of Puerto Rico themselves, the United States has notified the United Nations that it would cease to submit reports on Puerto Rico as a territory which is not self-governing.
The Puerto Rico Reconstruction Administration, originally established in 1935 to alleviate unemployment, is being liquidated since its continuation would involve the Government in business activities which are competitive with private capital.
It is fortunate in this crucial sixth decade of the 20th century that increasing enlightened attention is being given to the problems associated with providing adequate resources to meet the steadily growing needs of the people of the United States and of the world.
The day in which we could afford to take our natural resources for granted is past.
In the next 25 years the population of this country is expected to increase by about 40 million to a level of over 200 million.
This increase is to be accompanied by a corresponding rise in the demand for all types of raw materials, finished products, and energy.
Wise planning and efficient action will be required to assure that the natural resources to fulfill these needs are available in adequate supply and at a cost which will insure a continuing rise in our living standards.
In this vital task, the Department of the Interior has an important role to play as the Federal agency charged with prime resource responsibilities.
But this task is clearly not for the Department of the Interior alone, or even for a combination of Federal agencies alone.
It is a task which all of the American people must share.
Under the system of free enterprise that has made America industrially strong, private initiative and ingenuity must, as in the past, provide the mainspring for this overall effort to meet successfully the resource problems of the future.
The Federal Government, and State and local governments, each playing the appropriate part assigned to them as representatives of the people, have much to contribute but it is evident that these contributions, as important as they may be, are only supplemental.
By working together as a team, the American people can assure that our natural resources will be developed fully and effectively, contributing richly as they are converted into the necessities of life to the welfare of the American economy and the well-being of the American people.
Secretary of the Interior.
The Division of Geography was established to carry out the duties of the Secretary of the Interior under the act of July 25, 1947, conjointly with the Board on Geographic Names.
The Division does the research and other staff functions relating to the standardization of geographic names.
The Division's work in 1953 was concentrated on areas outside the continental United States.
Geographic and linguistic research preceded standardization of more than 160,000 geographic names for use by Federal agencies.
More than 220,000 tabulating cards were punched for publication in gazetteers and over 650,000 map and text names were edited for correctness of spelling and accuracy of application.
These figures represented substantial increases over similar services rendered to Federal agencies in previous years and resulted from improved efficiency of operations.
In addition about 15,000 names were supplied by inquirers by telephone and mail and cases were processed for about 1,300 formal decisions.
Substantial progress was made in converting Arabic and Persian names to romanizations by the system adopted by the Board on Geographie Names, and some 5,000 such names are now available.
While the Division's work has served with increasing efficiency the agencies providing funds, it has not been able to satisfy all needs for foreign names and has met almost none of the needs for domestic names.
The Board on Geographic Names is an interdepartmental organization established for the purpose of standardizing geographic nomenclature for use by the Federal Government.
Representatives of 11 Federal departments and agencies make up its membership.
George R. Ranow, Government Printing Office, became chairman during the fiscal year 1952.
The Board and its committees held frequent meetings during the year to act on policies, names, publications, and related matters.
Basic foreign name policies were formulated to cover new areas and policies were extended and amended for areas and classes of names previously covered.
The volume of the Board's activity is reflected in the statistical data included in the report of the Division of Geography.
The three advisory committees continued to assist in their special fields.
The Advisory Committee on Antarctic Names reviewed, revised and extended its recommendations for the Palmer Peninsula area and started a project on Wilkes Land.
The Advisory Committee on Names in Alaska will be reconstituted as the Alaskan Names Advisory Committee.
The Advisory Committee on Arabic and Persian resolved numerous problems and examined and approved several thousand individual names.
More than 4,000 decisions were published in lists covering Argentina, British Borneo, Colombia, Indonesia, Japan, Mexico, Panama, the Philippines, South Africa, and other areas.
A revised catalog of publications was also issued.
During the fiscal year the Oil and Gas Division continued the peacetime oil and gas functions, while the Petroleum Administration for Defense carried on the mobilization of petroleum and gas for national security and defense.
The Secretary of the Interior and the Bureau of Mines received from the National Petroleum Council valuable data on the petroleum productive capacity of the submerged lands and on the production costs of synthetic liquid fuels, which are departmental matters of great significance to the national economy.
The National Petroleum Couneil submitted nine reports on technical studies.
The Division maintained contact with the State regulatory bodies directly and through the Division's Federal Petroleum Board.
The Oil and Gas Division represented the Department at the quarterly meetings of the Interstate Oil Compact Commission.
The Oil and Gas Division represented the Department on the Department of Commerce committees and task groups dealing with export policy and export control.
By close collaboration with departmental officials, the Division gave the Department of Commerce full benefit of its knowledge on matters they are concerned with.
The Federal Petroleum Board, with headquarters at Kilgore, Tex., administers the Connally "Hot Oil" Act, under the direction of the Secretary and the supervision of the Oil and Gas Division of the Department of the Interior.
In adopting the Connally Act on February 22, 1935, the declared aims of Congress were to protect interstate and foreign commerce from the diversion and obstruction of, and the burden and harmful effect upon, such commerce caused by the production of oil in excess of amounts fixed under State law, and to encourage conservation of deposits of crude oil situated in the United States.
These objectives were to be accomplished chiefly by prohibiting the shipment or transportation in interstate commerce of all oil and the produets thereof produced in excess of the amounts authorized under State law, and by authorizing injunctions in proper cases to restrain violations of the law.
Experience had already abundantly demonstrated that without the aid of the Federal Government the States could not satisfactorily solve the complex and vexatious problems resulting from the enormous waste that had characterized unrestrained explotiation of rich oil and gas deposits in the various oil-producing States.
Conservation of petroleum oil and associated hydrocarbon minerals in the United States is of far greater concern to the Nation today than it was when the Connally Act was enacted in 1935.
This is so for a variety of reasons, but mainly because of the more general recognition of the extent to which the national welfare, both in peacetime and in time of war, is dependent upon an adequate and available supply of these resources.
While the Connally Act is applicable wherever State laws limit the rate of production and prescribe conditions for producing and handling of oil, its chief application is in the States of Texas, Louisiana, and New Mexico, whose regulations prescribed under the act are actively enforced by the Board.
So far as possible with the limited resources at its command, the Board also enforces the provisions of the act in other oil-producing States, particularly in Mississippi, Oklahoma, Arkansas, and Kansas.
To secure the widest possible voluntary compliance with the provisions of the act and thereby to promote uniform application of sound conservation practices, is the primary aim of the Board.
Investigations are constantly in progress throughout the areas where complaints arise, or where experience demonstrates violations are most likely to occur.
Administration of the act is further implemented through regulations which require producers, transporters, refiners, and others handling oil and products in the designated area to keep operating records and file periodical reports with the Board.
Presently, the designated area consists of 106 counties in the State of Texas, the counties of Lea and Eddy in the State of New Mexico, and the entire State of Louisiana.
From this designated area the Board regularly receives and processes each month approximately 6,200 monthly producers reports, about 535 monthly pipeline reports, and slightly less than 100 reports from processors and refiners.
These reports cover operations in about 1,700 separate oilfields and account for approximately 36 percent of the entire domestic production of crude oil, or approximately 71 million barrels each month.
During this fiscal period, more than 3,000 leases in Texas, New Mexico, Louisiana, and Mississippi were gaged and checked, and inspections of a less extensive nature were made on some 6,500 other leases.
In carrying on this work some 750 separate felds were visited, and some 3,000 separate interviews were conducted.
At the beginning of the fiscal period, 12 cases dealing with violations of the act were pending, 7 in an investigative status, 1 under review by the Department of Justice in Washington, 2 pending disposition by United States attorneys, 1 pending trial in Federal court, and 1 on appeal in the Circuit Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit.
At the close of the fiscal period there were 15 cases pending on the Board's docket.
During the period formal investigations were initiated in 14 new cases, making a total of 26 cases receiving consideration during the period, 11 of which were closed during the year, 9 by successful prosecution, 1 by administrative action not involving prosecution, and 1 where conviction was sustained on final judgment.
Fines imposed and paid during the year totaled $70,150, comparing with $38,930 for the year 1952; $33,000 for the year 1951; and $52,950 for the year 1950.
Imprisonment of a year and a day was imposed upon a defendant in one of the most aggravated cases to come before the Board in recent years.
Cooperation between the Board, the petroleum industry, and State conservation agencies of the various oil-producing States, always recognized as of prime importance in achieving the ultimate purposes of the act, was maintained and extended, with mutually beneficial results.
During the fiscal period ending June 30, 1953, the Board, consisting of a chairman, member, and alternate member, carried on its operations through a staff of only 24 persons in addition to the members of the Board.
Of this staff, 14 were investigating examiners, the remainder consisting of clerical and accounting personnel.
Total funds available for administration of the act during the period amounted to $187,000 of which approximately $175,500 were obligated.
These expenditures included both the field service and expenses incurred in Washington in connection with administration of the Connally Act.
At the end of the year the staff had to be sharply reduced because of reduction in appropriations for fiscal year 1954.
The Administrative -Assistant Secretary exercises the authority of the Secretary of the Interior in the field of administrative management and this office provides integrated direction of the functions of the Department in that field.
The office is comprised of the immediate office of the Administrative Assistant Secretary and six divisions, viz, Administrative Services, Budget and Finance, Management Research, Personnel Management, Property Management, and Security.
This Division directs administrative services for the Department and furnishes all administrative and housekeeping services required by the Office of the Secretary, Defense Solid Fuels Administration, and the Defense Minerals Exploration Administration.
These services include library, museum, health, space, telephone, photographic, warehousing and shipping, duplicating, and printing and binding.
Branch of Library Services.
Use of the central library continued to increase, as well as the Geological Survey and the Division of Geography libraries, which are under the technical supervision of the central library.
Statistics for the central library are: Patrons of reading rooms, 29,374; telephone calls, 22,093; circulations of books and periodicals, 61,000; interlibrary loans, 5,000; queries answered, 18,000; acquisitions, 15,000 books, 54,000 periodicals.
Total of shelved holdings rose to more than 403,000.
Branch of Personnel Operations.
This branch is responsible for the personnel program for the Office of the Secretary, which includes classification, placement, training, employee relations, processing, and reporting.
Easing of the Whitten amendment to allow permanent promotions within the September 1, 1950, ceilings, and a reduction in force and reorganization within the Office of the Secretary increased the workload.
Fiscal Section.
This Section performs budget and accounting functions of the Office of the Secretary, including the working capital fund, which finances certain services for the Department.
It is also responsible for control and reporting on approximately $4 million in transferred funds used by more than one bureau within the Department.
Expenditures from all funds by the Office of the Secretary during the year were approximately $4,100,000.
Operations under the working capital fund were about $1,200,000.
Receipts from operations on submerged lands which are held in a special account pending disposition were slightly over $37 million.
Records Management.
Records holdings within the Office of the Secretary were surveyed and retention and disposal schedules developed.
Approximately 2,300 cubic feet of records were transferred to Federal records centers or disposed of as useless papers, releasing 325 file cases and 2,500 square feet of floor space.
A new filing system for legislative records was developed and placed in operation.
The Personnel Files Unit was merged with the Central Files Section with increased efficiency and reduced force resulting.
The technical review staff fles were taken over by the Central Files Section, a step in centralization of all files for the Office of the Secretary.
Museum.
The Interior Department Museum serves as the medium for the public to visualize "the history, aims, and current activities" of the Department.
It is a repository for collections in the fields of conservation and development of natural resources and the culture and handicrafts of the American Indian.
Some 41,000 persons visited the museum during the year.
Thirty special exhibits were prepared and shown during the year.
More than 22,000 people saw the educational motion pictures shown daily.
Many teachers are bringing classes for conducted tours of the museum.
Branch of Central Services.
This branch is responsible for the purchasing work for the Office of the Secretary, and for operating central duplicating, communications, health, photographic, warehousing, shipping, and printing and binding services for the Department.
Work output continued at normal levels, despite the extra duties thrown on the branch with the cutback or termination of several of the Department's defense activities.
The Division of Budget and Finance is responsible for the development and supervision of the budget, financial, and investigation functions of the Department.
The Division consists of the Office of the Director and three branches responsible for budget, finance, and investigations.
Appropriations to the Department for the fiscal year 1953 total $545,817,501.
Receipts for the year are expected to exceed $249,000,000.
The Division continued work in developing uniformity and improvement in the formulation and execution of the Department's budget program; assisted bureaus in the installation of improvements in accounting systems; and investigated alleged irregularities involving employee misconduct or statutory violations.
At the request of the House Appropriations Committee the Division assisted in developing a business-type budget presentation for the Bonneville Power Administration; participated in a joint review with the Bureau of the Budget in improvement of budget justifications; and assisted bureaus in revising budget estimates for 1954 to comply with policies established by the President.
The Division participated in the joint program of the Bureau of the Budget, Treasury Department, and General Accounting Office for improving accounting and fiscal reporting.
Accomplishments included the installation of accounting systems for the Southeastern Power Administration and the Bureau of Mines.
Accounting manuals were approved for the Southwestern Power Administration, Southeastern Power Administration, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Alaska Road Commission, and the Government of American Samoa.
Accounting surveys were made for the Fish and Wildlife Service and the Government of the Virgin Islands.
In cooperation with the General Accounting Office the Division assisted the bureaus and offices in improving accounting systems in the Bureau of Land Management, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Alaska Railroad, and the Alaska Road Commission.
The Division cooperated with the General Accounting Office and with the bureaus of the Department with respect to the comprehensive audit program.
All bureaus of the Department were covered by this program with the exception of the National Park Service, Geological Survey, and Office of the Secretary.
The Division conducts investigations of alleged irregularities in the performance of official duties by employees of the Department and of other matters under the jurisdiction of the Department.
Cases indicating criminal violations are referred to the Attorney General.
The Division of Management Research advises on matters relating to the organization and general management of the Department and makes studies of departmental operations to insure the most efficient and effective implementation of programs.
The Division is responsible for overall development and staff supervision of the Department's management improvement program.
Additionally, the Division also continued to coordinate the departmental system of Secretarial orders and other administrative issuances.
During 1953, the Division participated in the establishment of the Technical Review Staff which was created to provide centralized staff assistance to the secretariat in its supervision of program operations and replaced the Program Staff and the four divisions: Land Utilization, Minerals and Fuels, Water and Power, and International Activities, which had heretofore performed this service.
Other organization changes included the establishment of a Division of Security in the Office of the Administrative Assistant Secretary and the readjustment of departmental defense agencies and activities to meet reduced budget allotments.
The Division assisted in the development of a departmental program of surveys of bureau organizations and operations and in compiling basic source material for organization studies of the bureaus during the coming year.
Members of the Division staff will participate as members of these teams or as advisers on organization and general management matters as representatives of the Administrative Assistant Secretary.
The Division also rendered assistance to the bureaus in improving procedures and making organization adjustments.
Bureau of Reclamation activities in California, and (6) developing a proposed plan of reorganization for the Office of Territories.
The Division continued to provide the bureaus with standards and guides for their annual management improvement program and to assist in the review and follow up on proposed amendments.
It prepared the Management Improvement Handbook which provides instructions for a systematic approach in solving management problems.
The Division also sponsored a management improvement workshop during the spring where the bureau representatives gathered to consider common problems and exchange ideas for making the program more effective.
The annual management improvement reports of the bureaus indicated measurable and practical accomplishments as a result of the program.
In reviewing the organizational implications of proposed legislation, the Division handled an expanded workload of preparing reports on legislative bills, Executive orders, and reorganization plans.
The codification of Secretarial delegations of authority and subsequent redelegations have been substantially completed with the issuance of the Handbook of Secretarial Delegations of Authority and the bureau compilations of their redelegations.
The Department's incentive awards program continues to produce a steady increase in savings to the Department.
These savings include not only measurable monetary savings but intangible benefits derived from improved employee relations, improved safety factors, better working conditions, and better public relations.
Of major significance in the field of personnel management during the fiscal year of 1953 was the transition between the old and new administrations.
Many problems faced the Division in carrying out policy changes of the Civil Service Commission and in effecting reductions in force as the result of changes and economic retrenchment in the Federal Government.
The reductions in force which occurred in the latter part of the fiscal year took out of the Department some 2,000 of its employees, principally in the field services of the Bureaus of Reclamation, Mines, and Indian Affairs.
In contrast to this, however, was the problem of continued difficulty in recruiting and retaining qualified chemists, engineers, metallurgists and persons trained in the social sciences in the Federal service.
The Division devoted considerable attention to the study of personnel problems peculiar to the Territory of Alaska.
Departmental surveys were made of each bureau's personnel operations in the Territory and through coordination of bureau and departmental efforts, agreements were reached as to standard methods of recruiting, applying employee benefits and equalizing wage structure.
A formal labor-management agreement with organized employee groups, engaged in the production of helium for the Bureau of Mines, was approved by the Secretary of the Interior under the Department's general labor policy.
This agreement provides a greater area for cooperation between labor and management in establishing wages and working conditions.
Labor-management agreements in the Bureau of Reclamation have existed since 1950 and this year were expanded to include the California projects and power operation and maintenance units in the upper Missouri River and the North and South Platte River Basins.
Due to the necessity for streamlining personnel operations required for employing individuals throughout the Department on a part-time, seasonal, temporary, or intermittent basis, a short-term employment form was developed.
This form consolidates all the information, affidavits, and procedures required to employ a person for a short term by the use of one document.
Several important administrative changes were made in the conduct of the fourth departmental management training program which began in September 1952.
It was decided to decentralize selection, placement, supervision, and counseling of the trainees to the bureaus.
Twenty-seven experienced employees were selected for training and 18 junior management assistants were recruited through the Civil Service Commission for the 1953 program.
In addition to the departmental management training program, four of the bureaus conducted management selection and training activities in the field.
The Division also worked elosely with the Senate and House Committees on Post Office and Civil Service in the preparation of reports encompassing all phases of personnel administration and manpower utilization in the Department of the Interior.
At the close of the fiscal year there were 58,727 compensated employees in the Department, of which 5,684 were in the Washington,.
D. C., metropolitan area, and the remainder located in the field.
Of the total number 39,043 were classified by grade under the Classification Act, 16,120 under wage-board procedure, and 3,564 under other pay systems.
Veterans in the Department now number 25,140.
The number of women is 12,562.
There were 413 retirements in the Department during the year, of which 60 were for age, 227 were optional, and 126 were for disability.
For the third full year of its operation, the Division can report considerable progress.
During the fiscal year 1953, the effects of the equipment and materials priorities laws steadily declined.
At the end of the fiscal year, the need for establishing priority requirements had ceased.
One of the accomplishments of the year was the development and adoption by the bureaus of a simplified purchase procedure, which reduced costs in connection with small purchases and payments to vendors.
The Division cooperated with GSA representatives in reviewing the requirements of the various offices and projects for working inventories.
Information was developed which permitted field offices to reduce inventory levels by as much as 30 percent without detriment to operations.
Arrangements were made with regional offices of the Federal Supply Service to carry the entire inventory, outside of construction stocks, for several large projects of the Department.
The Division instituted a weekly review of all substantial procurement transactions in February of 1953.
As a result of this examination, it was determined where common-use items could be pooled and the need for additional purchases was obviated by arranging for transfers between bureaus.
The Division arranged meetings for technical personnel of motor vehicle manufacturers to discuss maintenance and operation of equipment with representatives of bureaus and other departments and agencies, and continued its activity of developing an expanded series of interdepartmental motor equipment field conferences.
The Manual of Allowances for Quarters, Subsistence, and Services was revised to include a basis for evaluating these items when provided by bureaus in the Territories.
Secretarial authority was delegated to the bureaus to transfer, donate, or dispose of excess or surplus real property and to obtain excess property from other agencies for use in the Territories; approval was given to manuals of property accounting procedure developed by the Bureaus of Mines, Land Management, and Reclamation; and to a property accounting procedure to be used by bureaus engaged in overseas technical assistance programs.
The Division obtained specific exemptions from GSA regulations where they were found to be unduly restrictive on the operations of the Department.
Inactive records disposition continued to be an important factor in achieving economy in utilization of office space and filing equipment.
The Division continued to assist the bureaus in preparing records control schedules to insure prompt disposition of inactive records.
Transfers to Federal Records Centers in 1953 released approximately 8,000 four-drawer filing cabinets for current use.
A representative of the Division served on an interdepartmental committee to develop Civil Service Commission standards for use in a new position classification series, the Records-Management Series.
During the year, 281 radio-frequency assignments were made to provide for essential communications required by field activities of the Department.
The assignments, authorized through the Interdepartment Radio Advisory Committee, involved 647 location and 580 frequency entries.
The number of radio stations in the Department (excluding land-mobile and portable) now totals approximately 6,000, employing about 300 different radio frequencies between 200 kilocycles and 10,000 megacycles.
During the fiscal year 1953, the Division of Security was organized in the office of the Administrative Assistant Secretary.
The functions of the security officer of the Department were assigned to the newly created Division and, in addition, matters relating to civil defense and facilities protection, were placed under its cognizance.
Although the Division of Security was in operation only 8 months of the fiscal year, considerable progress was made both in the field of physical and personnel security.
In the fourth quarter of the fiscal year Executive Order 10450 was promulgated which provides for entirely new procedures with respect to personnel security within the Federal service.
Steps are being taken to revise departmental security policies and procedures to conform to the new security regulations and new regulations have been drafted for use by the Department.
The present Solicitor has occupied the position during only the last 4 months of the fiscal year ending June 30, 1953.
Records indicate, however, that the volume of work devolving upon the Solicitor's Office has been steadily increasing for some years.
Whereas there were pending 391 undisposed-of matters at the end of the fiscal year 1952, there were pending 751 such matters at the end of the fiscal year 1953, the principal increases being in appeals on tort and contract claims and in appeals with reference to public-land matters.
Some idea of the volume of work handled by the Solicitor's Office may be given by pointing out that during the year the Office reviewed 4,846 legal documents of various kinds.
Codification of delegations of authority.
The Claims Division has acted as coordinator of a joint project of the Office of the Administrative Assistant Secretary and the Office of the Solicitor to incorporate into a single general regulation the various delegations of authority from the Secretary of the Interior to officials throughout the Department.
A preliminary draft of the codification was issued on January 16, 1953, in the form of a handbook of secretarial delegations.
When issued in final form, the handbook will constitute the official source for all secretarial delegations of authority.
Claims.
At the beginning of the fiscal year 10 contract appeals were pending in the Claims Division.
As of June 30, 1953, 33 cases were pending.
During the year prior to June 30, 1953, final action was taken on 27 appeals.
A provision in a contract authorizing the Government to suspend work under the contract, and providing for the allowance of the contractor's necessary expenses due to delay caused by such a suspension, relates only to the issuance of a directive by the Government suspending the work, and does not cover delay due to the alleged failure of the Government to fulfill its obligations under the contract.
Associated Piping and Engineering Uompany, Inc. (CA–168).
The requirement under a standard form of Government contract that a contractor file timely written notice with the contracting officer respecting a delay, and its cause, is not satisfied by a showing that a Government officer or employee had actual knowledge of a contractor's delay, and its cause.
Sacramento Electric Works (CA-177).
Where the completion of a contract was delayed by a period of time spent by the contracting officer in determining whether to approve substitute materials under a provision in the specifications of the contract permitting under certain circumstances the use of substitute material, with governmental approval, liquidated damages should not be assessed against the contractor for such delay.
Rodarmel Plumbing Company (0A–182).
Officials of this Department do not have authority to waive the imposition of liquidated damages on equitable grounds or on the asserted ground that the Government actually did not suffer any loss by reason of the delay in completing a particular contract.
During the year prior to June 30, some 20 opinions concerning patent matters were prepared in the Claims Division.
A, Floyd and Mary Alice Yauger (T-482 (Ir.)).
When damage to claimants' buildings resulted directly from seepage of a reservoir by the Bureau of Reclamation, and the owners relocated their buildings, an award was granted covering the cost of relocation and possible severance damage, not exceeding the decrease in the market value of the buildings.
Earl L, Crane (T-483).
A claim based upon financial loss, allegedly suffered by the claimant's unsuccessful attempt to produce certain crops on his land compatible with an erroneous classification made by personnel of the Bureau of Reclamation was rejected on the ground that the provision of the Interior Department Appropriation Act, 1953, permitting the payment of property claims, relates only to situations where property has been lost or physically harmed by the activities of the Bureau.
Disciplinary matters.
As of June 30, 1953, 20 cases involving investigations of alleged misconduct on the part of employees of the Department had been reviewed in the Claims Division during the fiscal vear.
The alleged misconduct included violations of departmental regulations, misappropriation of Federal funds, supplies, and other property, misuse of Government motor vehicles, and irregularities in the disposal of Indian lands, timber, and other property.
The services of the office were required in connection with a variety of matters pertaining to the responsibilities of the Secretary of the Interior relating to the Defense Production Act of 1950, section 124A of the Internal Revenue Code, industrial mobilization and postattack rehabilitation.
Some of the more important matters that were considered dealt with stockpiling, advisory committees, legislation, proposed orders, and proposed action in the Department in the event of an attack.
The major work of the Public Lands Division during the 1952–53 fiscal year continued to be the preparation of decisions on appeals taken to the Secretary of the Interior from decisions by the Bureau of Land Management with respect to public-land matters.
Antonio DiRocco, et al., A–26434 (July 11, 1952), which held that persons other than actual applicants for oil and gas leases will be considered as the real parties in interest in the applications and will be subject to the acreage limitations applicable to lease applicants if they exercise substantial control over such applications and the leases to be issued and will receive the major benefits to be derived under such leases.
Union Oil Company of California, A–26518 (January 19, 1953), which refused to overturn a long-established practice of the Department whereby a mineral locator on land which has been patented subject to a reservation of the minerals can reconvey title to the surface to the United States and receive a mineral patent for the land.
William C. Holmes, A–26796 (May 27, 1953), which held that the Alaskan courts have exclusive jurisdiction to adjudicate protests based upon an asserted superior right of possession against allowance of claims to Alaska public lands for 5-acre homesites.
Percy Field Jebson, et al. v. Emmet F. Spencer, A–26596 (June 11, 1953), which held that land included in an oil and gas permit becomes subject to location under the mining laws immediately upon the expiration of the permit and without awaiting the notation of the cancellation of the permit on the land-office records, if the land at that time is not known to be valuable for any mineral subject to disposition under the Mineral Leasing Act.
Solicitor's opinions were also prepared by the Public Lands Division on a number of questions.
Perhaps the most important of these was an opinion (M-36153, December 31, 1952) construing an exemption provision of the Federal Coal Mine Safety Act.
The opinion held that the exemption in the act, of mines regularly employing 14 or fewer employees underground, does not apply to mines regularly employing more than 14 employees underground on a multiple-shift basis or alternate-week schedule, despite the fact that the number of individuals actually at work on any shift or during any week does not exceed 14.
An opinion (M–36159, December 30, 1952) was also rendered on several questions relating to the extension of oil and gas leases in certain situations involving commitment to unit agreements, assignments and drilling.
Katalla-Yakataga development contract.
This matter concerned attempts made to secure the issuance of some 400 oil and gas leases covering approximately 1 million acres of land in the Katalla-Yakataga area in Alaska and to secure the development of this area without conflicting with the acreage limitation provisions of the Mineral Leasing Act.
A procedure was suggested to the proponents of the project for accomplishing this end, and it eventuated in the execution of a development contract whereby the Phillips Petroleum Co. has obligated itself to the United States to undertake a systematic and extensive program for exploration and development of the area at a very substantial cost.
President's Materials Policy Commission report.
The Chief of the Division participated as a member of a departmental steering committee in the preparation of a report setting forth the views and recommendations of this Department on the Paley Commission report.
He also headed a task group charged with formulating the recommendations of the Department with respect to the portions of the Paley Commission report dealing with the mining and mineral leasing laws.
Outer Continental Shelf legislation.
Substantial time was spent in reviewing and recommending amendments to Senate bill 1901, a bill to provide for the administration of the lands of the outer Continental Shelf, which, in effect, passed the Senate as House bill 5134.
This work included participating in hearings on the legislation, the drafting of amendments and revisions, and the consideration of certain legal questions arising in connection with the legislation.
Uranium mining claims.
Considerable attention was given to the problems arising from the location of mining claims for fissionable materials in Colorado and Utah on lands already included in oil and gas leases issued under the Mineral Leasing Act.
Proposed legislation on the subject was discussed with representatives of the mining interests and the oil and gas interests, and reports on the pending legislation, together with a suggested bill, were prepared and submitted to the Congress.
Arizona v. California, et al., Original No. 10, in the Supreme Court of the United States, which is an action by the State of Arizona to quiet title to the use of certain waters of the Colorado River system in the lower Colorado River Basin, as against the claims of the defendants.
The rights of the parties appear to be controlled largely by the Colorado River Compact of 1922, the Boulder Canyon Project Act, and the California Limitation Act.
Because of large interests, the United States has intervened in the proceedings, since the water rights of the Indians of several Indian reservations within the lower Colorado River Basin area may be affected.
Proposals to protect the Indian water rights from the litigation by a stipulation are now pending.
Texas v. New Mexico, et al., Original No. 9, in the Supreme Court of the United States.
Mexico.
A master has been appointed.
The matter is now pending before the master on the question of the indispensability of the United States to the litigation.
The water rights of various Indian Pueblos might be affected adversely, dependent upon the termination of the litigation, and the question of the advisability of the intervention of the United States is pending before this Department and the Department of Justice.
Much time during the year has been devoted to criminal and civil actions with respect to a series of fraudulent transactions involving valuable Indian timberland in Oregon, in which two field employees of the Indian Bureau were participants.
A successful criminal prosecution of the three principals followed, as did remedial civil litigation and administrative action to restore the status quo ante.
Advisory opinions and decisions in appeals cases.
A number of advisory opinions and decisions in appeals cases involving important principles of Indian law were prepared in the Division during the year.
A–26615, A–22558, A–22586, A–26616 (January 15, 1953).
In these proceedings it was held that the Secretary of the Interior was authorized to fix the value of oil produced from Indian leases on the basis of the highest price offered or paid for the major portion of like quality oil produced and sold from the particular field in which the leased lands were located, irrespective of the fact that only one of the companies purchasing oil in that field bought the oil.
It was further held that where there was only one purchaser of oil in a particular field, the posted price paid by that purchaser for the oil was acceptable since the price paid was the highest posted price for all of the oil produced and sold from the field.
M–36162 (April 2, 1953).
In this opinion the Solicitor ruled that the Federal supervision over Indian reservation lands could not be transferred to a State without enabling legislation by the Congress.
M-36148 (October 27, 1952).
It was held in this opinion that Indian tribal lands needed for the Yellowtail Dam and Reservoir site could not be acquired by the United States in condemnation proceedings without additional legislation by the Congress.
M-36155 (November 21, 1952).
It was held in this opinion that the provisions of section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act, respecting the exercise by the Secretary of the Interior of the authority conferred on him to approve for organized Indian tribes "the choice of counsel and the fixing of fees" is mandatory, and that, therefore, a tribe subject to this provision may not adopt an amendment to its constitution under which it could employ attorneys for certain purposes without securing the approval by the Secretary of the choice of attorneys and the fixing of fees.
IA–96 (April 20, 1953).
In this proceeding it was held that a will devising in trust, for charitable purposes, the restricted estate of an Indian testator to an Indian tribe not organized under the Indian Reorganization Act, is valid.
The fiscal year 1953 included the final portion of the second session of the 82d Congress and the initial portion of the first session of the 83d Congress.
Public Law 447 (July 3, 1952, 66 Stat. 327) created the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico by congressional sanction to the constitution adopted by the people of Puerto Rico.
To a substantial extent this vests self-government in the Commonwealth.
Public Law 31, the Submerged Lands Act (May 22, 1953, 67 Stat. 29), conveys to the States the lands beneath navigable waters within the historic boundaries of the States and in the natural resources of those lands and waters.
The bill does not define the historic boundaries of the States, and the uncertainties of the phrase “historic boundaries" continue.
Authorization for the Secretary of the Interior to initiate a program of research and development for the utilization of saline waters was granted by Public Law 448, approved July 3, 1952 (66 Stat. 328).
This program has as its objective the discovery and perfection of methods for recovering fresh water from the ocean and other bodies of salt water, at costs sufficiently low to make possible the large-scale utilization of such reclaimed water in agriculture, industry, and other pursuits.
Public Law 552, approved July 16, 1952 (66 Stat. 692), extended materially the scope of Federal authority in the mine safety field.
This act establishes a detailed system of safety regulation for coal mines, and places the responsibility for its administration in the Bureau of Mines.
Public Law 569, approved July 16, 1952 (66 Stat. 736), implements State fishery laws by prohibiting the transportation in interstate commerce of fish caught in violation of State laws.
It amends an earlier statute which imposed a like prohibition with respect to game fish only.
The responsibility for enforcement of this legislation rests with the Secretary of the Interior.
Public Law 529, entitled the “Halogeton Glomeratus Control Act”, approved July 14, 1952 (66 Stat. 597), is directed to the end of eradicating a stock-killing weed that in recent years has spread widely among the grazing lands of the West.
The process of transferring the responsibility for the education of Indian children from the Federal Government to the States will be facilitated by Public Law 47, approved June 4, 1953 (67 Stat. 41).
This measure will permit the transfer, without reimbursement, of school properties administered by the Bureau of Indian Affairs to the States, or their political subdivisions, for use as part of the local school systems.
It contains provisions designed to insure that properties so transferred will be made available for the education of Indian children on the same terms as for non-Indian pupils.
The act thus recognizes that it is highly desirable for Indian children to attend public schools in order that they may obtain the benefits of association with non-Indians.
Public Laws 48 and 49, approved June 4, 1953 (67 Stat. 42), permit homestead allotments on the Blackfeet and Crow Indian Reservations to be disposed of in the same manner as other Indian lands, thereby eliminating numerous private bills heretofore designed to provide exceptions for individual cases.
Public Law 95, entitled the “Defense Production Act Amendments of 1953", approved June 30, 1953 (67 Stat. 129), continues in effect until June 30, 1955, most of the provisions of titles I, III, and VII of the Defense Production Act of 1950.
These titles contain the greater part of the basic authority under which the defense activities of the Department of the Interior are conducted.
There have been several decisions during the year which have had and will have a wide effect upon the activities of the Department.
In the Roanoke Rapids case (U. S. v. F. P. C. and Virginia Electric and Power Co., 345 U. S. 153), the Supreme Court of the United States affirmed the Federal Power Commission's grant of a license to Virginia Electric and Power Co. to develop the hydroelectric plant at Roanoke Rapids on the Roanoke River, against the contention of this Department that the project had been reserved for governmental development.
While holding that the Secretary had sufficient standing to intervene in the proceedings, the court refused to upset the determination of the Power Commission as to which of the contending parties should be granted the license.
The case tends to negative the right of the Department to oppose other applicants for hydroelectric sites in cases where the Government has not been authorized by Congress to construct the project.
Oscar L. Chapman, Secretary of the Interior v. El Paso Natural Gas Co., et al. (204 F. 2d 46).
In this case the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia held that certain regulations promulgated by the Secretary to implement the elause of the Mineral Leasing Act which requires natural gas pipelines to be common carriers, were beyond the power of the Secretary, and the Secretary was directed to issue the right-of-way permits involved in that case without the restrictions sought to be imposed.
The decision has resulted in passage by the Congress of legislation, which for all practical purposes, eliminates the common carrier provision as to natural gas pipelines.
In a case involving the Ivanhoe Irrigation District (Superior Court, Tulare County, California, No. 39627), the court to which this contract was submitted has refused to confirm the validity of the repayment contract negotiated by the Bureau of Reclamation, despite the fact that several other California courts have validated similar contracts in uncontested proceedings.
The matter in controversy is primarily over the excess lands provision and the failure to vest water rights.
In the absence of legislative action, protracted litigation over the validity of this type of contract is in prospect.
In Kansas City Power & Light Company, et al. v. McKay (substituted), et al. (D. C. unreported), the District Court of the District of Columbia held valid numerous complicated contracts between the Southwestern Power Administration and various cooperatives in Arkansas and Missouri.
However, the decision has been largely nullified by congressional action, because the Congress has clearly expressed its intention that no funds are to be used to carry the contracts forward.
Serious consideration is being given to a complete reorganization of the legal staff of the entire Department, looking toward consolidation of all legal work under the direction of the Solicitor and the designation of all lawyers as under the control of the Solicitor, rather than as attorneys for particular bureaus.
It is felt that opinions of the Department will be more uniform, the activity and opportunity of the individual lawyer will be enlarged, overspecialization in a particular bureau will be eliminated, and the lawyers will be in a position to render more disinterested advice, if they are responsible solely to the Solicitor.
Federal responsibility for administering the affairs of individual Indian tribes," the Assistant Secretary for Public Land Management wrote to the chairman of the Indian Affairs Subcommittee of the Senate on March 13, 1953, "should be terminated as rapidly as the circumstances of each tribe will permit. This should be accomplished by arrangements with the proper public bodies of the political subdivisions to assume responsibility for the services customarily enjoyed by the non-Indian residents of such political subdivisions and by distribution of tribal assets to the tribes as a unit or by division of the tribal assets among the individual members, whichever may appear to be the better plan in each case. In addition, responsibility for trust properties should be transferred to the Indians themselves, either as groups or individuals as soon as feasible."
Although this statement was made comparatively late in the fiscal year, it reflected the policy which was followed earlier and thus serves as an effective keynote for Indian Bureau activities throughout the entire period.
In the field of programing for termination of Federal responsibilities significant progress was made during the year with a large number of widely scattered Indian groups.
Proposed legislation to facilitate Indian Bureau withdrawal from California and from the Grand Ronde-Siletz area of western Oregon, introduced in Congress but not enacted the previous year, was reviewed and prepared for resubmission.
Similar legislation was also being prepared for four additional groups of Indians expressing an interest in being relieved of Federal supervision.
These were the Klamaths of Oregon, the Alabama-Coushattas of Texas, the Chitamachas of Louisiana, and the Prairie Island Band of Minnesota.
Menominees of Wisconsin, the Colvilles and Spokanes of Washington, the Flatheads of Montana, and a large number of smaller groups throughout the Western States.
Transfer of service responsibilities to State and local agencies continued at an accelerating tempo.
One of the Bureau's hospitals—at Hayward, Wis.
This brought the total number of Bureau hospitals in the United States and Alaska down to 59.
In the field of education responsibility for academic instruction at 3 of the Bureau's boarding schools and full-management responsibility for 16 of the day schools were transferred to local public-school authorities.
The combined enrollment involved in these transfers amounted to approximately 1,100 Indian children.
The Bureau also narrowed its responsibilities for maintenance of roads on Indian reservations by transferring a total of 75 miles to the counties and carrying out improvements which should make possible the transfer of 400 additional miles in the near future.
Indian borrowing from non-Bureau sources continued at a high rate with an estimated volume of more than $22 million of credit obtained by the Indians from such sources in fiscal 1952 compared with $2,463,835 of additional loans made by the Bureau in the same period.
Trust supervision over Indian land continued to be one of the Bureau's heaviest responsibilities.
Income to the Indians from mineral leases, principally oil and gas, on their lands increased from $18,600,000 in fiscal 1952 to more than $23 million in 1953.
The number of leases approved in 1953 was more than 2,300 or more than double the number for the previous year.
A similarly heavy workload was carried by most Bureau field offices in connection with other types of land transactions.
Some progress was made by the Bureau, however, in divesting itself of trust responsibilities for allotted Indian lands.
Issuance of patents in fee nearly doubled as compared with the previous year—increasing from 333 tracts to 623—while the disposition of allotted holdings through advertised sale more than tripled, rising from 496 tracts in 1952 to 1,721 in 1953.
Altogether more than 2,500 tracts were removed from trust or restricted status.
The most striking progress toward complete Bureau withdrawal was achieved in California.
Despite the lack of basic facilitating legislation, which will be needed before the process can be completed, the Bureau made significant strides under the provisions of existing law in narrowing the scope of its California operations and responsibilities.
The welfare program was closed out at the end of fiscal 1952 with State and county agencies assuming the entire burden of welfare aid to California Indians in 1953.
Litigation brought by one of the California counties resulted in a decision that Indians are entitled to welfare assistance from the counties on the same basis as other citizens.
In addition, the Bureau closed out 550 individual Indian money accounts, leaving approximately 2,000 accounts still active; initiated a complete inventory of the Federal buildings used in the administration of California Indian affairs: sold 102 public-domain Indian allotments and 27 reservation allotments for a total return to the Indian owners of approximately $1 million: completed appraisal work, looking toward disposition, on 260 additional public-domain allotments, 171 of them timbered.
It also carried out boundary surveys on 29 reservations or rancherias; reached agreements with county highway departments under which more than 190 miles of Bureau roads will be transferred to the counties for maintenance after they have been improved to county standards.
Also, it curtailed the enrollment at Bureau boarding schools throughout the country by prohibiting additional enrollment of California Indian children; negotiated a public-health contract with Mendocino County, which eliminated the need for a Bureau public-health nurse serving the area, and a medical-care contract with Modoc County, which eliminated the need for further Bureau financing of the part-time services of a local doctor.
During the year the Bureau's extension agent for California spent all of his time liquidating Indian debts to the United States.
At the close of the year the position was abolished and responsibility for further collections on the remaining debts was transferred to the Phoenix area office.
The Hoopa Indians indicated an active interest in taking over responsibility for management of the Bureau's hospital on their reservation and good progress was made in negotiations looking toward that cbjective.
The long-range rehabilitation program for the Navajos and Hopis, authorized by Public Law 474 of the 81st Congress, moved into its third full year of operations and produced additional basic improvements for the benefit of the two tribal groups.
Educational facilities on the reservation were expanded through the establishment of five trailer schools and the completion of three school construction projects.
Simultaneously enrollment of Navajo children in schools of all types reached an all-time high at 14,106, an increase of almost 1,000 over the previous fiscal year.
Road-construction work advanced materially with the completion of 53.5 miles of grade construction, 37 miles of base or gravel surfacing, 15.6 miles of bituminous surfacing, and 433 linear feet of bridges.
A community center at Gallup, N. Mex., to provide overnight accommodations for Indians in transit between the reservation and seasonal jobs, was completed and arrangements were made for its operation by a nongovernmental agency.
Work was completed on 48 deep-pit charcos of the type which have proved highly successful in conserving soil and water on the rangelands of the Navajo Reservation.
Nine additional wells were drilled with long-range funds.
In the field of tribal business enterprises the chief accomplishment of the year was the completion of a basic agreement between the Navajo Tribe and the Bureau of Indian Affairs under which the tribe will assume the major share of operating responsibilities.
Enterprises actually established in 1953 included two tribal motels and a number of smaller business projects of various types.
The Bureau's Division of Program, established in fiscal 1952, continued to pursue two main tasks.
First, it concentrated upon fact gathering and analysis to form the basis for amplifying and further developing program policy and procedure.
Secondly, it expanded its direct-contact efforts to encompass an increasing number of Indian groups.
Staff members of the Division continued in the approach of studying individual reservation situations, extending their attention beyond those situations where Bureau withdrawal seemed like an early prospect to include some Indian groups thought to require intermediate and longer periods before they assume complete responsibility for the management of their affairs.
Building upon the experience gained in the study of individual reservation situations and bringing together the thinking and experience of other central office and field staff at the areas studied, the Division staff developed plans for a nationwide survey of the circumstances of each tribe, band, or group of Indians coming within the purview of Bureau responsibilities.
An inventory checklist in four parts was devised for this undertaking.
The first part was designed to compile facts bearing upon basic factors such as the following: Population, resources, income, dependency status, business and governmental organization, nature and scope of Bureau services rendered, potential realty tax revenue, treaty rights, and pending claims against the United States.
This part ended with a request of local administrators for an appraisal of the qualifications of the particular India group to manage its affairs independently of the Bureau.
The second part of the inventory checklist was designed to indicate the pace of progress of the particular Indian group toward independence of need for special Federal supervision.
The third part was designed to delineate the major problems and tasks impeding the Indian's progress toward the basic objective.
The fourth part of the inventory checklist requestéd a listing of Indian groups considered presently able to manage their own affairs without further supervision of the Federal Government.
Subsequently, the inventory checklist was transmitted to the field and the inventory completed by engaging the active participation of Bureau staff and in many cases tribal leaders at all field installations.
In all, some 200 different tribes, bands, and groups of Indians were covered in the survey.
Besides serving the purpose of obtaining data for analyses necessary to develop policy and procedures to govern programing toward withdrawal throughout the Bureau, the comprehensive survey now constitutes a source of basic information and a ready reference to progress toward Bureau withdrawal up to August 1952, when the survey was made.
The survey also helped to acquaint both Bureau field personnel and Indian leaders with the nature of the problems and tasks involved in each situation so that they may better proceed toward mutual objectives culminating in Bureau withdrawal.
While progress was being made in the development of programing policy, both in Congress and within the Department and Bureau, the Bureau continued to work with Indian groups to facilitate the development and institution of specific programs appropriate to their circumstances and stage of readiness to proceed independently of special Federal supervision and assistance.
In the annual report for fiscal year 1952, a number of Indian groups with whom the Bureau initiated programing efforts were mentioned.
The Bureau's staff, both central office and field, continued to work with these Indians during fiscal year 1953, and also began programing activities with others.
Among the Indian groups listed in the last annual report were the California, Grand-Ronde Siletz, and Klamath Indian groups.
Proposed withdrawal legislation covering the first two groups was introduced in the 82d Congress but not enacted.
Similar bills for all three groups were in process of drafting at the close of fiscal 1953.
Three other Indian groups indicated their interest in developing a terminal program during fiscal 1953: the Chitimacha Band of Louisiana, the Coushatta Band in Texas, and the Prairie Island Band in Minnesota.
The Bureau consulted with all three groups to determine the required measures and the necessary enabling legislation.
The Coushatta Band is in a unique situation since the State of Texas has indicated willingness to have the Coushatta Reservation continued under State trusteeship.
À factual study of the existing circumstances of the Osage Tribe in Oklahoma was undertaken and completed during the year as a measure to clarify the important factors that should be considered in potential programing proposals.
Bureau work with the Menominees of Wisconsin continued, and mutual understanding of the need for the Menominee Tribe to take positive steps in programing for its release from Federal supervision was reached toward the close of the year.
In addition, the Colville and Spokane Indian groups in Washington, and the Flathead Indian group in Montana were approached by the Bureau to consider programing toward their release from Federal supervision.
These three Indian groups, like the Osage and Menominee, have substantial tribal assets and will encounter similar programing problems.
The Bureau also took steps during the year to further program development leading to termination of Federal supervision for Indian groups in Michigan, Iowa, Kansas, northeastern Oklahoma, Nevada, Nebraska, western Washington, and the Flandreau community in South Dakota.
Various preparatory measures were taken such as clearing up problems of land ownership, but in most cases involving these groups the Bureau's efforts are still in the preliminary stages of establishing a basis of understanding for specific program development.
Not all of the Bureau's programing efforts involved Indian groups which are at the point where termination of Federal trusteeship is in prospect within the reasonably near future.
Significant progress was made during the year in longer range programing with the Ute Indian groups: the Uintah and Ourays of Utah and the Ute Mountain group and Southern Utes of Colorado.
A rehabilitation program for the Papago Indians of Arizona was also under study.
Through a special staff at Billings, Mont., the Bureau has been helping Indian groups affected by Missouri River Basin development programs to protect their interests and to make maximum use of compensatory benefits realized in connection with the reservoir developments.
Activities of the Missouri River Basin Investigations staff include soil, range, forest, engineering, and socioeconomic surveys; assembly, analysis, and evaluation of factual materials; appraisal of properties and damages to properties; and formulation of practicable plans and programs relating to the development and use of resources and the solution of problems involving Indian resources and peoples.
By the end of fiscal 1953, 1 major job—the appraisal of Indian properties and the assessment of damages to Indians from land takings in 7 reservations for the Garrison, Oahe, and Fort Randall Dams was nearly completed.
Appraisal of 333,538 acres of Indian land and of improvements and commercial timber on these lands was completed.
These appraisals furnished the principal basis for negotiations between the Indians and the United States Corps of Engineers in their efforts to arrive at a settlement price for properties.
During the year MRBI personnel also participated in numerous negotiation conferences affecting Standing Rock, Cheyenne River, Crow Creek, and Lower Brule Reservations.
Agreement was reached on a settlement of $1,575,000 for Indian properties in the Standing Rock Reservation taking.
Prospects for acceptance of MRBI values by the Indians of Crow Creek and Lower Brule, and the corps, appeared favorable at the end of June 1953.
Conferences with the Cheyenne River Reservation Indians clarified the issues in question but agreement was not reached on the value of properties to be taken.
Comprehensive investigations to obtain basic data essential to reservationwide development programs are being undertaken on other Missouri Basin reservations.
The Crow Reservation in Montana was selected for an intensive socioeconomic study during fiscal years 1953– 54.
More than 95 percent of the resident families have been visited, schedules taken, analyzed, and a draft report prepared.
A proposed farm management survey, under the direction of Montana State College, will include Crow Indians engaged in livestock or crop production.
This analysis will show the size of farm, combination of farm enterprises, and the relative profitableness of various farm organizations.
Findings of these two surveys will be integrated with irrigation, soils.
The Indians of the United States, some 400,000 of them, own, control, or have use of about 56 million acres of land located in 26 States, under the trusteeship or supervision of the Federal Government.