Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the Eighty-third Congress: It is a high honor again to present to the Congress my views on the state of the Union and to recommend measures to advance the security, prosperity, and well-being of the American people.
All branches of this Government--and I venture to say both of our great parties--can support the general objective of the recommendations I make today, for that objective is the building of a stronger America.
A nation whose every citizen has good reason for bold hope; where effort is rewarded and prosperity is shared; where freedom expands and peace is secure--that is what I mean by a stronger America.
Toward this objective a real momentum has been developed during this Administration's first year in office.
We mean to continue that momentum and to increase it.
We mean to build a better future for this nation.
Much for which we may be thankful has happened during the past year.
First of all we are deeply grateful that our sons no longer die on the distant mountains of Korea.
Although they are still called from our homes to military service, they are no longer called to the field of battle.
The nation has just completed the most prosperous year in its history.
The damaging effect of inflation on the wages, pensions, salaries and savings of us all has been brought under control.
Taxes have begun to go down.
The cost of our government has been reduced and its work proceeds with some 183,000 fewer employees; thus the discouraging trend of modern governments toward their own limitless expansion has in our case been reversed.
The cost of armaments becomes less oppressive as we near our defense goals; yet we are militarily stronger every day.
During the year, creation of the new Cabinet Department of Health, Education, and Welfare symbolized the government's permanent concern with the human problems of our citizens.
Segregation in the armed forces and other Federal activities is on the way out.
We have also made progress toward its elimination in the District of Columbia.
These are steps in the continuing effort to eliminate inter-racial difficulty.
Some developments beyond our shores have been equally encouraging.
Communist aggression, halted in Korea, continues to meet in Indo-china the vigorous resistance of France and the Associated States, assisted by timely aid from our country.
In West Germany, in Iran, and in other areas of the world, heartening political victories have been won by the forces of stability and freedom.
Slowly but surely, the free world gathers strength.
Meanwhile, from behind the iron curtain, there are signs that tyranny is in trouble and reminders that its structure is as brittle as its surface is hard.
There has been in fact a great strategic change in the world during the past year.
That precious intangible, the initiative, is becoming ours.
Our policy, not limited to mere reaction against crises provoked by others, is free to develop along lines of our choice not only abroad, but also at home.
As a major theme for American policy during the coming year, let our joint determination be to hold this new initiative and to use it.
We shall use this initiative to promote three broad purposes: First, to protect the freedom of our people; second, to maintain a strong, growing economy; third, to concern ourselves with the human problems of the individual citizen.
Only by active concern for each of these purposes can we be sure that we are on the forward road to a better and a stronger America.
All my recommendations today are in furtherance of these three purposes.
I. FOREIGN AFFAIRS American freedom is threatened so long as the world Communist conspiracy exists in its present scope, power and hostility.
More closely than ever before, American freedom is interlocked with the freedom of other people.
In the unity of the free world lies our best chance to reduce the Communist threat without war.
In the task of maintaining this unity and strengthening all its parts, the greatest responsibility falls naturally on those who, like ourselves, retain the most freedom and strength.
We shall, therefore, continue to advance the cause of freedom on foreign fronts.
In the Far East, we retain our vital interest in Korea.
We have negotiated with the Republic of Korea a mutual security pact, which develops our security system for the Pacific and which I shall promptly submit to the Senate for its consent to ratification.
We are prepared to meet any renewal of armed aggression in Korea.
We shall maintain indefinitely our bases in Okinawa.
I shall ask the Congress to authorize continued material assistance to hasten the successful conclusion of the struggle in Indo-china.
This assistance will also bring closer the day when the Associated States may enjoy the independence already assured by France.
We shall also continue military and economic aid to the Nationalist Government of China.
In South Asia, profound changes are taking place in free nations which are demonstrating their ability to progress through democratic methods.
They provide an inspiring contrast to the dictatorial methods and backward course of events in Communist China.
In these continuing efforts, the free peoples of South Asia can be assured of the support of the United States.
In the Middle East, where tensions and serious problems exist, we will show sympathetic and impartial friendship.
In Western Europe our policy rests firmly on the North Atlantic Treaty.
It will remain so based as far ahead as we can see.
Within its organization, the building of a united European community, including France and Germany, is vital to a free and self-reliant Europe.
This will be promoted by the European Defense Community which offers assurance of European security.
With the coming of unity to Western Europe, the assistance this Nation can render for the security of Europe and the free world will be multiplied in effectiveness.
In the Western Hemisphere we shall continue to develop harmonious and mutually beneficial cooperation with our neighbors.
Indeed, solid friendship with all our American neighbors is a cornerstone of our entire policy.
In the world as a whole, the United Nations, admittedly still in a state of evolution, means much to the United States.
It has given uniquely valuable services in many places where violence threatened.
It is the only real world forum where we have the opportunity for international presentation and rebuttal.
It is a place where the nations of the world can, if they have the will, take collective action for peace and justice.
It is a place where the guilt can be squarely assigned to those who fail to take all necessary steps to keep the peace.
The United Nations deserves our continued firm support.
FOREIGN ASSISTANCE AND TRADE In the practical application of our foreign policy, we enter the field of foreign assistance and trade.
Military assistance must be continued.
Technical assistance must be maintained.
Economic assistance can be reduced.
However, our economic programs in Korea and in a few other critical places of the world are especially important, and I shall ask Congress to continue them in the next fiscal year.
The forthcoming Budget Message will propose maintenance of the Presidential power of transferability of all assistance funds and will ask authority to merge these funds with the regular defense funds.
It will also propose that the Secretary of Defense have primary responsibility for the administration of foreign military assistance in accordance with the policy guidance of the Secretary of State.
The fact that we can now reduce our foreign economic assistance in many areas is gratifying evidence that its objectives are being achieved.
By continuing to surpass her prewar levels of economic activity, Western Europe gains self-reliance.
Thus our relationship enters a new phase which can bring results beneficial to our taxpayers and our allies alike, if still another step is taken.
This step is the creation of a healthier and freer system of trade and payments within the free world--a system in which our allies can earn their own way and our own economy can continue to flourish.
The free world can no longer afford the kinds of arbitrary restraints on trade that have continued ever since the war.
On this problem I shall submit to the Congress detailed recommendations, after our Joint Commission on Foreign Economic Policy has made its report.
ATOMIC ENERGY PROPOSAL As we maintain our military strength during the coming year and draw closer the bonds with our allies, we shall be in an improved position to discuss outstanding issues with the Soviet Union.
Indeed we shall be glad to do so whenever there is a reasonable prospect of constructive results.
In this spirit the atomic energy proposals of the United States were recently presented to the United Nations General Assembly.
A truly constructive Soviet reaction will make possible a new start toward an era of peace, and away from the fatal road toward atomic war.
DEFENSE Since our hope is peace, we owe ourselves and the world a candid explanation of the military measures we are taking to make that peace secure.
As we enter this new year, our military power continues to grow.
This power is for our own defense and to deter aggression.
We shall not be aggressors, but we and our allies have and will maintain a massive capability to strike back.
Here are some of the considerations in our defense planning: First, while determined to use atomic power to serve the usages of peace, we take into full account our great and growing number of nuclear weapons and the most effective means of using them against an aggressor if they are needed to preserve our freedom.
Our defense will be stronger if, under appropriate security safeguards, we share with our allies certain knowledge of the tactical use of our nuclear weapons.
I urge the Congress to provide the needed authority.
Second, the usefulness of these new weapons creates new relationships between men and materials.
These new relationships permit economies in the use of men as we build forces suited to our situation in the world today.
As will be seen from the Budget Message on January 21, the airpower of our Navy and Air Force is receiving heavy emphasis.
Third, our armed forces must regain maximum mobility of action.
Our strategic reserves must be centrally placed and readily deployable to meet sudden aggression against ourselves and our allies.
Fourth, our defense must rest on trained manpower and its most economical and mobile use.
A professional corps is the heart of any security organization.
It is necessarily the teacher and leader of those who serve temporarily in the discharge of the obligation to help defend the Republic.
Pay alone will not retain in the career service of our armed forces the necessary numbers of long-term personnel.
I strongly urge, therefore, a more generous use of other benefits important to service morale.
Among these are more adequate living quarters and family housing units and medical care for dependents.
Studies of military manpower have just been completed by the National Security Training Commission and a Committee appointed by the Director of the Office of Defense Mobilization.
Evident weaknesses exist in the state of readiness and organization of our reserve forces.
Measures to correct these weaknesses will be later submitted to the Congress.
Fifth, the ability to convert swiftly from partial to all-out mobilization is imperative to our security.
For the first time, mobilization officials know what the requirements are for 1,000 major items needed for military uses.
These data, now being related to civilian requirements and our supply potential, will show us the gaps in our mobilization base.
Thus we shall have more realistic plant-expansion and stockpiling goals.
We shall speed their attainment.
This Nation is at last to have an up-to-date mobilization base--the foundation of a sound defense program.
Another part of this foundation is, of course, our continental transport system.
Some of our vital heavy materials come increasingly from Canada.
Indeed our relations with Canada, happily always close, involve more and more the unbreakable ties of strategic interdependence.
Both nations now need the St. Lawrence Seaway for security as well as for economic reasons.
I urge the Congress promptly to approve our participation in its construction.
Sixth, military and non-military measures for continental defense must be and are being strengthened.
In the current fiscal year we are allocating to these purposes an increasing portion of our effort, and in the next fiscal year we shall spend nearly a billion dollars more for them than in 1953.
An indispensable part of our continental security is our civil defense effort.
This will succeed only as we have the complete cooperation of State Governors, Mayors, and voluntary citizen groups.
With their help we can advance a cooperative program which, if an attack should come, would save many lives and lessen destruction.
The defense program recommended in the 1955 Budget is consistent with all of the considerations which I have just discussed.
It is based on a new military program unanimously recommended by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and approved by me following consideration by the National Security Council.
This new program will make and keep America strong in an age of peril.
Nothing should bar its attainment.
The international and defense policies which I have outlined will enable us to negotiate from a position of strength as we hold our resolute course toward a peaceful world.
We now turn to matters which are normally characterized as domestic, well realizing that what we do abroad affects every problem at home--from the amount of taxes to our very state of mind.
INTERNAL SECURITY Under the standards established for the new employee security program, more than 2,200 employees have been separated from the Federal government.
Our national security demands that the investigation of new employees and the evaluation of derogatory information respecting present employees be expedited and concluded at the earliest possible date.
I shall recommend that the Congress provide additional funds where necessary to speed these important procedures.
From the special employment standards of the Federal government I turn now to a matter relating to American citizenship.
The subversive character of the Communist Party in the United States has been clearly demonstrated in many ways, including court proceedings.
We should recognize by law a fact that is plain to all thoughtful citizens-that we are dealing here with actions akin to treason--that when a citizen knowingly participates in the Communist conspiracy he no longer holds allegiance to the United States.
