This is a crucially important task.
The future welfare of our people may well depend on how wisely we conserve, how soundly we develop our basic resources of water, land, minerals, and energy sources.
When our resource problems are considered on a truly long-term basis, moreover, our very survival as a eivilization may be said to hinge upon the future adequacy of our natural resources.
Inherent in the concept of conservation is concern for the future.
Our resources are not inexhaustible.
As our Nation continues to grow the demands upon these resources will continue to expand at a tremendous rate.
Some of our resources—such as minerals, oil, gas, and coal—are nonrenewable.
Once used they are gone forever.
At the same time we should remember that only by using them can we continue to expand our economy.
Other resources such as land can lose their productivity unless we practice sound conservation.
Still others, like our water resources, are renewable.
In looking ahead to the needs of the future we must give the needed emphasis to development of new sources of wealth as well as to conservation of what we have.
The concept of conservation in the sense of hoarding or locking up our resources, in fact, is a negative one.
If pursued to its logical extremes, it would mean a halt in our progressive growth as a Nation and as a prosperous people.
Actually, one of the most vital aspects of our modern history has been the finding and developing of new sources of wealth.
Hand in hand with conservation must go a vigorous effort to develop new materials, new sources of energy, to replace those which face ultimate exhaustion.
With regard to all of our basic resources, indeed, it is clear that the future will bring difficult and complex problems.
As our needs for fertile acreage grow, we must carry out necessary programs for reclamation of arid and semiarid lands, using both our water and our land in the most efficient manner.
We must develop efficient, low-cost methods of processing secondary mineral deposits and reclaiming wasted sources, as well as find new materials and substitutes to fill the gap left as our better mineral sources are exhausted.
As our demands for energy continue to increase, we must assure the wisest use of our exhaustible supplies of fossil fuels such as oil, gas, and coal.
Hydroelectric developments should assume their proper role, although the hydroelectric potential is at best only a small proportion of the total energy requirements.
Before too long, atomic energy may be expected to contribute to our supply.
And, ultimately, we may turn to the energy of the sun and the tides as a last, long-term source.
Many of these problems lie far in the future.
The United States more than any Nation in the world has been blessed with a bounteous supply of nearly all the resources required to continue to increase the usable wealth of its people.
Yet even today we can see already the value of conservation practices—followed during recent past decades—which have preserved valuable resources for our present use.
When the ever-accelerating pace of our consumption of natural resources is considered, in fact, it is more than ever apparent that we must begin preparing today for problems that, while still years in the future, can be met successfully only if we look ahead and develop now the long-term programs that are required.
It is not an easy task to prepare to meet problems that may not become critical until the day when our children or our children's children come of age.
We have immediate concerns that absorb our attention, decisions that must be made on the basis of our present inadequate knowledge of the full scope of tomorrow's needs.
Nevertheless, to the maximum extent possible, all of the Interior Department's many and varied activities have been directed to contributing to the conservation and development of the Nation's resources so that they will serve the needs of future generations.
The primary role in the development of the Nation's resources has always been assumed by private individuals rather than by the Government.
That has been the historic American way.
The role of the Department of the Interior is one of providing guidance and leadership through research and the effective accomplishnent of its specific responsibilities assigned by Congress.
The task ahead is so great that it can be approached only as a mutual undertaking involving the cooperative teamwork of the Federal, State and local agencies and most basic of all—the initiative of individual citizens.
This report attempts to provide a brief, practical evaluation of the Department's major activities indicating how they are being directed to serve future needs and how they are being shaped in response to changing resource demands.
Many questions admittedly must remain unanswered, except to indicate the line of approach which is presently being pursued.
In other cases, even fundamental questions may remain unasked because the problems are still unanticipated or only vaguely sensed.
No one claims to have all the answers.
We do claim merely that we are making substantial progress toward meeting those needs of tomorrow that we know or can visualize, and that our nation and industrial society are well prepared, from a resources standpoint, to meet the future.
Life itself is impossible without water, and it is fortunate that water is a resource that is constantly renewed.
On how effectively we control the water which falls on our hills and plains, however, depends a host of key resource responsibilities.
Untamed and unharnessed, our water can be a destructive enemy.
It may erode away our fertile acreage, and bring floods to destroy our cities.
When intelligently controlled, however, water can bring productive wealth in many ways.
The angry spring floods can be stored in vast reservoirs for release in later periods of shortage to bring fertility to otherwise arid lands.
The mighty surge of our great rivers can be harnessed to provide electric power for our homes and industries.
The more quiescent flow of other streams and rivers can be controlled and spread so that the precious water is stored underground for later withdrawal.
For more than a century, continuing development of our water resources has been recognized as essential to national economic advancement, particularly in the arid and semiarid Western States.
This policy had its inception with the early Spanish explorers who followed the trail blazed by the aboriginal Indian tribes in introducing extensive irrigation into the Southwest, and with the sagacious Mormon pioneers who in 1846 dug the first irrigation ditch bringing water to land in what was to become Salt Lake City, Utah.
Fifty-six years later, in 1902, President Theodore Roosevelt signed the Federal Reclamation Act, bringing into being the first major partnership in the development and beneficial use of this natural resource in the arid and semiarid regions of the United States.
It should be noted that when the Reclamation Act was passed the opportunities for homesteading were rapidly diminishing.
Vast areas of productive land, such as that settled by the early pioneers, were no longer available.
At the same time, with the increase of our population the need for an increased food supply was growing rapidly.
The Reclamation Act, by opening up new land for agricultural development, therefore, was an important phase in the history of America's effort to provide resources for tomorrow.
It is significant that administration of the Federal reclamation law was vested in the Department of the Interior, where it remains today, thus affording a foundation for continuity in technical knowledge and practical experience in the planning, construction, and operation of reclamation projects containing such engineering features as the world's largest and highest dams, water-distributing canals, and hydroelectric powerplants.
Success of the Federal reclamation program is reflected in the service rendered in the 17 Western States.
New or supplemental water has been supplied for more than 7 million acres of irrigable land on which settlers have established 125,000 farms.
Another 1½ million persons live in nearby towns and villages whieh depend economically in a large measure upon the program.
This land supplied with water from Bureau constructed works is about one-fourth the total irrigated area in the Western States.
The other three-fourths has been irrigated by private initiative, acting through State and local agencies.
The Bureau's activities aid in the more difficult and complex developments.
In addition to supplying irrigation water, Bureau of Reclamation-constructed works provide municipal and industrial water service to over 2 million people.
Construction completed during the year added about 2 million acrefeet of storage capacity in new Bureau of Reclamation reservoirs, 700 miles of canals, pipelines, and laterals, almost 300,000 kilowatts of hydroelectric generating capacity, and 100 miles of major electric transmission lines.
The year was highlighted by completion of Canyon Ferry Dam, a large concrete dam on the Missouri River in Montana, and by the placing in service of its 50,000-kilowatt powerplant; by completion of Jamestown Dam, an earth dam in North Dakota, nearly a year ahead of schedule, the "holing through" of the 41/2 mile long Eklutna Tunnel in Alaska, and the construction of irrigation facilities to serve about 55,000 acres of land on the Columbia Basin Project in Washington.
The 1955 construction program will provide for the completion of irrigation facilities to supply new and supplemental water supplies to an additional 290,000 acres of land and for an increased hydrogenerating capacity of 241,500 kilowatts.
Looking at the future economie needs of the Nation, nearly 5 million acres of irrigated land can be added to the agrieultural potentiality of the Western States, and nearly 700,000 kilowatts of hydroelectric generating capacity can be installed in plants on Bureau of Reclamation projects already authorized to be constructed by Congress.
In addition, the blueprint for continued development in the West, which will have its effect throughout the Nation, calls for the recommendation to Congress of legislation, cosponsored by local water resource interests and the Bureau of Reclamation, authorizing construction of such major undertakings, as the Colorado River Storage project, the Fryingpan-Arkansas project, and the Washita River Basin project.
The latter project would provide water for municipal and industrial use and for irrigation of 25,700 acres of land in Oklahoma; the Colorado River Storage plan would provide reservoir space for 47,355,000 acre-feet of water for irrigation and other purposes including the generation of 1,592,000 kilowatts in a five-State area, while the Fryingpan-Arkansas project would furnish water for 322,000 acres of land and the generation of 500,000 kilowatts of hydroelectric power in the eastern Colorado region.
The Department is giving its vigorous support to these projects which are essential to the development of important areas of the West.
Other projects are under current investigation and in keeping with its affirmative reclamation program the Department intends to pursue actively the investigation of every desirable project, as funds are made available by Congress.
Needed projects found to be feasible from an engineering standpoint and falling within the guideposts established by Congress will be firmly supported.
The record of reclamation activities belies any suggestion that this essential program has been permitted to lag.
The Upper Colorado River Storage Project alone is the most comprehensive and farreaching undertaking for water resource development proposed in recent years.
All in all, the reclamation program is moving ahead at a steady pace, with construction work, appropriations, and recommendations for the authorization of new projects all showing progress in fiscal 1954.
America is a home-building Nation.
That trait is dramatically typified in the demand, particularly from veterans of service in the Armed Forces, for farm units made available by irrigation under the Reclamation program.
Since the end of World War II a total of almost 2,000 farm units aggregating about 153,000 acres of land were made available for acquisition on 13 Bureau projects.
Applications for farm units totalled almost 87,000, mostly from veterans.
The 1953 harvest of crops in the service area of Federal reclamation projects was valued at $785,939,868.
This was the eighth consecutive year with crop values in excess of one-half billion dollars.
It brought the cumulative value of the products produced by all reclamation projects from 1906 through 1953 to more than $9.7 billion.
Tonnagewise, the 1953 harvest was the highest on record, 9 percent greater than the previous year and 80 percent larger than the harvest of ten years ago.
In terms of acres, the most significant crops were hay and forage with 44.6 percent of the irrigated lands producing these crops.
The benefits accruing to the Nation through reclamation development are measured in terms of families served, crop production and value, livestock raised, increased population on and adjacent to projects, and in a wide variety of other ways.
These benefits filter to every State and every segment of society.
They provide through this process additional economic stability to the Nation.
Emphasis on these achievements of the Federal reclamation program, however, must not lead us to ignore the major role played by private citizens, local communities, and State governments in the Western States.
While in many instances they have been partners with the Federal Government in supplying irrigation water, in innumerable other cases local interests without any financial aid or assistance from the Federal Government have with their own resources transformed parched sagebrush desert into more than 19 million acres of irrigated land, which contributed substantial benefits to the economy of the Nation.
The success of America's water resources conservation program depends upon the extent these local interests share in the responsibilities and opportunities for providing the Nation's resources for tomorrow.
The Federal Government, and particularly the Department of the Interior, stands ready to contribute its full share to any partnership.
The technical know-how amassed under the Federal reclamation program is at the service of the people of the Western States.
Guidance toward the goal of maximum beneficial use of the water resources is being formulated through the preparation of a national water policy, and through legislation which will be presented to Congress to permit effective cooperation between the Federal Government and local interests in the financing, planning, and development of water resources projects.
The Pacific Northwest is characterized by an abundance of water resources and paucity of other sources of energy.
It lacks known deposits of petroleum or natural gas and has relatively small deposits of high-grade coal.
But the Columbia River and its tributaries, gathering the flow of numerous streams originating in the snowcapped Rocky Mountains and Cascade range, contain the largest concentration of water power found in any drainage basin in the United States.
Only about 15 percent of the Columbia's 34 million kilowatt potential has been harnessed by dams built by the Federal Government, privately owned utilities, and public agencies.
The vast bulk of the Columbia River system's energy potential and some of the best dam sites still remain to be used.
Total requirements, exclusive of new electro-process industries, are expected to jump from 29.5 billion kilowatt-hours in 1953 to 58 billion kilowatt-hours in 1963, or about 7 percent annually.
The economic development of the Pacific Northwest has been phenomenal in the past 15 years, but the future offers even greater promise.
Power is a major key to the region's future prosperity, and the control of falling water to generate low-cost electricity must be the basis for the bulk of the additional energy supply.
The Western Group of the Northwest Power pool, whose service area includes Washington, most of Oregon, northern Idaho and parts of western Montana, presently has an installed capacity of 5,100,000 kilowatts.
Of this total, 3,100,000 are in the 12 multipurpose projects of the Federal system.
Non-Federal hydroelectrie capacity in the region totals about 2 million kilowatts, about two-thirds of which is in private ownership and one-third in local public ownership.
An additional 3,100,000 kilowatts are under construction by the Federal Government and 115,000 kilowatts by non-Federal utilities.
Thus, when all the projects now scheduled are completed, 6 or 7 years hence, the region will have more than 8,300,000 kilowatts of installed capacity.
Under the new power program of the Administration the Federal Government will undertake large multipurpose projects which are beyond the means of local public or private enterprise.
Such a project is Libby Dam on the Kootenai River in northwestern Montana, endorsed by the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of the Army for immediate construction.
One of the key upstream storage dams in the proposed control plan for the Columbia River, Libby would eventually add 880,000 kilowatts—ineluding downstream benefits—to the Pacific Northwest power supply.
This project offers complications because it backs up water into Canada and has international ramifications.
There are other similar projects under consideration by State agencies and private organizations.
In order to meet the needs of the region for power, however, it is clear that substantial non-Federal construction is required.
The construction job to be undertaken is too tremendous and costly for the Federal Government to carry the burden alone.
Under the new power policy of the Administration local interests are being encouraged to play their proper part.
This policy, keyed to the need for developing for tomorrow the Northwest's waterpower potential, is meeting with an affirmative response.
Non-Federal utilities now have some 35 hydroelectric projects and additions to existing projects with a total of over 5 million kilowatts proposed for development in the Northwest.
Many of these involve partnership development, with the private companies or local public agencies constructing the power facilities and the Federal Government financing the nonreimburseable features.
This positive approach, a departure from the negative view that only the Federal Government is equipped to do the job, recognizes that the cooperation of all groups is essential if the region is to be provided with the electric power it needs.
Washington to build the mammoth Priest Rapids dam with the Federal Government responsible for flood control and navigation facilities.
It is clear that local people are alert to the region's power needs and are aggressively working to solve the problem.
It appears likely that much of the needed capital will be raised through cooperative effort and that several hydroelectric plants now under consideration will move forward and reach the construction stage in the next few years.
Certainly the power problem offers a tremendous challenge to the region, and that challenge is being met.
In the Southeast, large volumes of water flow in abundance from the mountainous section of that area down to the Atlantic Ocean and the Gulf of Mexico.
This water has a potential of nearly 13 million kilowatts annually which can best be used for peaking purposes when properly integrated with fuel burning systems.
The firm and dependable energy from these projects, because of the irregularity of stream flow, is very mueh less than their capacity when used only a few hours a day for peaking purposes, and many of them have little if any dependable capacity if used on a 24-hour-a-day basis.
The Department's Southeastern Power Administration is responsible for the marketing of 1 million kilowatts of developed capacity produced at 7 projects located on 4 Southeastern rivers.
Now under construetion by the Corps of Engineers are four additional projects which will add another quarter of a million kilowatts of capacity.
In the Southwest, we are blessed with four great river systems: the Arkansas—fourth largest in the United States—the White, the Red, and the Gulf Coast river system.
A start has been made toward controlling the floods and developing the hydroelectric potential.
Several large reservoirs have been constructed and planning is underway for others to generate hydroelectric power, regulate stream flow, provide a measure of protection to the areas downstream and provide storage for other priority uses, such as municipal and industrial water supply, pollution abatement, irrigation, and navigation.
In the Southwest, there are 10 existing major hydroelectric Federal and State projects with an installed capacity of 578,400 kilowatts, and an average annual generation of 1,925,100,000 kilowatt-hours.
Two projects are under construction which will have an installed capacity of 175,000 kilowatts and an average annual generation of 616,000,000 kilowatt-hours.
As the marketing agency of the Department of the Interior in the eastern half of this region, the Southwestern Power Administration is responsible for the sale at wholesale of such hydroelectric power.
The degree and timing of the development of projects to furnish a portion of the electric power and the domestie and industrial water supply whieh will be needed in the expanding development of resources in the Southwest will have a great bearing on the conservation and proper utilization of all the resources in the area.
As the Nation has continued to grow, its needs for water in every part have grown, sometimes in geometrical proportion to the population growth.
Even in parts of the Nation outside the arid and semiarid regions, the problems of water supply have become far more pressing.
It may be anticipated that in some areas in the future policies may need to be adopted to assure the best use of such water as is available.
It is the business of the Geological Survey to conduct the search for more and more water.
Water circulates endlessly through the hydrologic cyele, but there are limits to its development for use by man.
The Survey conducts the necessary investigations to determine the quantities of water available, its usefulness, and the extent to which it can be developed without depleting the supply or impairing the quality.
Demands in many areas have caused a substantial increase in the use of underground supplies.
Investigations are being made by the Survey in order to determine the extent of this resource.
With the basic facts thus provided, the Nation can assure proper development and use without harmful depletion.
In certain areas of the United States existing sources of water are inadequate.
In some places the supplies of fresh ground water and surface water are limited.
In other areas inereasing pollution by reuse of the water is resulting in sufficient deterioration of water quality to prevent any use.
Current investigations include the study of changes in the chemical and physical characteristies of water in order to forestall aggravated conditions.
Studies of trends of the mineral content of western streams, for example, are necessary for continued operation of irrigation projects.
With development of the country, its smaller streams become increasingly important as sources of supply, but their reliability or suitability can be gauged only if there is adequate information on their flow patterns.
The Geological Survey attempts to obtain such data.
In some areas where fresh water is extremely scarce a solution may be provided through development of a practical low-cost means of desalting sea water, or other saline water.
The Department is now carrying on a research program aimed at producing water by this process which will be suitable for municipal, industrial, agricultural, and other uses.
Progress is being made.
We are as yet a long way from any mass production process which would provide desalted water for industrial or agricultural uses on an economically feasible basis.
It is possible, nevertheless, that domestic supplies of some coastal cities may be materially augmented by desalted sea water within the next few years.
If we succeed in achieving practical success in this program, we would have the promise of working a tremendous revolution for the betterment of mankind everywhere.
When the millions of acres of parched land which could be made fertile by these methods are considered, the changes which could be wrought throughout the world defy the imagination.
This program truly represents, therefore, one of the most important facets of the Department's efforts to develop new resources for tomorrow.
Minerals and fossil fuels differ from some other natural resources in that once used they cannot be replaced.
Many deposits not now known undoubtedly will be discovered, and ways undoubtedly will be found to utilize many already known but not now of commercial grade.
Nevertheless, our total resources.
We cannot add to them, but can only subtract.
Despite their irreplacable nature and their limited volume, minerals and fossil fuels are fundamental to our mechanical and industrial civilization.
Indeed any civilization at all would be impossible without minerals.
Man learned to fabricate implements and weapons of bronze—and, in the opinion of at least some authorities, of iron as well—before he learned to keep written records.
If the supply of mineral raw materials and fossil fuels should be cut off, our whole industrial and economic machine would quickly grind to a halt.
In fact the progress that has characterized the history of this country can continue only so long as these commodities continue to be available to us in constantly increasing volume.
In facing the challenge presented by the need for an ever-growing supply of mineral raw materials and fuels in the face of the inevitible depletion of our reserves, we can take heart from the experience of the past.
When mineral deposits discovered in the early days of the Nation became exhausted, we found new ones.
When it became clear that our forests would not provide enough charcoal to fuel our growing iron and steel industry, we turned first to anthracite and then to coke.
When we ran short of whale oil and oil distilled from coal for illumination, we discovered that petroleum, formerly used chiefly as medicine, could light our lamps, and a great new industry was born.
When an invention demanded better materials than were available at the time, we learned how to produce them.
Conversely, when we learned to make new materials, we discovered hitherto unsuspected ways of using them.
Such developments throughout our history have followed a welldefined pattern.
First scientists in their laboratories have advanced chemical or physical knowledge, sometimes intentionally but often apparently by accident.
From their experiments, new substances have been developed as laboratory curiosities.
Next, engineers have found ways of producing such substances economically and of incorporating them in designs.
Finally, business enterprises have seized upon the results of such advances and translated them into end products.
Through the cooperation of scientist, engineer, and businessman we have developed new metals and fuels, sometimes from earlier wastes.
For instance, in the early days of the oil industry gasoline was considered a dangerous waste material that had to be disposed of carefully by makers of kerosene; with the coming of the internal combustion engine this formerly discarded substance became one of the industry's most valuable products.
We also have learned to utilize lower and lower grade ores; for example, most of the world's copper comes from material that would have been regarded as waste rock a few generations ago.
In meeting the problem of supplying our needs for minerals, the Department plays a major part.
Twice during the past 15 years the United States has been drawn into international conflicts, and each time the supply situation with respect to strategic metals and minerals has been critical.
Even in peacetime, rapidly mounting demands for mineral raw materials have continued to place growing pressure upon our resource base.
In view of these facts, the President on October 26, 1953, established a Cabinet Committee on Minerals Policy to study problems relating to the production and utilization of metals and minerals and to make recommendations for national policies in this field.
Membership on this Committee included the Secretaries of the Interior, State, and Commerce, and the Director of the Office of Defense Mobilization, with the Secretary of the Interior serving as Chairman.
The Secretary of the Treasury and the Director of the Bureau of the Budget also partieipated in advisory capacities.
The Cabinet Committee during March 1954 presented an interim report containing a number of basic proposals.
A key recommendation was for the establishment of a new, long-term stockpiling program.
This plan, which was approved by the President and put in effect on March 26, 1954, calls for further acquisitions of 35 to 40 metals and minerals with the objective of virtually eliminating the risk that strategic and critical metals and minerals would become a bottleneck in time of emergency.
In appointing the Cabinet Committee, the President indicated that depressed conditions in numerous mining districts, largely the result of post-Korea adjustment, were of grave national concern.
He asked that every effort be made to find an equitable solution to this problem, since strong and prosperous mineral industries form a primary component of a sound mobilization base.
Consequently, the Committee indicated that purchases for the long-term stockpile were to be made, wherever possible, from domestic producers, and ordinarily at times when the Government decides that purchases will help to reactivate productive capacity and alleviate distressed conditions in industries producing strategic minerals and metals.
Stockpiling strategic and critical minerals and metals is, in effect, taking out an insurance policy against crippling shortages in times of national emergency.
It is essential to the security, perhaps to the very life, of the Nation, but it is only part of the story of mineral conservation, which means wise use of our resources without unnecessary waste.
To contribute to the solution of the problems involved in meeting our day-to-day requirements for minerals and fossil fuels, the Department conducts numerous programs.
In cooperation with educational institutions, research foundations, and industry, it strives to encourage wise and careful use of known deposits, exploration for additional deposits, and the development of new and better materials.
Programs carried out through the Bureau of Mines to approach these objectives include: (1) Developing new and improved methods for processing known mineral resources to offset the declining grade of ore; (2) improving methods of extracting and treating minerals and fossil fuels to recover valuable materials now wasted; (3) improving conservation of available materials now wasted; (4) improving conservation of available materials through reuse; (5) developing processes that will broaden the resource base to include more and more of the oceans, the atmosphere, and portions of the earth's crust not now considered economically usable; (6) providings new and abundant materials to meet or offset expanding requirements for older, scarcer commodities; (7) solving production and utilization problems that will make hitherto unused metals and minerals with peculiar properties available to meet the increasingly diversified requirements of the consuming industries; and (8) finding means of synthesizing mineral raw materials to meet and fill gaps in domestie supplies and to create better materials.
Soaring demands for metals pose problems of both materials and fuels.
Through the Bureau of Mines, for instance, the Department is seeking to develop feasible methods of utilizing low-grade bauxite and aluminum silicate rocks for the production of aluminum and of abundant ilmenite in place of scarcer rutile for the production of titanium metal.
At the same time, because production of both aluminum and titanium, and of the third light metal, magnesium, requires tremendous amounts of electricity, soaring demands for them presents the problem of fuel.
Although about 20 percent of our electricity comes from hydro plants, the principal source for the immediate future will be installations burning coal, oil, or natural gas.
Of these, our coal reserves are by far the greatest.
A Department research project, carried out by the Bureau of Mines in cooperation with a power company, culminated successfully last year with the opening of a generating plant burning dried lignite and designed ultimately to burn lignite char.
The electricity will be used for aluminum production in Texas.
In making the char, tar also is produced.
Since this tar differs from that obtained in carbonizing bituminous coal in coke ovens, studies are now being conducted to learn the nature and uses of the chemicals that can be produced from it.
This project already assures a future supply of low-cost electrical energy, and points to future development of a great but thus far little-used natural resource to yield not only fuel, but valuable coproducts as well.
Assurance of enough steel for the future likewise presents both materials and fuel problems.
On the materials side, the Bureau of Mines, enlisting the cooperation of industry, is conducted research on beneficiating low-grade and off-grade iron, chromium, and manganese ores, and on recovering manganese and iron from open-hearth steel furnace slags.
The latter process is being tested by industry on a semiworks scale; its industrial utilization may one day supply half the Nation's annual manganese requirements.
On the fuels side, mindful that coke meeting rigid standards of strength and chemical composition is needed for blast-furnace use, studies are conducted on preparation of coals to remove impurities, blending of less desirable coals with better ones to make possible their metallurgical use, and reducing mining losses—now amounting to about 50 percent of the coal in the ground—without adding appreciably to costs.
The significance of such studies to the Nation's future is pointed up by realization that although our coal resources are tremendous, our reserves of high-grade coking coal are more limited and are being depleted rapidly.
The Bureau of Mines has a continuing program of advancing health and safety in the mineral industries.
Improved teaching methods, new publications, detailed studies of hazards and their elimination, fostering of interest in accident-prevention campaigns, and compilation of pertinent statistics on accidents and their causes are chapters in the Bureau's program.
These activities are increasing constantly with corresponding reductions in accidents and a growing interest by miners and supervisors in the crusade against fires, explosions, roof falls, transportation accidents, electrocutions, and other mishaps that still take a heavy toll of lives.
Currently idle coal deposits in many parts of the country lie in the path of fires, and encroachment of water threatens to cut short the life of the anthracite mining industry of Pennsylvania.
Both threats are of concern to the Department.
Fire-control work carried out through the Bureau of Mines already has saved for coming generations more than 200 million tons of coal, some in the West and some in the thickly populated East.
Other millions of tons of coal of all ranks still lie in the path of fires, and measures are being developed by the Department to guard these irreplaceable reserves.
In eastern Pennsylvania, flood waters already have inundated millions of tons of anthracite, of which the Nation's reserves are extremely limited, and have hastened the closing of mines in this hardpressed area.
Through studies already completed and additional reports under preparation, the Department will be equipped to provide engineering assistance to comprehensive drainage and floodcontrol programs to save such reserves for tomorrow's needs.
Since 1946 this Nation has discovered more than 11½2 times as much petroleum and over twice as much natural gas as it has produced.
During 1953, the petroleum industry achieved the Governmentestablished goal of capacity to produce, transport, refine, and distribute one million barrels a day in excess of current requirements.
This reserve capacity, equalling about 1/s of present consumption, assures the Nation of enough petroleum products to meet a sudden emergency.
Historically, the production methods used have recovered less than half the oil originally present in the ground.
The Bureau of Mines is conducting studies aimed at increasing this proportion.
As an example of progress, ultimate recovery from one pool is expected to be increased by 720 million barrels.
Opportunities for similar contributions are almost unlimited and the Bureau is ever watchful for an opportunity to assist.
The enactment of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act in 1953 paved the way for the development of oil, gas, and other mineral resources of the outer Continental Shelf.
The Interior Department has been assigned the duty of supervising and regulating this development.
The outer Continental Shelf adjoining the United States, particularly in the Gulf of Mexico, represents one of the few remaining petroleum and mineral provinces that is largely unexplored.
Although its development will require many years, a firm foundation has now been laid.
Administration, offshore oil production is expected to increase greatly and bring substantial royalty payments to the Federal Treasury.
The discovery of oil under the water of the Continental Shelf and the development of methods of extracting it constitute a tremendous achievement of American science and enterprise.
For years the development of this resource was hampered by litigation and political dispute.
The action of Congress has now made it possible for development to proceed, in both State and Federal areas, thus adding a tremendous potential supply to the Nation’s oil reserves.
To postpone the day, predicted by some authorities, when the margin between our productive capacity and our rising requirements for petroleum will narrow, the Department cooperates with industry in both immediate and long-range research.
An important line of attacking the problem of meeting rising demands for liquid fuels is research upon their production synthetically not only from coal, but also from oil shale.
Our oil-shale resources have gone unused partly because of a feeling that mining costs would be prohibitive.
The Bureau of Mines has developed and tested techniques and equipment that have shown these fears to be groundless.
This accomplishment, coupled with the development and testing of retorting and refining methods, has brought down the cost of shale oil until it is approaching that of natural petroleum.
It is anticipated that industry now will assume some of the research load in this field.
The activities of the Defense Minerals Exploration Administration, designed to encourage exploration for strategic and critical minerals and metals, are an important aspect of the Department's efforts to aid in the development of new sources of minerals for the future.
Under the Defense Minerals Exploration Administration program the Government shares in the cost of the exploration.
Specific projects for exploration are established by contract in which the Government participates to the extent of 50 or 75 percent of the cost, depending upon the mineral sought.
The amount contributed by the Government is repayable as royalty from the net sales receipts for any ore produced.
From the beginning of the program in mid-1951 to June 30, 1954, 2,221 applieations for Government aid in exploration have been received from 24 States and Alaska.
During fiscal 1954 Defense Minerals Exploration Administration approved 130 contracts, bringing the total number of contracts executed since the inception of the program to 647.
Government commitments in contracts executed in the past 12 months amount to $4,275,001, bringing the total to date to $19,371,100.
Industry participation in the past 12 months has been $2,479,475, with a total to date of $12,446,624.
Substantial quantities of minerals have been found.
Current production is small, coming principally from ore removed during the exploration work, but as mining operations are expanded the ultimate production will be important to the national economy and defense.
In addition, during the search for higher grade ore, deposits of lower grade have been found which may be brought into production in the future.
These constitute a reservoir of strategic minerals which is an important element in the Nation's preparations for the minerals problems of tomorrow.
The urgency of the search for new sources of essential minerals demands a continual improvement in the techniques of mineral exploration.
In recent years, all of the physical sciences have been drawn upon, sometimes in dramatic fashion, in the endeavor to pierce as quickly and accurately as possible the geologic problems which hold the key to new mineral wealth.
The focal point of much of the Government's activities in this scientific research is the Geological Survey.
The application of airborne magnetometer and radioactivity methods, and the modification for field use of various laboratory techniques in geochemical and geobotanical prospecting has been pioneered by the Survey and found wide favor in the mining industries.
Through its scientific facilities and vast accumulation of data the Survey will undoubtedly continue to make significant contributions in this field so important in the overall task of providing resources for tomorrow.
Only a small proportion of the Nation's total supply of the principal minerals is located on the public lands, but as a part of the overall minerals development program of the Nation it is essential to assure the proper supervision of development and producing operations on these Federal and Indian land mineral leases.
This activity, carried out by the Geological Survey, includes enforeement of the applicable operating regulations and lease terms, and the requirement of adoption of safety measures designed to protect the resources from underground loss or damage.
Liberalized leasing regulations have accelerated prospecting.
Since 1945, for instance, suficient reserves of potash have been discovered to meet the anticipated national needs for this commodity for more than 150 years.
Recent explorations have brought to light prospective sourees of strategic minerals on national forest lands: Nickel and copper in Minnesota and Wisconsin; lead and zine in Missouri; manganese in Arkansas, Tennessee, and Virginia.
The importance of assuring wise use or preservation of leasable minerals and oil and gas is illustrated dramatically by the importance of these products to this country's economy, protection, and physical welfare.
During the fiscal year just closed, royalties accruing from leasing operations on federally owned and controlled lands amounted to nearly $49,000,000.
As the atomic age advances, fissionable materials, particularly uranium and thorium, will be outstandingly important.
Greater use of electronic equipment will enhance the importance and consumption of many of today's so-called rare metals such as germanium and selenium.
New alloys with superior physical, chemical, and electrical properties most certainly will be developed in the years ahead and will lead to increased demands for many of the uncommon metals, including the rare-earth metals.
To help assure that such demands will be met, the Bureau of Mines has been studying new techniques for beneficiating various types of uranium ores.
It also has conducted metallurgical research on monazite sands—the principal sources of thorium and the rare earth metals—thus acquiring more knowledge of rare earth metals and compounds.
The development of new and improved processes for recovering these elements from their ores is anticipated.
Impetus has been given to the production of uranium through the passage of legislation by the 83d Congress with full Administration support providing for the multiple use of our public lands.
Formerly, production was handicapped by legal problems and complex leasing procedures.
Since a very large part of our uranium supply comes from public land areas, this new legislation is of vital importance in accelerating the output of this critical material.
The new legislation will also aid in increasing production of other minerals and fuels.
Some 60 million acres of public lands under lease for oil and gas production are now open for mineral development.
Previously mineral development was excluded from the area.
On the other hand, millions of acres of publie lands on which mineral development will undoubtedly occur have also been opened to lease for oil and gas production.
The United States, although by far the world's leading producer of mineral wealth, also depends wholly or in part upon imports for several essential minerals.
The knowledge and background of the Department are used to keep the Nation abreast of developments in the mineral field abroad, and its professional skills and experience are on call to assist in the solution of technologic and economic problems of the mineral industries in friendly foreign countries, so that supplies of such minerals from foreign sources may be available to our industries when and as needed.
In the field of land management the Department has the primary responsibility with respect to an area (including Alaska) of more than 600 million acres.
Of these lands by far the largest part (over 500 million acres) is administered by the Bureau of Land Management.
BLM-administered lands consist for the most part of those lands, mainly in the West and in Alaska, remaining in Federal ownership today after many decades of settlement and acquisition of lands from the Government by our pioneers under the homesteading and other public land laws.
In addition to these lands, extensive areas embracing over 300 million acres of the public domain have been reserved for national forests, national parks, irrigation projects, military or atomic energy use, and other purposes.
Under the numerous public lands laws, over a billion acres of public land have been disposed of in the United States and Alaska since the founding of our Nation.
There are nearly 500 million acres remaining in the public domain subject to possible disposal.
Most of the latter lands are not now in demand, but population increases and shifts, technological improvements, and steadily improving economic conditions constantly create new demands.
The Department executes the land laws providing for disposal of such lands.
Strenuous efforts have been made during the year to speed up the issuance of patents and the processing of other necessary governmental actions.
Lands for such purposes have also been made available through a poliey of revoking unnecessary withdrawals.
In past years much public land that clearly will never be needed for public purposes was withdrawn from private use.
A continuous program is now underway to revoke such unnecessary reservations of public lands.
Revocations in the United States and Alaska during the fiscal year totalled elose to 2 million acres and action on several million more acres is being considered.
Land resources in the United States are mainly developed and utilized by individuals.
That is the situation whether the lands are privately owned or are in the public domain.
With respect to federally owned lands Congress has through the years enacted a host of laws dealing with their use by the private segments of our economy.
Under these laws it is a basic mission of the Department to integrate the publie domain with the private economy so far as feasible, consistent with the continuing objective of the wisest and soundest use.
The Department remains responsible for assuring sound resource management and development of such lands.
The Bureau of Land Management also works constantly with the land users to insure that sustained yield practices will be followed, in order to provide a resource base for future generations.
A basic principle of conservation is to provide incentives to the land users to leave something for tomorrow.
That is achieved through guaranteeing land users security of tenure on the lands they use.
As a result of such policies, individual land users not only cooperate with the Government in sound conservation practices, but commonly also take the initiative in making conservation improvements which build up productive values, far beyond the capacity of the Government to achieve alone.
Other relatively inexpensive functions of the Bureau, such as cadastral surveys for the identification of boundaries, and land use planning and classification, help lay a sound basis for the most productive use.
The execution of these responsibilities has been given additional impetus by the recent reorganization of the Bureau of Land Management which provides for further decentralization of operations and the amalgamation of all the technical staffs into a technical bureau.
The forest lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management fall into three categories: (1) The revested O & C Railroad grant lands and other areas generally identified as O & C lands; (2) public domain forest lands in the continental United States, and (3) the public domain forest land in the Territory of Alaska.
These forest lands, which approximate 21 million acres in the O & C area, 4½/ million acres on the United States publie domain and 40 million acres in Alaska, contain a basic resource having an actual value of billions of dollars.
When such a resource is made available to private entrprise each dollar's worth of raw material permits the gainful employment of labor to create and fashion new goods and structures which add immeasurably to the wealth of the Nation.
It is the goal of the Bureau to enhance and perpetuate this wealth by proper management.
Timber, being a renewable resource, can be so managed.
Forest management on the O & C lands, practiced under the sustained vield act of 1937, is steadily increasing the value of an already valuable resource.
The act carries out the principle of good management by limiting the harvest to a rate that does not exceed the sustained yield capacity, thus insuring a continuous annual timber supply.
The public domain forest resource in the United States is scattered over 11 western and 11 eastern states from the Atlantic to the Pacific.
The principles of forest management applicable to O & C lands also apply to public domain.
To perpetuate the forest resource on this scattered area, the major problem, after providing adequate protection, is to overcome the fragmented pattern of ownership.
Wherever feasible the practice of private tree farming is facilitated and extended either by integrating the management of public domain forest with such enterprises.
Controlled cutting, intelligently planned access roads, increasingly better protection, constantly improving forest practices, and more and more reforestation, are reflecting the effects of proper management on Bureau of Land Management forest lands.
These activities serve to increase the harvest of salvage and overmature timber, and turn more acres over to the immature growing stock that will supply future generations with wood products, insure recreation values, and protect water supplies.
Prudent management in any field of activity requires knowledge of the limits to which that activity can be applied.
Cadastral surveys provide this knowledge in land matters by creating and establishing the boundaries of the public lands, identifying the subdivisions of those lands, and affording deseriptions and areas for management and title purposes.
Those surveys differ from purely informational surveys conducted by other agencies in that the land boundaries are actually established and marked on the ground by substantial monuments.
An equally important part of the cadastral program is the reestablishment of survey lines and corners which have become obliterated due to passage of time and destructive forces of the elements.
Of vast importance to the nation and to the industry has been the establishment of suitable leasing units, by cadastral processes, on the outer continental shelf in the Gulf of Mexico.
This affords a basis for the leasing of those areas and the development of the tremendous mineral potential beneath the waters of the Gulf.
In carrying out this cadastral program, attention is given to the long range needs for establishing land boundaries for the future development and conservation of our resources.
Land classification is a tool whereby lands may be put to their highest use.
Land classification is also a means whereby the land ownership pattern may be simplified for more effieient management.
It should be noted, however, that land classification has never been applied in Alaska since in a large, undeveloped area such as this Territory it is generally more feasible to permit development to proceed along the lines that seem most appropriate to the individual settler.
1) Place in private ownership those public lands which are adaptable to agricultural production.
2) Place in private ownership those public lands whieh are isolated from other public lands and not subject to efficient publie management.
3) Retain in public ownership for sustained-yield management those lands which are not suitable for private ownership under present conditions.
These lands consist of sustained-yield forest units, grazing lands not susceptible to individual ownership, and other lands which are needed for public use.
4) Place in State or local ownership those lands which are used and can be efficiently managed in the public interest by local governing bodies.
Because of the selective manner in which the public domain was disposed of under the public land laws, the remaining public domain in many areas presents a problem of land ownership pattern.
An intermittent and intermingled land ownership pattern is a deterrent to proper land use and conservation practices.
It is the responsibility of the Bureau to so manage public domain that the land ownership pattern is simplified.
This will contribute to better use of both public and private lands.
Simplification of the land ownership pattern is presently being accomplished by land sales, private land exchanges, exchanges of lands with the States, restoration of public lands from restrictive withdrawals, and selective disposals under various public land laws.
The Bureau's lands program is pointed toward consolidation of lands producing timber and forage so that they may make maximum contributions to the local and national economy.
Continued progress in the management, conservation, and improvement of the public land grazing resource has reversed the trend of range deterioration in past years.
Adjustments in grazing use to the sustained productivity of the forage resource and gradual improvement of the soil through conservation practices will help assure an adequate forage supply to serve tomorrow's needs.
The range administration activities of the Bureau are directed toward the full utilization of the Federal range forage resources in the future and continued stabilization of the livestock industry dependent upon them.
Present day technology applied to range conservation practices is demonstrating the full potential of increased productivity.
The success of the Bureau's range waterspreading practices has attracted international attention as an effective soil and water conservation measure.
Great strides have been made in the field of artificial range revegetation, although millions of acres of public rangeland still remain in need of treatment to attain maximum productive capacity.
Both immediate and long time programming of the Bureau's conservation activities is based on a watershed approach in order to fully utilize the available physical data obtained from river basin and similar studies.
Recently this programming has also been geared to the Department's twenty-year plan of conservation for all Interior lands.
Long time plans also provide for needed range improvements such as stockwater, fencing, truck trails and similar measures to facilitate use of the range.
While many such improvements have been installed, much remains to be done.
The accomplishments here as in range administration and conservation all provide positive evidence of proper resource management for the future.
Lands held in trust by the Federal Government for Indian tribal groups and individual Indians, comprising more than 54,000,000 acres, are a factor of major importance in the future resource picture of the Nation and particularly of the West.
It is the purpose of the Department to terminate Federal supervision as rapidly as the Indians are ready and willing to assume the full responsibilities of citizenship and where the States and local governments are prepared to render them normal community services.
As this process takes place, the Indians will assume themselves the management of the resources of their lands.
The Federal programs directed to conservation of these lands and resources, therefore, must look to that day.
Although some parts of the Indian estate are sharply limited in economic value and a few areas are virtually worthless, the combined area still looms large in significance.
It includes, for example, about 850,000 acres of irrigated land which in 1953 produced crops valued at more than $40,000,000.
Nearly a third of the area, about 16,000,000 aeres, is forest land with an estimated volume of 41 billion board feet of timber.
Roughly 30 billion board feet of this total is on 6 million acres classed as commercial forest.
Also ineluded in the total are more than 44 million acres of rangeland with an annual grazing eapacity for 880,000 cow units and an annual use value of $6,500,000.
Underlying the Indian lands are deposits of oil, gas, uranium, and other minerals whieh, in the year ended June 30, 1954, produced an income for Indians of over $30,000,000.
Many of the Indian lands, located in key watershed areas, are vitally important from the standpoint of streamflow and reservoir protection.
The future of these Indian resources must be considered from two points of view.
On the one hand there is the prospect that increasing portions of the Indian estate will move out of trust status and into unrestricted private ownership as additional Indians and Indian groups reach the level of competence where they are able to manage their assets without further Federal supervision.
On the other side is the job which remains to be done in developing, managing, and conserving Indian resources prior to the eventual termination of trusteeship.
The 83d Congress undoubtedly achieved more progress in providing Indians with full authority and responsibility for handling their own economic affairs than any previous Congress in the Nation's history.
During the first session it adopted, in House Concurrent Resolution No. 108, a basic policy that Indian tribal groups should be given such authority and responsibility as rapidly as feasible.
In the second session it held hearings on a substantial number of bills designed to accomplish this purpose for particular Indian groups, enacted one into law during the fiscal year 1954, and had several others under active consideration at the end of the fiscal year.
Involved in these measures were two of the most important Indian timber holdings in the country—those of the Menominee Tribe in Wisconsin and the Klamath Tribe of Oregon.
What the ownership pattern of Indian lands will be after termination of Federal trusteeship is impossible to predict since the decision will be made by the Indian owners and not by the Federal Government.
As an illustration, legislation for the Klamath Tribe, developed in accordance with recommendations of the tribal leaders, specifically provides for dividing the tribal holdings into two major segments.
One of these would be sold and the proceeds distributed to those members wishing to withdraw their individual shares of the tribal assets.
The other would be held in tribal ownership and managed for the benefit of individuals choosing to remain in the tribal organization.
Other termination bills considered by the 83d Congress provide the Indians affected with an option of disposing of their property or continuing to manage it either through a private trustee or as an organized group.
Pending the eventual termination of Federal trusteeship, the Bureau of Indian Affairs has a continuing responsibility to safeguard the Indian trust lands and to promote their effective development and use to the fullest possible extent.
This involves principally conservation of the soil and water resources, proper development of the mineral assets, sound management of Indian forests and ranges, and assistance to Indian farm families in agricultural and home-making techniques.
The soil and moisture conservation program of the Bureau is in the process of rehabilitating the 55 percent of Indian lands with severe and critical erosion and of saving from destruction the 45 percent where erosion is slight to moderate.
The application of conservation and improved land treatment measures, combined with healing natural processes, frequently develops the soil to a higher state of productivity than that found under virgin conditions.
The Department's 20-year plan for soil and moisture conservation as developed by the Bureau for Indian lands is aimed at stepping up production to keep pace with the population increase.
On irrigated lands production will be greatly enlarged by the better usage of water resulting from leveling, revision of distribution systems, the control of salts and improvements in method of application which better control the amount of moisture available for plant growth.
On dry farmland similar results will be achieved by the installation of upland waterways, terraces, and contour farming; the production of cover crops, including legumes, in rotations to increase soil nitrogen and organic material; improvements in tillage practices including rough tillage and subsurface tillage; the introduction of new crop species, weed control, and the application of fertilizers as part of the farm conservation plan.
On rangelands the work will emphasize brush removal, reseeding, and water spreading to increase the yield palatable of forage and development of ponds such as the improved deep-pit charco, as a means of obtaining better distribution of stock and making more effective use of the forage.
Soil and moisture conservation is also an extremely valuable part of the termination program in Indian affairs.
It prepares the individual for high-caliber citizenship.
The Indian plans with technicians the future of his operations and his land.
He puts the plans into effect and year by year improves his property and its productive capacity.
In the process he becomes economically independent.
The widespread exploratory interest on numerous Indian reservations and the extensive leasing of lands for development of oil and gas and strategic minerals indicate that these lands will contribute materially to the future needs of the Nation.
Income to the Indians from oil and gas and other mineral development has been increasing steadily for the past several years and in fiscal 1954 reached a peak of more than $30,000,000.
In contrast with earlier years when mineral development on Indian lands was largely confined to Oklahoma, many tribes in other parts of the country are now benefiting from exploration operations.
The orderly development of oil and gas and other minerals is the program for the period ahead.
This will be accomplished by unity of purpose and action in which the Indian landowners and the industry take the leading part.
The program is implemented by oil and gas unit and communitization agreements and cooperation with the State agencies.
Such a program will serve to prolong the life of the oil and gas fields, meet future petroleum needs, and increase the income of the Indian landowners.
This program had its start on Indian lands in Oklahoma in the 1920's and has resulted in prolonging the life of the fields and materially assisting in meeting the demand for petroleum.
As far as strategic minerals are coneerned, recent developments on reservations in New Mexico, Arizona, and Utah, warrant an optimistie outlook.
The management of Indian forest lands contemplates their conservative development and use, by the Indian people, for the purpose of promoting self-sustaining communities.
It is concerned, in other words, with human as well as forest resources.
The ultimate objective of the Indian Bureau's forest management program is to help those tribes with timber resources to reach the point where the present Federal trusteeship may be terminated and the estate turned over to the Indian owners.
Although much remains to be done, there has been notable progress in the management and conservative use of Indian forests under Government supervision.
The present annual timber harvest from the 6 million acres of commercially valuable Indian forest is about 575 million board-feet.
The annual income to the Indian owners, in the form of stumpage payments, amounts to more than $9,000,000.
Because of fund limitations, it has not been possible to develop the forests on all Indian reservations to their full productive capacity.
To accomplish this will require reliable data regarding present volumes and growth potentials, and access roads to facilitate the harvest of overmature and decadent timber.
In the past 2 years the Indians of several reservations have made their own funds available to obtain forest inventories and to prepare management plans.
While progress in aecess-road construction has been less encouraging up to now, the prospects for the immediate future seem to be somewhat brighter.
It is believed that, with full development, the present Indian forests are capable of producing about 700 million board-feet of commercial timber annually.
Through its extension program the Bureau of Indian Affairs has been making another contribution to the conservation and development of the Nation's resources by educating the Indian citizens to the value of their agricultural resources and the proper use of them.
This is being accomplished by gathering scientific and practical information relative to these resources and passing it on to the Indians in a form which they can understand and use beneficially.
Meetings, short courses, observational tours, and field demonstrations are conducted at which Indians are advised concerning the proper development and use of their agricultural resources.
This enables them to realize the greatest possible returns from their resources and, at the same time permits passing them on to future generations in a highly productive state.
The Department's Fish and Wildlife Service, guardian of our Nation's free-moving creatures of the sea, air, land, and fresh-water areas, has set its sights on the year 1975 as a major check-point in its look to the future.
By that year, the available supplies of food fish must have increased by 25 percent in order that the nutritional needs of our anticipated human population may be met.
By that year, too, about 4 million American waterfowl hunters nearly twice the present number—will be gunning for wild ducks and geese, expecting to find enough birds available to satisfy a reasonable sporting urge.
These demands, along with many others having no time limit, guide the Fish and Wildlife Service in planning and carrying out its programs.
Although the combined commercial fisheries of the United States and Alaska yielded 4.4 billion pounds of fish and shellfish (valued at 345 million dollars) in calendar year 1953, this catch was considerably below the potential.
Since fish and shellfish are particularly valuable sources of protein, utilization of food from the sea will havé special importance in meeting the nutritional needs of the Nation's future population.
The production of haddock in the north Atlantic could be inereased 50 percent by scientific adjustment of the fishing rate.
There are great underfished resources of herring in the north Atlantic and west Pacific, of pilchard in the south Atlantic and south Pacific, of tunas in the central Pacific and south Atlantic, of cod in the north Pacific and the Atlantic.
These latent stocks of fish constitute resources for the future, which present research and other activities of the Department are helping to conserve and make available.
Increasing the production of fish will not ensure improvement in the Nation's diet, however, unless these valuable food items are added to the menu.
Already, steps are being taken by the Department to work toward this objective.
Probably the most important piece of legislation enacted in many years for the benefit of the Nation's commercial fisheries is the Saltonstall-Kennedy Bill approved by the 83d Congress.
This bill earmarks $3,000,000, for a period of 3 years, from duties collected under the custom laws on fishery products, for transfer by the Secretary of Agriculture to the Secretary of the Interior.
These funds are to be used in promoting the free flow of domestically produced fishery products in commerce by means of an educational service, along with technological, biological, and related research programs.
The average (per person) consumption of fish has hardly changed in the last 25 years.
This new program, to promote understanding of the value of fish for food, should make a valuable contribution toward meeting the Nation's nutritional needs in the future.
In Alaska, because commercial fishing is the chief source of income, the Service keeps a watchful eye on aquatic resources.
Conservation measures are applied constantly as a safeguard against overfishing.
The salmon industry, which accounts for 90 percent of Alaska's fishery products (from the standpoint of value), has been fully exploited for a number of years.
As a result, the Service recently found it necessary to protect the salmon by means of strict regulatory controls on the take of this species.
Through such measures future generations of Alaskans will be able to find a livelihood, as their fathers have done, in the north country's fishing bays, inlets, tidal basins, and open coastal waters.
Considerable effort has been made by the Service in recent years to expand the Territory's latent fisheries, with activities in this direction centering around the yield of king crabs and groundfish.
The king-crab fishery has shown gains, and bottom fish are expected to form the basis of a recognized fishery in the near future.
The staff members of the Service's Pacifie Oceanic Fishery Investigations is searching the seas around Hawaii and westward through the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands for new sources of protein for the American dinner table.
Valuable information on the distribution of Pacific tuna is being obtained, along with facts on the abundance of this highly important food species.
Similar studies are being made by the Service in Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico waters, with various species of fish and shellfish under scrutiny.
New fishing grounds are being opened up, and improved methods of catching fish are being developed.
Trouble-shooting in connection with the Nation's commercial fisheries has been a necessity from the earliest days.
Through biological research, the Service has suggested solutions which in some cases have alleviated such adverse situations as a sharp decline in the catch of haddock in the late 1920's; the recent invasion of Lakes Huron, Michigan, and Superior by the fish-killing predator known as the sea lamprey; and the mass mortalities of fish resulting from a plague called the "red tide" which has periodically infested the waters off the west coast of Florida.
The past few years have brought increasing cognizance of the international aspects of fish resources, with the Service playing a prominent role.
The need for cooperation among nations has become more apparent with each passing year, and the result has been a rise in the number of international fish-conservation agreements, as well as more active exchange of technological information and skills.
International teamwork recently resulted in substantial economic gain for the trawler fishermen of New England.
On the recommendation of the International Commission for the North Atlantic Fisheries, the United States promulgated a new regulation designed to conserve undersized haddock.
The small fish thereby spared for future seasons will be worth a million dollars each year, according to Service calculations.
In the interest of good sport fishing the Service is keeping constant vigilance over the Nation's game fish, concentrating particularly on reserve stocks and potentials for the anglers of the future.
Service sport-fishery specialists have found that only through wise and careful management of our game-fish resources can stocks be expected to hold out under the heavy fishing pressures extant today and even greater pressures expected to develop in the years to come.
Fortunately, fresh-water fishery management is coming into its own as a science.
With the aid of research, the Service is learning how to make better use of hatchery-propagated fish and how to rear better fish more economically.
A good understanding of fresh-water fish populations, their environments, and their proper utilization is gradually being acquired and new techniques of fishery manipulation are being developed.
By means of this fresh knowledge, stocks are both preserved and expanded.
Designed to restore and protect game fish for the future, the Dingell-Johnson program is a joint Federal-State endeavor administered by the Service.
By means of this program, State sport fisheries are reaping the benefit of constant research and development activities.
Land and water areas are being purchased to increase public fishing opportunities, and physical improvement projects in the fisheries are resulting in greater game-fish productivity as well as the creation of new fishing waters.
Because of their migratory habits, American waterfowl are peculiarly the concern of the Federal Government.
Seasonal flights carry some of our wild ducks and geese from the Arctic Ocean to the northern regions of South America and back again.
Crossing international boundaries in spring and fall, these intercontinental migrations gave rise in 1916 to the Migratory Bird Treaty, whereby the United States and Canada agreed to give migratory birds the fullest possible protection against undue depletion.
In 1936, a similar agreement was reached with Mexico.
To assure perpetuation of wild ducks and geese for the hordes of waterfowl hunters that take to the marshes each fall and winter, the Service works on a year-round basis studying and protecting these much-sought-after game birds.
Breeding-ground, wintering-ground, and hunting-success surveys are conducted annually, and the result is a close check from one end of the year to the other on waterfowl survival trends.
The National Wildlife Refuge Program of the Service is a great general insurance program for the benefit of these birds.
In many of the Nation's most heavily shot areas there are Federal refuges to harbor waterfowl when hunting pressures get too severe.
This refuge program has recently doubled the number of Canada geese in areas where waterfowl hunters do their shooting.
During the next 10 to 15 years, if the program is carried forward to its goal, the number of geese in these areas will be tripled.
A great deal of pressure has already been taken off the heavily hunted ducks.
Other birds receiving special attention at Federal refuges are the rare trumpeter swans and whooping cranes.
Through careful study of these unique native species, and through scientific measures designed to increase their chances of survival, the Service is playing a leading role in saving them from extinction.
The successful handling of Alaska's fur-seal herd by the Federal Government has been cited by naturalists as an outstanding example of proper conservation and channeling of an animal population in the natural state.
Since the Government first assumed direct responsibility for this resource, 45 years ago, the herd's ranks have swollen from 125,000 to 1,500,000 seals.
During this period more than 1,800,000 skins have been taken from male fur seals with no detriment to the herd, since these males were surplus to the breeding requirements of this highly polygamous species.
The herd has now reached a peak of development, and a sustained annual yield of 60,000 to 70,000 skins is being maintained.
To preserve other wildlife for future generations, the Service administers the Pittman-Robertson program whereby game species are restored and protected through a variety of life-giving projects.
These projects, initiated and conducted by the States, consist principally of research, surveys, land acquisition, and land development.
Recent projects have given new impetus to the perpetuation of antelopes, elk, wild goats and sheep, deer, caribou, moose, bears, wild turkeys, quail, pheasants, grouse, and doves, to name but a few.
The control of predatory animals such as coyotes, wolves, bobcats, and mountain lions is often a decisive factor in successfully stocking an area with desirable species.
It is also a necessary management tool in building up game populations in localities where the ranks have been seriously depleted through overhunting or other causes.
Predator-control operations are carried out by the Service in many areas of the United States and Alaska.
Although the Service's predator-control operations in the West are conducted primarily to reduce livestock losses, these operations are benefiting game species indirectly.
As a result, profitable livestock production and continued hunting opportunities are being assured under one and the same program.
The Service has been called upon recently to participate in a number of multiple-purpose resource developments.
As a result, it has been necessary to stress the importance of preserving fish and wildlife in the face of irrigation, flood control, electrie power, and river-navigation projects.
When necessary and feasible, the Service is recommending the acquisition, in advance, of compensatory lands to replace wildlife habitat that would be lost as the result of reservoir construction.
Lands at several Federal reservoirs were made available during fiscal year 1954 for management of wildlife and fishery resources by State and Federal conservation agencies.
The Service is forcefully pursuing its policy of protecting fish and wildlife in connection with all water-development projects.
Uppermost in mind is the fact that these resources are important not only economically, but sociologically as well.
The role these resources play in satisfying the growing need among the American people for outdoor recreation cannot be measured in dollars and cents.
Recognizing the need for facts on which to base effective wildlife management, the Service is cooperating extensively with colleges and universities throughout the Nation in research and training activities.
Research laboratories have been established, and biologists have been assigned to attack the problem of wildlife diseases and similar perplexing questions.
Service researchers are playing a prominent part in the recognition of fish and wildlife surpluses, and in pointing out the advisability of harvesting these surpluses within sound biological limits.
Through these and many other research activities, the Service is laying the foundation for efficient planning, reasonable approaches, and enlightened action.
As a result, longer-range conservation and better use of our fish and wildlife resources may be expected in the future.
One of the most striking and significant social phenomena of midcentury America has been the tremendous surge of public interest in our national parks.
If present trends continue, moreover, this interest is expected to grow at an even more spectacular pace in the future.
In 1910 only about 200,000 visitors were counted at all of our national parks.
By 1920 this had increased to 1,000,000, in 1930 to 3,000,000, and in 1940 to 17,000,000.
Following World War II, this upward trend was greatly accelerated.
By 1950 more than 33,000,000 people were enjoying our parks each year and by 1953 the total had reached the record height of more than 46,000,000.
This continuing increase in the number of people finding recreation and enjoyment in our national parks is clearly the result of a variety of factors which are having an ever greater impact on our national way of life.
One of these factors has been the automobile.
In recent years the automobile and the expanding network of good roads has made travel to once remote areas possible for millions of Americans.
At the same time, our civilization has provided our citizens with increased amounts of leisure time to devote to personal interests, such as travel.
Other factors which have combined to focus attention on our national parks are the continued growth of population and the progressive urbanization of the Nation.
Our cities are spreading over the landscape.
As they grow closer and closer together, the once great vistas of open land and endless forests are being steadily reduced.
These developments have limited the areas in which we can enjoy the timeless beauties of nature at the same time that other tendencies have created a growing need and opportunity for such enjoyment.
It is clear, therefore, that as our Nation continues to grow, we will undoubtedly treasure with increased concern the areas of unparalleled scenie beauty and historie significance which have been set aside as national parks to be preserved for the enjoyment of all.
The Department is determined to meet its responsibility to care for and broaden these opportunities for enjoyment.
As the need dictates and the opportunity arises, additional areas will be added to our national park system and existing areas further developed and expanded.
In keeping with this overall objective, the Department also will continue to work with local governments for the development of State parks, and will seek to utilize the full recreational potentialities of other areas, such as storage reservoirs and the lands around them.
In spite of all the wealth that has been produced in Alaska from fisheries, mines, furs, and forests, the real significance to the United States of this giant of the Territories lies in its development potentials.
Alaska represents a vast storehouse of resources for the future because it is beyond question the largest and richest undeveloped area of the Nation.
The problems peculiar to Alaska, including commereial fisheries, land management, industrial and defense development, are being attacked by the Department on all fronts in an attempt to foster accelerated development of the Territory.
These activities include emphasis on the policy of freeing the lands of the Territory from unnecessary withdrawals to permit more land to pass into non-Federal ownership, thus hastening the development of these resources for tomorrow.
Alaska salmon operators and fishermen joined with the Department during the fiscal year in unprecedented conservation measures designed to aid in restoring the pink salmon runs in Territorial waters.
These measures are an important part of the effort looking forward to a rich resource future for Alaska.
Another phase of the Department's activities in the Territory has been the successful attempt to improve the efficiency of its operations affecting the Territory, thus providing better public services as well as savings for the taxpayer.
Illustrative of this effort was reorganization of the Alaska Railroad which has resulted in the replacement of a loss in fiscal 1953 by a $766,000 profit in fiscal 1954.
The future of Alaska is of international as well as national significance.
Yukon territory in Canada.
These related areas in the Dominion are equally undeveloped and equally important on a continental scale to the economics of the future.
The international boundary between the Canadian and United States portions of this northland region is a completely artificial one.
There is no geographic separation established by the physical features of mountains, valleys, lakes, and rivers.
The full potential of this region, Canada's Northwest as well -as Alaska, can hardly be realized until the two nations find a way to join hands in the utilization of its natural wealth.
Water resources furnish the most dramatic example of this political economy relationship.
On the Canadian side of the boundary that separates British Columbia and Yukon territory from Southeastern Alaska are enormous supplies of water, most of which flows northward to enter the Yukon River system or westward through gaps in the coastal Rockies to the sea.
On the United States side the mountains slope precipitously to the Pacific Ocean, furnishing a huge power potential if Canadian water can be brought through the mountains to take advantage of the abrupt drop in altitude.
Competent engineers have appraised this power potential as among the greatest in North America, with estimated costs at phenomenally low levels.
Further south at Kitimat in British Columbia the Canadians have proved the size and cheapness of a similar power supply in an area where Canada controls both the water and its outlet to the ocean.
An aluminum empire, based on cheap power and including a new city, is being built in this portion of the Canadian wilderness, thus providing a large-scale demonstration of the practicability of this kind of enterprise.
On an international basis, the same kind of development is possible in the Alaska-Canadian areas north of Kitimat, but it will require new principles and new techniques of cooperation between the two nations to accomplish it.
Alaska not only has many other waterpower possibilities in stream valleys which it wholly controls, but many other resourees of importance to the economic welfare of the United States.
Among the most important of these are Alaska's forests, which cover the coastal slopes of the mountains from Ketchikan to the Kenai Peninsula.
Here is one of the last great virgin forests of the world, so protected by humidity and rainfall that fire damage has never been a serious problem.
While there has been some use of Alaskan timber on a small scale for many years, the recent opening of a multi-million-dollar pulp mill near Ketchikan represents the first large-scale use of this forest resource.
Since the coastal forest cover stretches far to the north in the Tongass and Chugach national forests, there are many opportunities for other industrial plants of a similar character.
The petroleum possibilities of the far north are so great that oil companies have been busy in many parts of Alaska exploring and leasing oil lands, while in some areas drilling operations are under way.
Navy exploration has already demonstrated the existence of oil and gas resources north of the Brooks Range.
Other prominent structures now being actively explored are in the Yakutaga-Katalla area near Cordova, in an area near Chinitna Bay, at the base of the Alaska Peninsula, and in a region east of Palmer.
Geological investigations are also under way in other parts of Alaska.
In these explorations the Department of the Interior has a heavy responsibility in the issuance of leases and in providing map services, geological data, and supervision over the oil development, and a transportation responsibility arising from its operation of The Alaska Railroad and the Alaska Road Commission.
Although many millions of dollars have been taken from Alaska's wealth in gold, copper, coal, and other minerals, the full extent of Alaska's mineral resources is not yet known.
The areas of exploration and possible exploration are so vast it is not improbable that additional discoveries will be made for many years to come.
The absence of adequate transportation, except air transportation, now makes it necessary to concentrate on very high grade, high value deposits.
For the development of Alaska’s resources of the future a great deal depends on the work of the Department's Geological Survey and Bureau of Mines.
The work of territorial agencies centered at Juneau and at the University of Alaska, at Fairbanks, is also making its contribution.
Above all, land problems emphasize the partnership relation between the Department of the Interior and local enterprise in both the use and conservation of the Territory's resources.
There are many other Alaskan resources, the future use of which depends upon a partnership relation between business and government.
The handling of fishery resources is one of these.
Except as the Department of the Interior, Alaska's fishermen, and Alaska's salmon eanning interests can find effective and rational ways to conserve fishery resources in the present, the significance of fisheries as a resource for the future may continue to decline.
The problems of conservation of resources involve use as well as conservation.
A mature forest deteriorates when the crop is not harvested.
On the other hand mining operations limited only to the extraction of the highest grade ores make more difficult the profitable mining of lower grade deposits which may be greatly needed by future generations.
Many governmental agencies in addition to the Department of the Interior are involved in the conservation and resource use problems of the territories: the Department of Agriculture in its assistance to farmers in the Matanuska and Tanana valleys and on the Kenai Peninsula; the Department of Commerce in its aid to the development of territorial aviation; the Department of the Treasury through the activities of the Coast Guard, and others.
In territorial areas of the United States other than Alaska the use of existing resources is of far more importance to future economic progress than is the expectation of finding previously unexplored sources of wealth.
This would seem to be true of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the Territory of Hawaii.
In such areas conservation is necessarily of overriding importance.
In any consideration of the utilization of physical resources it must never be forgotten that human resources are paramount, for it is only in their effect upon human welfare that the use and conservation of physical resources have any meaning.
In all territorial areas political developments go hand in hand with economic growth.
A free people are the most productive and the development of both the form and substance of self-government is not unrelated to the wise use and conservation of resources.
In this field the Department through it Office of Territories will continue its historic mission of assisting territorial peoples in establishing the conditions which make representative government possible, and of providing ever-increasing opportunities for them to participate in that government.
Gifford Pinchot, one of the greatest conservation leaders of this country, summed up the essence of sound resource planning when he said". . . conservation is the farsighted utilization, preservation, and renewal of forests, lands, and minerals, for the greatest good for the greatest number for the longest time."
This time-tested doctrine has provided a guiding philosophy for the Interior Department's many resource activities.
We think, as this report has indicated, that a good job is being done.
It could, of course, be better.
There is a constant need for reexamination of our resource programs to insure that necessary reorientations and changes are made as required.
In the past year, significant progress has been made by the Department in providing better public service at the same time that savings were achieved for the taxpayer.
This resulted from a series of comprehensive administrative actions which were launched shortly after the new administration assumed office.
Early in 1953, survey teams were appointed and asked to make a detailed review of the organization and operating procedures of each of the Department's bureaus and offices in order to develop the most efficient means of accomplishing the Department's programs.
These teams included top level management personnel from industry and expert professional consultants as well as selected personnel from within the Government but outside of the bureau being studied.
At the conclusion of these surveys, the teams made recommendations for organizational and operating changes to increase efficiency.
These changes have been approved and at the end of the fiscal year most of the necessary bureau reorganizations have been completed.
As a result, it has been possible to reduce the Department's personnel costs by an estimated $15,000,000, while improving services to the publie.
This saving was brought about in the main by increased efficiency.
In previous years, the Department's employment had been substantially increased in anticipation of budget allocations which Congress did not enact.
The personnel reduction which was achieved in the fiscal 1954 was, therefore, in conformance with the actual workload being carried by the Department and did not constitute a curtailment of operations.
These efforts to increase administrative efficiency, as well as allied activities in a variety of fields to assure the soundest possible programs for fulfilling the Department's responsibilities, will be vigorously pursued.
We shall continue to work as earnestly and as creatively as we know how to insure that the resource needs of tomorrow as well as those of today are met fully and efficiently.
HE Assistant Secretary—Water and Power Development—is responsible for the supervision and direction of the water and power agencies of the Department.
These are the Bureau of Reclamation, Bonneville Power Administration, Southeastern Power Administration, and the Southwestern Power Administration.
The latter three agencies are solely marketing agencies for the sale of surplus electric power generated at Federal dams in their respective areas.
The Bureau of Reclamation undertakes the construction of projects whose primary purpose is the reclamation of arid and semiarid lands in the western part of the United States and also markets power in this area outside the boundaries of the Bonneville Power Administration and Southwestern Power Administration.
The activities of these agencies are more fully described in sections of this report covering each of the Department's bureaus and offices.
In addition, the Assistant Secretary—Water and Power Development—exercises responsibilities which are not exclusive to any one of the Department's operating bureaus or agencies, but which involve particularly the consideration of problems of a broad, overall, or policy nature.
These include the supervision of the Saline Water Conversion Program, which is described in a separate chapter in this report, and coordination, review, and preparation of Departmental comments on water and power project proposals submitted by other Federal agencies to this Department.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 1954, the Department, through this office, reviewed 40 reports of the Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army, concerned primarily with flood control and navigation; 18 reports of the Department of Agriculture concerned primarily with runoff and waterflow retardation; 19 reports of the Public Health Service, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, concerning water pollution; and 50 applications for permits and licenses under the Federal Power Act.
The Assistant Secretary—Water and Power Development—actively participated in the negotiation of contracts for the sale of power in the Southeast and Southwest begun during fiscal year 1954.
Marketing criteria for guidance in future contract negotiations for the disposal of power by the Bureau of Reclamation in the Missouri River Basin were also issued.
Policies were reviewed and formulated for the marketing of power and the preparation of adjustments in rates by the Bonneville Power Administration.
Instructions were issued for a comprehensive analysis and review of the Missouri Basin program.
General agreement was reached with the Corps of Engineers and the Federal Power Commission on methods and related factors for the determination of allocations of cost of multipurpose projects.
The Assistant Secretary—Water and Power Development—participated with representatives of the Department of the Interior and other interested Federal agencies in discussions with representatives of the State of California on the proposal of the California Water Project Authority for State acquisition of the Central Valley Project.
He also serves as Departmental representative on the Inter-Agency Committee on Water Resources which replaces the former Federal Inter-Agency River Basin Committee.
The purpose of the reorganized committee is to provide for the establishment of policies and procedures for facilitating the coordination of interests and programs of the various Government agencies concerned with water resource development.
The residual functions of the Defense Electric Power Administration, which was abolished as of the close of business on June 30, 1953, were transferred to the Office of Assistant Secretary—Water and Power Development.
The major functions remaining pertain to the E-5 rated program and the Electric Power Goal No. 55.
The Office of the Assistant Secretary—Water and Power Development—is the allotting agency for the E-5 program consisting of 89 generating units, with nameplate ratings totaling 10,721,000 kilowatts to be installed on or before June 30, 1956.
These E-5 rated units are essential to adequately furnish interim, firm, and backup electrical power to Atomic Energy Commission installations.
The approved Electric Power Goal No. 55 provided for the expansion of generating facilities by 41 million kilowatts for the 4 years 1952–55, scheduled for completion by December 31, 1955, and 1 million kilowatts for certain special defense related projects to be completed in 1956.
This goal has been filled with installations presently scheduled or in operation and was placed under suspension December 3, 1953.
No new applications for certificates of necessity for accelerated tax amortization have been certified since this date.
However, scope and time amendments to all projects previously certified are eligible for consideration under Electric Power Goal No. 55.
There have been granted 668 certificates involving 20,126,605 kilowatts at an estimated cost of $3,852,589,102 for electric utilities, and 32 certificates for 505,150 kilowatts at an estimated total cost of $111,525,770 for industrial power projects.
Construction work went forward under a budget of $186,000,000, which resulted in the addition of about 2,200,000 acre-feet of water storage capacity.
Operation and maintenance continued satisfactorily during the year with four projects or units of projects being turned over to water users' organizations for operation making 97 units now under the direct administration of the local contracting bodies.
Renewed emphasis was placed on local participation and responsibility at all levels of planning, construction, and operation and maintenance.
Concurrently, numerous organizational changes were effected to provide greater efficiency and economy in Bureau of Reclamation operations in 17 Western States and Alaska.
The technical aspects of irrigation and power operations and project investigations were transferred to the Bureau's Denver offices, and these activities, together with facilitating services which had previously been operated independently, were combined with design and construction functions to constitute the office of the Assistant Commissioner and Chief Engineer at Denver.
The consolidation of these technical activities made possible improved efficiency and reduced costs, and permitted the implementation of more uniform policies and procedures in the Bureau's planning, design, construction, and operation and maintenance work.
At the same time the Commissioner retained policy direction and responsibility in the Washington office with Assistant Commissioners for Administration and Irrigation and Power.
In fiscal vear 1954 an investment of $148 million in new construction of irrigation and power facilities was added to the Bureau of Reclamation's projects in the West and in Alaska.
These facilities included concrete and earth dams, power and pumping plants, irrigation canals and their extensive lateral systems, electric transmission lines, and other works which will contribute materially to the conservation and development of the Nation's land and water resources.
Construction completed during the year added about 2,200,000 acrefeet of water storage capacity in new Bureau of Reclamation project reservoirs, 297,250 kilowatts of hydroelectric generating capacity, 700 miles of canals, pipelines and laterals, and more than 100 miles of major electric transmission lines.
The total value of all contracts awarded in the year amounted to about $65 million, comprising the face value of over 250 separate contracts for construction, materials, equipment and supplies.
Construction contracts comprised about $57 million, or about 87 percent, of this total contract aggregate.
Construction contracts in force at the end of the fiscal year totaled about $194 million.
The year's construction accomplishment provided irrigation facilities for about 322,000 acres of land.
Construction will continue during the next fiscal year on 30 projects and 16 units of the Missouri River Basin project, as well as preconstruction activities on authorized work not yet approved by the Congress for construction.
The 1955 construction program will provide for the completion of irrigation facilities to supply new and supplemental water supplies to an additional 307,000 acres and for an increased hydrogenerating capacity of 241,500 kilowatts.
The year was highlighted by completion of Canyon Ferry Dam, a large concrete dam on the Missouri River in Montana, and by the placing in service of its 50,000 kilowatt powerplant; by completion of Jamestown Dam, an earth dam in North Dakota, nearly a year ahead of schedule; by the addition of 104,750 kilowatts of power capacity on the Colorado-Big Thompson project in Colorado through the completion of the Flatiron power and pumping plant and Pole Hill powerplant; by "holing through" of the 4.5-mile long Eklutna Tunnel, a major feature of the Eklutna project in Alaska; and by placing in full service of the Hungry Horse powerplant in Montana, an important unit in the multiple-purpose development of the water resources of the Columbia River and its tributaries.
Other notable accomplishments included the completion of Trenton Dam and Bartley Diversion Dam, both on the Missouri River Basin project in Nebraska, and the construction of irrigation facilities to serve about 55,000 acres of land on the Columbia Basin project in Washington.
Listed in table 1 are major construction and supply contracts (more than $1 million) awarded by the Bureau of Reclamation in fiscal year 1954.
Among the features for which contracts were awarded were Monticello Dam on the Solano project in California, Wanship Dam on the Weber Basin project in Utah, the Chandler power and pumping plant on the Yakima project in Washington, and 108 miles of pipelines for the Delano-Earlimart irrigation district on the Central Valley project in California.
Principal features completed on Bureau of Reclamation projects in fiscal year 1954 are shown in table 2.
The listing includes 5 storage dams, 2 diversion dams, 4 powerplants in full production, 704 miles of canals, pipelines, and laterals, 102 miles of transmission lines, and 9.6 miles of railroad relocation.
On the Columbia Basin project in Washington construction proceeded on the irrigation systems which will serve large blocks of land from completed main canals.
Irrigation facilities, including 25 small pumping plants, were completed during the year to provide water to about 186,000 acres of land.
Hungry Horse project construction in Montana was highlighted by the placing in service of the remaining two of four 71,250-kilowatt generators in the Hungry Horse powerplant, bringing the plant to its full capacity of 285,000 kilowatts.
Also in Montana, Canyon Ferry Dam and its 50,000-kilowatt powerplant, features of the Missouri River Basin project, were completed, the plant being placed in full service by April 1954.
In Idaho, good progress was made in the construction of the Palisades Dam, largest of the Bureau's earth dams, and its associated 114,000-kilowatt powerplant.
Despite construction difficulties caused by repeated flooding of the contractor's cofferdams, the rehabilitation of the Savage Rapids Dam on the Grants Pass project in Oregon, wa essentially completed to allow 1954 irrigation operations to proceed on schedule.
On the Central Valley project in California the Camp Creek diversion dam was completed and construction continued rapidly on the extension of the irrigation distribution systems under the Friant-Kern and Madera Canals.
Laterals totaling 82 miles in length were completed on the Madera system and construction of laterals on the extensive Delano-Earlimart irrigation district under the Friant-Kern Canal were brought to new high levels of completion by year's end.
Nimbus Dam neared completion by the end of the year, and construction was continued on the project's Nimbus and Folsom powerplants.
Cachuma project construction in California was noted by completion of 46 miles of pipelines for the project's irrigation systems.
On the project's Tecolote Tunnel the Bureau was faced with one of the most difficult construction problems it had encountered in recent years.
Water temperatures of 112° and humidity of 100 percent at the working face stopped excavation of the remaining 4,700 feet of the 6-milelong tunnel.
At year's end installation of new pumping and dehumidifying facilities was under way, with the expectation that excavation of the tunnel could proceed without further delays.
In southern California, 21 miles of pipelines were completed on the irrigation lateral systems of the Coachella Valley distribution system ef the All-American Canal system.
Also in southern California, laying of the 61-mile-long second barrel of the San Jacinto-San Vicente aqueduct on the San Diego project was virtually completed at year's end.
In Arizona, on the Gila project, 29 miles of irrigation laterals of the Mohawk distribution system were completed, and the Dome Canal and the first unit of the Dome distribution system were virtually finished.
All existing contracts for channelizing of the Rio Grande on the Middle Rio Grande project in New Mexico were completed during the year and rehabilitation of 140 miles of drains approached completion by the end of the fiscal year.
Good progress was made during the year on the rehabilitation of dams, canals, and laterals on the Vermejo project, also in New Mexico.
On the Weber Basin project in Utah, the 3-mile-long Gateway Tunnel was "holed through" in March 1954.
Wanship Dam and the Davis aqueduct on the project were placed under construction.
In addition to completion of Canyon Ferry Dam and powerplant, construction on the Missouri River Basin project was notable for the completion of Jamestown Dam in North Dakota, and Trenton Dam and Bartley diversion dam in Nebraska.
Also completed on the project were 30 miles of the Angostura Canal and 62 miles of laterals and drains in South Dakota; 33 miles of canals in Nebraska and Kansas: and 36 miles of irrigation laterals under the Cambridge Canal in Nebraska.
In Kansas, the 9.6-mile-long railroad relocation at Kirwin Dam was completed, and construction began on the main embankment of Webster Dam, following completion of the dam's foundation earlier in the year.
Progress was made on the large network of electrical transmission lines which will transmit energy from powerplants of the Bureau of Reclamation and Corps of Engineers on the Missouri River Basin project.
During the year 82 miles of transmission lines were completed and an additional 510 miles of lines were under construction.
In May 1954, a contract was awarded for an additional 204 miles of lines.
Associated with these transmission lines was the virtual completion of construction on 20 substations.
On the Colorado-Big Thompson project in Colorado, Willow Creek pumping plant on the western slope of this transmountain diversion development was completed.
On the eastern slope the Pole Hill powerplant and Flatiron power and pumping plant (total capacity of 104,750 kilowatts) were placed in service on the project.
Also finished was the 9-mile-long St. Vrain supply canal.
With completion of these major facilities, the $160 million project, on which construction was begun in 1938, was essentially finished to give full service to water and power users.
Alcova powerplant (36,000 kilowatts) on the Kendrick project in Wyoming was brought to near completion at the end of June 1954.
In Alaska, on the Eklutna project, the 4.5-mile-long Eklutna Tunnel was essentially completed at the end of the fiseal year.
Construction on the project's 30,000-kilowatt Eklutna powerplant and Anchorage substation continued.
The Bureau continued its efforts to develop and administer its safety program for the protection of personnel against occupational hazards.
While there was a slight decrease in the number of accidents, the significant importance was the progress made in reducing the severity of occupational injuries.
In construction operations the severity rate was reduced 59 percent below the 1953 rate.
The design engineering force experienced sharp staffing reduetions during the year, but the Bureau continued to meet the pressures of design work.
The Denver engineering offices completed designs and specifications for 124 major construction contracts.
The average cost for these engineering services as related to the overall Bureau construction and rehabilitation program for fiscal year 1954 was 3.8 percent.
Progressive developments were made in dams design.
For concrete arch dams the use of increased limiting stress in design, made possible through research and improved practices in control of concrete production, will permit the reduction of 20 percent of the total yardage of mass conerete, a substantial savings in construction costs.
Use in design of steel frames, insulated metal wall panels, and metal roof decking for power and pumping plant superstructures resulted in reduction of construction costs, and accelerated the initial operation of the plants.
The use of rivets for shop fabrication and field erection of steel structures was virtually eliminated in design—all fabrication and erection is now done by welding, a significant factor in reducing construction costs.
To effect further reductions in design and construction costs, power and pumping plant superstructures under design were replaced by the semiopen or outdoor type of building, and the expensive gantry-type crane replaced by a bridge-type crane.
Further economies were achieved by the standardization of design of steel towers for electrical transmission lines.
During the year the price of aluminum was reduced, and as the supply became plentiful aluminum pipe was incorporated in the design of buses for electrical power and transmission systems.
This has resulted in a significant saving in the cost of bus construction.
A highlight of the year was the confirmation of design of the Bureau's reversible pump turbine in the Flatiron power and pumping plant on the Colorado-Big Thompson project.
Hydraulic acceptance tests of the unit indicated that warranted efficiency and capacity were exceeded by substantial margins.
The Flatiron installation is the first of its kind in the United States.
It is used both in pumping water for irrigation and for generation of power during periods of maximum kilowatt demand.
Revisions of specifications requirements were made during the fiseal year leading to improved administrative procedures and performance in construction by contractors engaged in reclamation work.
To achieve greater uniformity in Government contract procedure, the Bureau initiated the use of the new standard Government forms for construction contracts.
As assistance to both bidder and Bureau engineers, a copy of the construction contract form is now incorporated in each copy of the specifications issued by the Bureau.
Where indemnity bonds are required for work on the right-of-way of railroads or the right-of-way of other utilities, a new practice begun during the fiscal year requires that construction specifications contain a description of the types and amounts of the bonds required.
This indemnity information is of considerable assistance to bidders in that they are informed of the bond requirements before bidding.
To provide for a more equitable allowance in the contractor's negotiation for contract adjustments, the Bureau's 10 percent maximum allowance for overhead, superintendence, general expense, and profit was changed to 15 percent.
This new allowance is in consonance with present-day costs of doing business and parallels amounts currently allowed by other contracting agencies.
Throughout the fiscal year good competition was experienced under Bureau construction specifications and invitations for equipment and materials.
Low bids received were generally near or below the engineers' estimates.
European manufacturers continued to bid on Bureau equipment and materials requirements including firms in Switzerland, Italy, Austria, and France.
In accordance with the "Buy American Act," a 25 percent differential was added to all foreign bids before they were compared with domestic bids.
During the fiscal year the Bureau's engineering laboratories in Denver assisted in the solution of a wide variety of complex problems intrinsic in the development of reclamation structures and in their operation and maintenance.
In concrete materials investigations the laboratories developed a material having air-entraining, retarding, and plasticizing properties which shows promise of permitting a substantial reduction in the water requirements of mass concrete.
An accelerated test was also developed to determine the relative resistance of concrete to disintegration due to attack by sulfates in soil and water.
A meter device, developed by a Bureau field engineer for measuring the inplace density of fresh concrete, was evaluated.
Also developed was an electronic device for rapidly scanning a photograph of concrete surfaces; hardened concrete can thus be analyzed for air content and for void size, spacing, and distribution.
The laboratories gave technical assistance during a hearing before the Interstate Commerce Commission on freight rates for fly ash.
The hearing resulted in the granting of a low transcontinental rate for fly ash and an immediate saving to the Government of $13,000 in concrete construction at the Bureau's Palisades Dam, and possible savings amounting to many more thousands of dollars on mass concrete dams that may be built by the Bureau in the future.
Several hydraulic devices were developed or improved for use in the field.
For Platoro Dam, a reservoir headgate, cooperatively designed with project personnel, was fabricated in the laboratories.
The tidal current meter used the past two irrigation seasons for measuring flow through the Walnut Grove Channel on the Central Valley project, was improved and readied for use this year.
Hydraulic tests of a modified lower cylinder gate on one of the four Hoover Dam intake towers demonstrated changes made in its bottom shape were adequate in reducing extreme vibration during emergency closure of the gate.
Reworking of the gate also caused a marked reduction in the downpull for emergeney closure.
The test results justify similar modifications to the lower gates in the remaining three towers.
Siphon inlets on the Gateway Canal in the Weber Basin project, Utah were designed to have sloping baffles and thus prevent animals and humans falling in the canal from being swept into the siphons.
Model tests indicated, however, that two large vortexes were as hazardous as the unguarded siphons.
Modifications in the design were recommended to make the safety devices operate in a desirable manner.
One bay of the fish screen structure on the Delta-Mendota Canal headworks, Central Valley project, was equipped with a louver-type fish screen which showed promise of effectively preventing passage of fish into the canal.
The louver-type screen is expected to reduce operation and maintenance costs and to lower the high fish mortality rate now occurring when revolving screens are used.
A total of 175 laboratory reports covering such fields of research as testing of concrete and concrete materials, earth and foundation materials, hydraulic studies, bituminous construction, structural studies and petrographic examinations were issued during the year.
The Bureau's engineering skills and services were continued to be made available to other Federal agencies and foreign Governments.
During the year 27 engineers were loaned to other Government agencies to assist in specialized work or to meet emergencies.
Technical studies were made in the design of a proposed pipeline for the city of Las Vegas, Nev.
Analyses of multiple correlation problems arising in the forecasting of seasonal runoffs were made for the upper Colorado River Commission.
Laboratory assistance in the solution of several operation problems at Falcon Dam was given to the International Boundary and Water Commission.
Hydraulic model studies on the proposed Gorge High Dam were conducted in the laboratories for the city of Seattle.
A cooperative test program with the Atomic Energy Commission to determine the effects of radiation on asphalt materials was carried out in the laboratories during the year.
Advice and information relative to installation of various bituminous-type canal linings were made available to the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
Technical services by the Bureau, embracing preparation of designs and estimates for several major foreign projects, were performed for foreign Governments.
These projects included: Snowy Mountains hydroelectric project, Australia; Klang Gates project, Malaya; Karadi Dam, Iran; Wu Sheh Dam, Formosa; Litani project, Lebanon: and Yan Hee project, Thailand.
For the Australian, Thailand, and Formosan projects, engineers from these countries received training in Bureau design and construction practices and assisted in the preparation of designs.
Although construction wage rates increased about 6 percent, and material costs remained fairly steady, Bureau of Reclamation construction costs during fiscal year 1954 showed little or no variation from costs experienced during the previous fiscal year.
This paralleled a nationwide trend on all types of public works, evidently the result of stiff competition in the construction industry.
Many low bids were received well below carefully prepared estimates reflecting known labor, materials, and equipment costs.
It can only be concluded that the low bidder's margin of profit is extremely slim, and that little or no amount is included in many of the bids for risk or contingencies.
Bidding interest in all types of Reclamation work continued to rise during the vear.
During the first half of the year, an average of 7 bids was received on construction specifications schedules issued by the Bureau, which amount was similar to the bidding interest shown during the last half of the previous fiscal year.
However, the average number of bids per construction schedule rose to 8.8 for the second half of fiscal year 1954.
This increased competitive interest was reflected by favorable prices and resulted in substantial savings to the Government.
The following table shows cost indexes for Bureau of Reclamation construction work based on the combined costs of materials and labor supplied by contractors and materials and labor supplied by the Government.
The Bureau's drainage and ground-water program encompasses activities from the earliest planning stages of a project, through construction, and constantly thereafter in project operation.
Drainage is requisite to preservation of productivity of irrigated lands.
Significant progress was made during the fiscal year, both in the development or appraisal of practical new techniques and in the design, construction, and rehabilitation of drainage works.
For the first time in Bureau history, all planning reports now submitted fully recognize and evaluate drainage requirements and costs.
Basic drainage policy was reviewed and strengthened.
An innovation was the development of a policy under which the Bureau is planning to construct, at least on two major projects, closely spaced tile drains as a federally financed feature.
Formerly such drains were considered the responsibility of the farmers; if the drains were not installed the lands deteriorated.
On these two projects the water users could not finance farm drain construction.
The new policy makes possible the construction of some additional feasible projects.
Ground-water problems which developed on the Columbia Basin project prompted clarification of important aspects of Bureau policy.
The policy now clearly recognizes a limited Bureau responsibility for damages caused as the direct result of project operations, but does not assume responsibility resulting from irrigation of individual farms.
Clarification of the Columbia Basin problem will materially assist in planning other projects.
Prompted by drought conditions, the Bureau was active during the year in ground-water explorations, in designing and developing wells for domestic water supply, in experimental wells for irrigation, and in projects where water salvage by irrigation or drainage wells is an important feature of the project plan.
The entire irrigation water supply comes from ground water for some projects under construction.
In the plan for a complex project in California, careful development of the ground-water resource along with the surface supply will provide control for the water table which, without such development, would be a serious and costly drainage problem.
The design and construction of drainage and ground-water facilities increased substantially as many projects undertook construction of these facilities.
Drainage work on the Riverton project proceeded satisfactorily, although construction difficulties were experienced and special equipment and special provisions in contracts were necessary.
The third edition of Dams and Control Works and a revised reprint of the Paint Manual were published during this year.
The first publication, written to be of interest to the nontechnical reader as well as to the engineer, describes the Bureau's experience in the design and construction of storage and diversion dams, spillways, and outlet works, and discusses the scope of reclamation engineering.
The Paint Manual provides information and instructions relating to painting practices, paints, and to other types of protective coatings, as applied to Bureau work.
Also published during the year was the technical record on the design and construction of Bonny Dam, a large earth dam on the Missouri River Basin project in Colorado.
The comprehensive technical record of Davis Dam design and construction was submitted for printing by the Government Printing Office.
Technical records for Platoro Dam and three major features of the Columbia Basin project were essentially completed at vear's end.
Other technical records on which major work was done and which were scheduled for issuance in the next fiscal year were those for Anderson Ranch Dam, Hungry Horse Dam, and the Tracy pumping plant, and two volumes of the fourvolume report on the Colorado-Big Thompson project.
The sixth edition of the Bureau's Concrete Manual was prepared and is to be published early in the next fiscal year.
The manual is an authoritative handbook of information and instruction on concrete control and construction techniques.
Three engineering monographs were published during the year.
These describe the Bureau's design criteria for concrete gravity and arch dams, the selection of hydraulic reaction turbines, and surge control on the Coachella pipe distribution system.
Two technical memoranda were published covering the subjects of compression characteristics of rolled fill materials in earth dams and pressure grouting in large dam construction.
Other publications issued during the fiscal year included a revised edition of the pamphlet on labor relations in reclamation construction, a handbook on the Bureau's safety requirements for construction by contract, and a brochure describing the Bureau's Denver engineering laboratories.
In addition, 175 laboratory reports and 20 detailed instructions for operating irrigation and power systems were issued, along with 204 construction and supply specifications.
In conjunction with the engineering assistance accorded to other governments, a number of reports were issued, notable among which were the voluminous report on the Litani River Basin development in Lebanon, an evaluation report on the Karadj project in Iran, and a report on the Wu Sheh power development in Taiwan.
Other reports, such as the one on the Yan Hee development in Thailand, were in preparation at year's end.
During fiscal year 1954, the Bureau of Reclamation continued to cooperate in the technical assistance programs of the United States Government primarily at the request of the Foreign Operations Administration which took over the work formerly performed by Technical Cooperation Administration and Mutual Security Agency.
The Foreign Activities Division is responsible for administering the Bureau's participation in these programs.
This assistance consisted of the training of technicians from foreign lands, rendering service to observers and visitors, sending of individual specialists and missions of Bureau technicians to other countries, and the performing of technical services such as testing, research and design and specification review for foreign water resources development.
State, UNRWA, IBRD, and other agencies directly concerned with water resources development throughout the world.
The Department of State requests were under the authority of Public Law 402 and financed by funds made available by requesting government.
The Training Administration Branch handled 135 inservice trainees during fiscal year 1954, which ineluded engineers and government officials from 24 different countries.
Also accommodated were 20 official observers from 15 different countries and 102 accredited visitors from 26 countries.
No records are kept of the numerous foreign visitors who stop unannounced at Bureau installations but who are usually given the same courteous reception accorded the programed persons.
In the Denver office alone, 131 persons from 41 countries visited the Bureau's facilities as tourists during the past fiscal year.
Among some of the outstanding visitors to reclamation projects during the vear were Ambassador Mehta of India; Carl A. Bock, director, Puerto Rico Water Resources Authority; A. N. Khosla, past chairman, Central Water and Power Commission, India; Abdullah Khan, president, Helmand Valley Authority, Afghanistan; Comdr.
Robert G. A. Jackson, head, Volta River Preparatory Commission, Gold Coast; Andre Coyne, engineering consultant, France; Emperor Haile Selassie, Ethiopia; and W. H. Hudson, commissioner, Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric Authority, Australia.
Through the Technical Cooperation Branch, under the FOA program, 121 Bureau employees were on technical assistance assignments of various types during fiscal vear 1954 in Afghanistan, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Egypt, Ethiopia, Formosa, India, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Philippines, Turkey, and Uruguay.
In addition, 13 men were sent on technical assistance missions for other agencies, including a 7-man team to advise the Thailand Government on its Yan Hee project.
Towards the close of the fiscal year, a new agreement was signed between the Department of Interior and Foreign Operations Administration, establishing new procedure for handling technical assistance.
This new agreement has not as yet been implemented and its effect on future Bureau participation in the foreign assistance program is unknown.
During the year the Bureau received $2,329,000 from other agencies to finance these technical assistance endeavors.
This may be compared with $2,438,000 for fiscal year 1953 and $1,845,000 for fiscal year 1952.
Engineering services available in the Denver office continued to be in demand during the past year.
Under the authority of Public Law 402, and at the request of Foreign Operations Administration, work was accomplished for the Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric Authority, Australia; Wu Sheh project, Formosa; Klang Gates Dam, Malava; Kardi Dam, Iran; Litani River project, Lebanon; city of Singapore, Malaya; Electric Power Development, Inc., Japan; Peruvian School of Engineering; Greater Vancouver Water District, Canada; Central Water and Power Commission, India; Sariyar project, Turkey; Taunsa Barrage project, Pakistan; Damodar Valley corp., India; Rio Elqui project, Chile; and Chao Phya project, Thailand.
The Irrigation Division, formerly the Operations and Maintenance Division, is responsible for keeping irrigation water flowing down the ditch to 125,000 family-sized farms and a like number of urban and suburban units consisting of more than 7,000,000 acres on which 410,000 settlers live.
This land, supplied with water from Bureau constructed works, is about one-fourth of the total irrigated land area in the Western States.
Actually, the reclamation family proper, exclusive of the municipal and industrial water benefactors, numbers almost 2,000,000.
In addition to the settlers living on the projects, at least 1,500,000 persons living in nearby towns and villages are dependent on the reclamation program.
In addition to supplving irrigation water, Bureau of Reclamation constructed works provide municipal and industrial water service to over 2,000,000 people.
The Irrigation Division is also responsible for keeping these water delivery facilities on 69 projects in good repair to assure the best and most economical use of water.
These facilities include 126 storage and 80 division dams, more than 19,500 miles of canals and laterals, more than 5,700 miles of drains, 386 major pumping plants, and an estimated 11,300 miles of operating roads.
The 1953 total of irrigable land in the service area of reclamation projects reached 7,147,528 acres.
This is an increase of 153,050 irrigable acres over the 6,994,478 acres reported in 1952.
The extension of irrigation service on the Columbia Basin project, Washington, and the Central Valley project in California accounts for approximately 74 percent of the total increase.
Other significant increases occurred on the Coachella and Imperial divisions of the Boulder Canyon project, California; the Frenchman-Cambridge unit, Nebraska; Missouri River Basin project; Gila project, Arizona; and the Klamath project, Oregon-California.
A total of 368 full-time and 21 part-time farm units was madə available from Federal lands.
Veterans were given preference under the provisions of various preference acts for 256 units on the Columbia Basin project, 85 units on the Minidoka, 28 units on the Gila, and 20 units on the Coachella division of the Boulder Canyon project.
Of the 21 part-time units 6 were available to applicants not entitled to veterans' preference.
The 1953 harvest of crops in the service area of Federal reclamation projects was valued at $785,939,868.
This was the eighth consecutive year of crop values in excess of the one-half billion dollar mark, and brought the cumulative value of all reclamation harvests through 1953 to more than $9.7 billion.
The value of the crop was the third highest in reclamation history.
However, it was $149.7 million less than the record value of $935.7 million produced in 1952.
The decline in total value of crops was due primarily to lower unit prices received by the irrigation farmers.
Tonnagewise, the 1953 harvest was the highest on record.
The total tonnage produced, 25.7 million tons, was 2.1 millon tons or 9 percent greater than 1952 harvest, and approximately 80 percent larger than the harvest of 10 years ago.
The $126.92 average crop value per acre of cultivated land reflects a decline of $28.34 from the record per acre value attained in 1952 of $155.26.
The high average value per acre for all production on a major division was $687.32 attained on the Tieton division of the Yakima project, Washington.
Fruits and nuts were highest in value per acre ($423.46) and hay and forage were lowest ($37.83).
The 1953 harvest of 25,711,235 tons included: 11,814,510 tons (46 percent) of hay, pasture and forage crops; 6,872,171 tons (26.7 percent) of miscellaneous field crops; 3,722,819 tons (14.5 percent) of vegetable and truck crops; 1,677,704 tons (6.5 percent) of cereal crops; 1,513,391 tons (5.9 percent) of fruits and nuts; and 110,640 tons (0.4 percent) of various seed crops.
In terms of acres, the most significant crop group was hay and forage with 44.6 percent of the irrigated lands producing these crops.
The effective use of the forage on the 700 million acres of rangeland in the Western States is greatly enhanced by the supplementary feed and forage crops produced on irrigated farms.
The most significant individual crop produced in 1953 was cotton which made up approximately 21 percent of the total crop value and utilized about 11 percent of the irrigated land.
Alfalfa hay was the second most significant crop with 11 percent of the value and 22 percent of the acreage.
The acreage and value of crops produced on each of the Federal reclamation projects is shown in tables 5 and 6.
Ncort ae e t e oaion.
Wyoing.
Wnng.
Wao e et, lr' 00 Pr r t ds siet t t rea nt red Col o en.
Prio ith disrict.
Highlights of achievements in several regions include the following: In the Northwest the area in cultivation increased 53,170 acres with the principal increase taking place on the Columbia Basin project, Washington.
Per acre yields were comparable to those obtained in 1952 when the highest total value harvest was achieved.
However, a dip in the general level of prices received by farmers for crops contributed to a decline in total crop value.
The relatively high average value per acre of crops in region 2 ($185) and region 3 ($230) reflects the production of high value crops such as vegetables, truck, fruit, and cotton on a relatively large percentage of the area and the multiple cropping of a considerable acreage.
The irrigable area for service was increased 55,729 acres in region 2 and 31,256 acres in region 3.
Approximately one-half of the 31,000-acre lettuce crop of the Imperial division of the Boulder Canyon project was processed for shipment in recently constructed vacuum cooling plants in the valley, which reduce the temperature of the lettuce to 33° in about 20 minutes.
Many of the projects of region 4 are characterized by high elevations and mountain valleys with a relatively short growing season, and are subject to late spring and early fall frosts.
Fruit production declined from the 1952 level on six projects by reason of late spring frosts.
All projects in region 5, except Fort Sumner, N. Mex., reported a shortage of water for the 1953 season.
Projects in region 6 are primarily producers of cereals and forage crops utilized as livestock feed.
Approximately 85 percent of the irrigated area is used for these crops.
Growing conditions were favorable on all projects except Belle Fourche which experienced frost late in the spring and hail in July.
In region 7, the Frenchman-Cambridge division of the Missouri River Basin project was prepared to serve 11,500 new acres for the first time in 1953.
The Colorado Big-Thompson project works delivered approximately 177,594 acre-feet of water to the Northern Colorado Water Conservancy District as compared with 41,141 acrefeet delivered in 1952.
During the fiscal year 1954, 9 land openings conducted by the Bureau on 4 reclamation projects opened for settlement 389 new farm units totaling 34,126 acres.
The greatest number of the foregoing were on the Columbia Basin project where 256 units were offered for sale under the provisions of the Columbia Basin Project Act.
These included 15 part-time and 32 full-time farm units in the East Columbia Basin Irrigation District, 6 part-time and 30 full-time farm units in the Quincy-Columbia Basin Irrigation District, and 173 full-time farm units in the South Columbia Basin Irrigation District.
Similarly, 28 farm units were offered for sale in the Wellton-Mohawk division of the Gila project under provisions of that project's authorization act.
The remaining 105 farm units, opened for settlement under the provisions of reclamation and homestead laws, consisted of 85 farm units in the North Side pumping unit of the Minidoka project and 20 farm units in the Coachella division of the All-American Canal system, Boulder Canyon project.
The number of part-time farm units made available was 60 percent less than the average of the preceding 3 years.
Settlement opportunities, however, were considerably enhanced over those of the preceding year by virtue of a 75-percent increase in the availability of full-time farm units.
Despite this inerease in the number of farm units offered for settlement, the demand by qualified applicants still continued to far exceed the available supply with an overall average of 71 applicants for each farm unit opened for sale or homesteading.
Enactment of legislation (Public Law 402, 83d Cong., 2d sess.) extending present veterans' preference in land openings to veterans of the Korean conflict will in all probability result in a still further increase in the ratio between applicants and available farm units.
Since the close of World War II a total of 152,622 acres of land comprising 1,838 farm units on 13 reclamation projects have been opened to settlement.
That these settlers have been eminently successful is evidenced by the extremely small response to date to the provisions of the act of August 13, 1953 (67 Stat. 566), providing for the exchange of farm units, on Federal irrigation projects, which prove insufficient to support a family.
Cooperative working relationships established by the Bureau with the Farmers Home Administration, the Agricultural Extension Service, the several State colleges and universities and comparable agencies, have been maintained.
Additional agreements were consummated throughout the year whenever possible in the interest of project entrymen and their successful solution of farm unit development and management problems.
During the fiscal year 1955 it is anticipated that additional farm units will be made available to settlers.
These land openings will be conducted on the Columbia Basin and Yakima projects, Washington; the Minidoka project, Idaho; and the Gila project, Arizona.
A few additional farm units may be available on one or more of the other Bureau projects.
The development farm program begun in 1947 has been continued in cooperation with several Department of Agriculture agencies and State agricultural colleges.
From 10 to 20 percent of each farm is set aside for use by the cooperating agencies for conducting research in water use, fertilizers, crop diseases and other special problems peculiar to the area in question.
The remainder of the farm is used to demonstrate research findings as well as the most effective methods of irrigation, water requirements of crops, cropping practices, crops best adapted to the area, farm layout systems and other agricultural practices of which the new settlers may have had little or no experience.
The farms are aiding also in determining the feasibility of developing certain areas for irrigation where the soil and water quality are such that sustained irrigation may be questionable.
The information obtained through the development farm program is disseminated jointly by the Bureau and the cooperating agencies by means of field days, tours, and other educational media.
The program has aided the new settlers materially in making the early success of their irrigated farms and has helped to safeguard the Government's investment.
To date 22 development farms have been established of which four have served their purpose and have been discontinued.
The farms are located in the Columbia Basin project, Washington; Missouri River Basin project, North Dakota, South Dakota, Kansas, and Nebraska; and Gila project, Arizona.
During consideration of the fiscal year 1955 Interior appropriation bill, the Congress directed that a review of the development farm program be made by the Departments of Agriculture and Interior and the Bureau of the Budget.
Based on this review recommendations covering future operations are to be submitted to the 84th Congress.
During fiscal year 1954, repayment contracts were entered into with 10 irrigation districts to assure the return of the cost of construction of new irrigation works and for municipal water service.
In addition delivery of water to over 67 contracting organizations was provided for by interim and long-term water service type contracts executed during the vear with irrigation districts and municipalities.
Contracts providing for reimbursement of emergency and rehabilitation and betterment funds, or for adjustment of other contract provisions, were executed with 20 organizations.
During fiscal year 1954, amendatory basic construction repayment contracts were negotiated with 8 irrigation districts on 7 Federal reclamation projects involving the repayment of some $45 million.
Special legislation authorizing these contracts either was enacted during the year or was under consideration by the Congress at the close of the fiscal year.
Negotiations of similar amendatory repayment contracts which must be submitted to the Congress are under way or are scheduled with additional irrigation districts involving construction costs approximating $50 million.
In keeping with the Department's policy of conservation of natural resources the Bureau has continued its soil and moisture conservation operations on lands under its jurisdiction.
These activities have included erosion control on public lands, protection of reservoirs, canals and other irrigation works from siltation, and prevention of water losses detrimental to irrigation projects.
The program objectives are accomplished in cooperation with other Federal agencies as well as State and local agencies.
Water users' organizations also assist in planning the work and in many cases furnish a part of the labor, materials, and funds.