HE tremendous task of sound resource conservation and development which today confronts the United States must be viewed in the light of the unprecedented economic and technological advances of mid-century America.
Never in world history has a Nation made more sweeping gains in providing a good way of life for its people.
Our economy, expanding at a breath-taking pace, has more than kept up with the gigantic demands of a record growth in our population.
Each year as new families form in burgeoning numbers their needs for an amazing abundance of goods and services are being met with the vast outpouring of American industry and the American farm.
What has this meant in terms of our natural resources?
New families and the advance of the American standard of living to a level never before achieved anywhere at any time has created equally record-making demands on all of our resources—our minerals and energy sources, our forests, our land, our water.
New homes mean that the minerals of the earth must be mined to provide the ores that go into the steel, the aluminum, all of the magic metallurgical combinations that we think of simply as homes, automobiles, and washing machines.
To use our washing machines, our television sets, our automobiles, we must have power, and this power comes from the coal, natural gas, and oil that man must take from the supply that nature has built over millions of years.
It means also harnessing the best of our sources of water power to make use of the always renewable energy provided by falling water.
Our land, too, faces ever increasing demands for the.food we eat, the cotton for the clothes we wear, and the lumber that our forests can provide for a multiplicity of essential uses.
Increasingly also we are recognizing that we cannot take our water supplies for granted as we soberly view the prospect of the growth of our water needs for industrial and domestic use by 145 billion gallons daily—equivalent to the flow of 11 Colorado Rivers—in the next 20 years.
Meeting successfully all of these tremendous and accelerating levies on our natural resources will not be easy.
The task is gigantie and complex.
It is also vital to the very continuance of our civilization as we know it.
All of those who have realistically faced the problem will agree, however, that it is a task that must be approached by the American people within the framework of their creative traditions.
Clearly, this great joint responsibility can best be met by our system of individual enterprise with the Government working construetively to aid and assist but not to dominate and control.
Sound conservation and development of our natural resources demands a realistic partnership of all of the American people.
Federal, State, and local agencies charged with resource responsibilities must provide leadership and guidance.
But the basic mission must be that of the whole complex of our free society working inventively and productively as only that type of society can.
In essence the partnership policy is simply the realistic carrying forward in terms of our modern problems of that basic truism of the Government's proper relationship to the people that was so effectively stated by Abraham Lincoln: "The function of government is to do for the people what the individual cannot do at all, or do so well for himself, and in all those things which the individual can do for himself, the government ought not to interfere."
The partnership pattern will vary of course, depending on the particular problems to be faced in each resource area and each of the specific situations involved.
Inherent in the partnership concept is the clear recognition that the task is not one for Federal agencies, such as the Department of the Interior alone.
Nor is it a task for only State and local agencies, or for private initiative alone.
Rather, it is a task in which we can best succeed through a program of close teamwork in which Federal agencies, State and local agencies, and free enterprise work together, each performing the function for which it is best fitted.
In the sections of this report which follow, the specific patterns and approaches under which partnership can serve in meeting our resource conservation and development task will be outlined.
In each instance, however, we must bear in mind that no magic formula is being promulgated except the enduring Américan belief in the productivity of our way of life based on a common recognition of our individual rights and responsibilities.
The policy of participation with all interested parties in the better utilization of mineral resources attained new heights in fiscal 1955.
The Bureau of Mines and other Department agencies engaged in scores of cooperative projects in the fields of metallic and nonmetallic minerals and mineral fuels.
Private enterprise has the major responsibility for resource development in the United States.
Consequently, service to and cooperation with industry long have been prime objectives of the Department.
These objectives are attained in many ways, since the interests of industry frequently coincide with those of the Federal Government.
For example, the Government must have detailed information on mineral commodities and the industries that produce them so it can plan intelligently for the Nation's military and economic security.
The industrialist also needs such information to make the decisions upon which the success of his business depends.
The Bureau of Mines cooperates closely with industry and with other Government agencies, both State and Federal, in collecting and reporting such information.
Virtually all of the Bureau's industry-wide statistical canvasses are partnership projects in which forms are submitted to industry for information and returned voluntarily.
At times, industrial associations find Department facilities and impartial viewpoint useful for carrying out special joint canvasses.
Such a canvass, to estimate future cement production capacity was undertaken with the Portland Cement Association to provide the President's Advisory Committee with data for planning a national highway program.
Efforts to develop new mining methods and machinery to utilize mineral resources more effectively supplement those of industry, and whenever feasible are carried out cooperatively.
Bureau engineers and technologists currently are working with the operators of copper mines in three States—Arizona, Michigan, and Nevada—to develop methods of increasing ore recovery and to learn more about such low-cost underground mining methods as block caving.
The use of highly sensitive listening devices that pick up subaudible noise resulting from movement in rocks was developed jointly by the Bureau and mining companies to increase safety and conservation when mining underground rock supports, or pillars.
One Bureau-industry project was an investigation of processes to recover beryllium as a coproduet of lithium from an ore mined in North Carolina.
Another dealt with recovery of alumina from high-silica bauxites and residues from commercial alumina operations, and still another developed an improved process for recovering kyanite-sillimanite concentrates from wastes at a mineral processing plant in Florida.
At one of its laboratories, the Bureau created specimens of lowmelting synthetic micas for industry to evaluate as bonding agents for grinding wheels.
For vears the Bureau has worked in close partnership with the iron and steel industry.
Recent cooperative projects have ranged from research to develop better methods of producing iron, through tests of anthracite as a partial substitute for coke in steelmaking, to studies that developed two processes for recovering manganese from open hearth steel furnace slags.
One of the most closelv integrated company-Bureau projects during the year was the development and trial of a mechanical phosphate rock planer similar to certain coal-mining machines.
After designing and constructing the first model, Bureau personnel monitored mine tests in which the cooperating company supplied labor, underground transportation, and facilitating services and tools.
As a result, the machine has developed from the experimental stage to a point where commercial use seems assured.
Another outstanding example of successful joint industry-Government activity is the Defense Minerals Exploration Administration Program.
To encourage exploration for strategic or critical minerals, Bureau of Mines and Geological Survey engineers worked together under the direction of DMEA to examine and evaluate specific exploration projects for which Government financial assistance is sought.
DMEA projects have been undertaken with individuals, partnerships, and companies.
Wise development of our reserves of mineral fuels is essential to our continued security.
To assure that succeeding generations will have coal and petroleum to meet demands of the future, the Bureau of Mines cooperates with industry and with Federal, State, and local Governments in encouraging conservation of these commodities.
Cooperative programs are underway with bituminous coal and anthracite operators to cut production costs and increase safety through development of improved mining and roof control methods.
In another cooperative effort, the Bureau is working with private firms to devise a means of gasifving coal underground where it occurs in seams too thin or of too low grade to justify conventional mining.
Cooperative research on upgrading solid fuels already has resulted in a process for drying lignite to obtain a fuel for power generation and recover tar as a potential source of chemicals.
The Bureau's coal sampling and analysis work not only enable the Federal Government to purchase solid fuels on a guaranteed quality basis, but also aids industry and State and municipal agencies to do the same.
Cooperative research on production, transportation, and storage of petroleum and natural gas and their products is part of the foundation for conservation of these resources.
The continuing benefits of this research have been of great value to industry and also to the taxpaying public.
An early example of industry-Bureau research on petroleum was the development of an oil well casing program to protect underground fresh water horizons and prevent waste of petroleum.
This program was adopted and followed by the industry and by State commissions concerned with oil production problems.
The value of the Bureau's petroleum chemistry and refining studies has been recognized by increased financial support from industry and from other Government agencies until today nearly $4 of every $10 spent by the Bureau in this field of research come from outside sources.
The Bureau has cooperated with industry in studies to develop better helium recovery methods and to improve the heating value of certain natural gases.
An agreement recently signed with a gas production company enables the Bureau to obtain additional heliumbearing gas for its Navajo Helium Plant from a natural gas that has no value as a fuel.
The Nation's vast reserves of oil shale are an ideal example of a mineral resource that can best be developed by cooperation between Government and private initiative.
The reserves are owned partly by the Government and partly by individuals and corporations.
Studies in the experimental mining, retorting, and refining were carried on under an arrangement in which the Department of the Navy permitted use of its oil shale and the Bureau of Mines developed equipment and methods for utilizing it.
Government departments, however.
Crude shale oil and products from the Bureau's shale oil refinery at Rifle, Colo., were supplied to industry and to other Government agencies for testing and experimentation under 18 cooperative agreements during the past year.
In cooperation with industry, the Bureau last year made more than 2.800 tests of explosives and hazardous chemicals used in mineral production and processing.
Conditions leading to gas and dust explosions were studied, as were methods of minimizing explosion damage.
Much of the Department's work in the fields of mineral economics and health and safety is also of intimate concern to various State agencies, and is best carried out in cooperation with them.
The Bureau of Mines cooperates closely with State agencies in collecting and compiling economic and statistical data on mineral commodities.
It has formal cooperative agreements with State geologists or Divisions of Mines in 27 States and Alaska for joint collection of mine production data.
One of the finest examples of State-Federal partnership is the Bureau's Petroleum Experiment Station at Bartlesville, Okla.
Since this station, said to be the largest installation of its kind in the world, was established in 1918, the Oklahoma State Government has continuously provided through regular appropriations part of the money for salaries and operating expenses.
Technologie developments born of this partnership have benefited not only the petroleum industry and the State of Oklahoma, but also the rest of the Nation.
For many years the Bureau of Mines has worked with State, county and municipal agencies in the business of fighting coal fires on private property.
All these agencies have exchanged information freely in controlling fires in abandoned coal mines or in coal beds which are not on the public domain.
Moreover, the partnership extends to payment of the cost of fighting these fires.
Under present legislation, this cost is borne on a matching dollar-for-dollar basis by the Federal Government and the interested agency, which may be a private coal company, the State, or other political subdivisions.
The Bureau likewise cooperates closely with mining departments of several States in administering the Federal Coal Mine Safety Act and in carrying out its various accident prevention and safety training programs.
The specialized technical knowledge and facilities available in the Bureau of Mines are used by many other Government agencies in carrying out their work.
Typical cooperative programs currently in progress with the General Services Administration are aimed at developing domestic resources of selenium, recovering columbium from Arkansas titanium deposits, and increasing output and improving recovery of nickel and other metals from deposits at Nicaro, Cuba.
The Bureau also performs mine examinations, metallurgical tests and quality control tests for GSA.
Examples are investigation of an asbestos mine in Venezuela, and analysis and laboratory testing of lowgrade manganese ores submitted to GSA depots to determine their acceptability and value.
The Bureau has participated in the work of the Atomic Energy Commission to develop resources of radioactive minerals.
More than 20 monazite-bearing placer deposits have been investigated by the Bureau, and at least half of these give promise of becoming commercial producers.
In cooperation with the Atomic Energy Commission and the Navy Department's Bureau of Ships, the Bureau of Mines developed methods and constructed and operated the country's only facilities to produce hafnium-free ductile zirconium needed for research in constructing nuclear power generators.
This program developed improved methods of recovering metallic zirconium and hafnium at lower cost than are now used by commercial producers.
In 1955 the Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce, was authorized by Congress to take a census of the Nation's industries and businesses.
To minimize duplication, increase effectiveness, and assure complete coverage, the Bureaus of Census and Mines are cooperating on the census of mineral industries.
Many canvasses are being conducted jointly, and the information obtained will be of great value both to the Government and to industry.
Cooperation between the Department of the Interior and the oil and gas regulatory agencies of the petroleum producing States dates back more than 40 years.
In 1914, the Secretary of the Interior offered the services of Bureau of Mines experts to cooperate with State officials in stopping the waste of natural gas in Oklahoma.
The Bureau assisted in drafting two laws on oil and gas conservation which were passed in 1915 by the Oklahoma Legislature.
The 1915 Oklahoma oil law has been a beacon in the history of oil conservation.
During the past two decades, the Department has had active and elose cooperation with the States in the enforcement of their conservation laws through the administration of the Connally Act, passed in 1935 to prohibit interstate shipment of oil produced in violation of certain State oil and gas conservation laws and subsequent orders.
Early in 1947 the Secretary of the Interior strengthened cooperation to further oil and gas conservation with the designation of the Director of the Office of Oil and Gas as the Department's official representative to the Interstate Oil Compact Commission.
Since then, the Department has participated regularly in meetings of the Compact Commission, under which member States and Alaska have exercised leadership in improving and standardizing oil and gas conservation practices throughout the country, as well as providing a forum for discussion of conservation and related problems.
Partnership arrangements of one kind or another with the Federal Government are the warp and woof of the responsibilities assigned by the Department to the Bureau of Land Management, which exclusively administers some 468 million acres of public domain lands that are almost wholly unappropriated and unreserved.
The Department works with countless individuals, businesses, industries.
Thousands of such transactions make up the workload of the Bureau, a workload that bespeaks cooperation.
Partnership is reflected in the financial balance sheet and distribution of the Bureau's “earnings.
During the nine years since the Bureau of Land Management was formed, receipts have totaled more than $623.000.000.
Of this amount more than $192,000,000 was transferred to the Bureau of Reclamation for investment in dams and other projects (usually constructed by private contract) for development of arid regions of the West.
More than $169,000,000 was paid to States and counties for schools, roads and other local purposes.
Part of the remainder, when appropriated, has been used for improvement of grazing lands, and the balance was deposited in the miscellaneous receipts fund of the Treasury.
During the fiscal year 1955 alone, income from Bureau of Land Management sources amounted to more than $239,000,000 as compared to its appropriation of $11,913,000—representing a ratio of $20 return for every $1 expended.
The historic policy of the United States with regard to the unreserved public domain has been to encourage the transfer of public lands into private ownership when such ownership can make more productive use of the land resources.
Since the lands remaining in public ownership under jurisdiction of the Bureau are either reserved or less desirable than in the past, the rate of their transfer to private ownership has been considerably retarded compared to the earlier days of the Nation.
As demands for public lands for various purposes have inereased, new laws and regulations were put into effect, substantially stepping up the declining transfer rate during the past year.
Some 20 million acres of vacant, unreserved public lands remain in the Missouri Basin, much in the form of less desirable isolated tracts surrounded by private holdings.
In the first of a series of carefully planned public sales, the Bureau put 94 of these tracts totaling more than 12,000 acres on the auction block in South Dakota near the end of the fiscal year, with more to follow.
In another systematic disposal program, some 112,000 acres of lands restored from withdrawal in Arkansas were also put up for public auction sale.
Some 225,000 acres of previously unsurveyed school lands were made available to Western States through stepped-up cadastral surveys, and a program of lieu selection was worked out so that the State of Washington could take possession of some 150,000 acres of its statehood grant school lands.
It must be emphasized that acceleration of the rate of transfer of certain public lands to private ownership does not mean that the Federal Government intends to dispose of all the land in unreserved public domain status, nor even of the major portion.
Careful selection is made of the lands to be listed as available for disposal; equally careful selection is made of lands to be withdrawn from unreserved status.
The yardstick in both instances is the course by which the land in question can best be put to its highest and most beneficial use, for the ultimate public good.
National forests, parks, and wildlife refuges are held inviolate, for example.
There have been occasions when land exchanges were arranged, usually to achieve uriformity of a tract which would afford better management.
Such exchanges have been effected with States or, in some cases, with private individuals when the Federal Government sought to consolidate public acreages or dispose of isolated tracts.
The Department was instrumental in laying the groundwork during the past year for passage of legislation that opened to mining location and development more than 7.2 million acres of public lands long withdrawn for power and water sites, with full protection to the Government if the land should be needed at some future time.
This climaxed two other important enactments by the Congress that were vigorously supported by the Department—Public Laws 585 and 167.
These conservation measures provide for fuller utilization of natural resources of the public domain by enabling multiple use of the same tracts of land for all kinds of mineral development and multiple use of the surface resources.
Passage of the Outer Continental Shelf Act of 1953 giving the Department of the Interior jurisdiction over submerged lands in the outer periphery of the Continental United States presented a new challenge to the Department.
Keeping pace with the new technologies which have enabled the petroleum industry to develop oil in deeper and deeper waters of the Gulf of Mexico, the Department successfully mapped 20 million acres of OCS lands off Louisiana and Texas for oil and gas leasing purposes.
With the maps, locations of submerged lands can be pinpointed as accurately on dry land by means of their coordinate positions related to fixed monuments on the shore.
This enabled the Department to proceed with a new program for unlocking these vast resources—a treasure valued in the billions of dollars.
The oil and gas industry backed their faith in the new program by pouring $142.4 million into the U. S. Treasury in bonus bids and first year rentals for the right to explore just 489,869 acres for oil, gas, sulphur in the outer shelf off Louisiana and Texas.
This resulted from two bid “sales" held in October and November 1954.
Preparations were completed for a third sale, held on July 12, which boosted acreage leased to 864,236 and the bonus-rental cumulative total past the quarter billion dollar mark.
District forestry offices of the Bureau helped relieve a severe log shortage crisis resulting from a 1954 summer-long strike that threatened to prolong the shutdown of Oregon's lumber mills through the winter.
In response to an emergency appeal from the Governor and orders from Secretary McKay, 70 million board-feet of timber, in addition to regular output, were rushed from points nearest existing access roads to supply the dire need of the plywood and other lumber mills affected by the strike.
Plans were completed during the past fiscal year for a long range cooperative program of soil and moisture conservation designed to rehabilitate most of the Federal rangelands in the Western States.
In addition to appropriated funds, an estimated 40 percent of the total planned operations will be financed by contributions from range users and other private sources and local government agencies.
Partnership, particularly during the past year, has been a veritable touchstone to effective administration of the public land grazing resources under the Taylor Grazing Act of 1934.
Wise control of the Federal grazing lands after decades of unregulated use would have been impossible without the voluntary help and support of locally elected grazing district advisory boards.
These groups of public-spirited stockmen have spearheaded the Department's drive to effectuate orderly use of the range and apportion grazing privileges equitably among qualified users as called for in the Taylor Grazing Act.
This cooperation has transcended mere lip service.
Cash and deeds have supplemented wise counsel.
During the past fiscal year, the range users have contributed nearly half of more than $5,000,000 invested in range conservation and improvement works, not to mention instituting or continuing numerous range improvement practices that have entailed many man-hours of labor and use of private equipment.
Contributions both in money and materials from livestockmen constitute about 40 percent of the total annual investment made in these improvements to the public lands.
This has had the effect of sharpening the personal interest of the stockmen.
When their personal assets are invested with public dollars in the development of public lands, the result is a greater and more permanent accomplishment.
The planning of conservation and improvement measures on a watershed basis has been virtually completed during the past year.
In addition to cooperation with public land users, complete and integrated planning has made it imperative to have harmonious working relationships with other Federal and State agencies having an interest in each watershed.
Planning groups, composed of interagency representatives, are employed to assure that all affected interests receive adequate consideration.
Cooperative effort has been most effective in meeting emergencies such as the prolonged drought that plagued the Western range country last year and for several years past.
Substantial voluntary reductions in numbers of livestock using the range and rapid development of supplemental water supplies have been accomplished through the cooperation of the range users.
Greater participation by State governments and local communities, private industries and individual citizens is paving the way for a high level of achievement in water resources development in the 17 Western States and Alaska.
Legislation enacted or pending in Congress at the close of the fiscal year pointed to an even closer partnership in this field of conservation by establishing wider horizons for national economic progress in the years to come.
Cooperation between Government and people in the development of the natural resources in the arid lands of the West has been the traditional policy of the Nation for more than a half-century.
It had its beginning in 1902, when President Theodore Roosevelt on June 17 signed the first Federal Reclamation Act establishing a revolving fund of proceeds from the sale of the public lands with which to construct water storage dams and other irrigation works in the West.
Administration of this act and other Federal reclamation laws was vested in the Department of the Interior where it remains today.
There has thus been afforded a continuity in technical knowledge, and practical experience in the planning, construction and operation of reclamation projects containing such engineering features as the world's largest and highest dams, water-distributing canals, and hydro-electric power plants.
As a result of this combination of cooperation and continuity, facilities capable of delivering irrigation water to more than 7 million acres of land have been provided by the Department's Bureau of Reclamation.
Individual initiative has resulted in the parallel development of 125,000 family size farms and more than 125,000 suburban units.
The area for which water can be supplied from Bureauconstructed works comprises about one-fourth of the total irrigated land area of the western United States.
At the earliest date possible, irrigation facilities are transferred for operation and maintenance by the local water user organizations.
Of the irrigation projects or divisions of projects construeted by the Bureau, 89 percent have been transferred for local operation and maintenance.
Fresh concepts of cooperative partnership in the development, planning and financing of water resource conservation programs in the West characterized to a striking degree the administration of the Department during the past year.
In general, this policy anticipates that the Federal Government will provide funds for a part of the cost of features of a multiple-purpose project, such as flood control, navigation, interest on the reclamation investment, and perhaps an advance of some of the cost of the reimbursable features of a multiple purpose project.
The balance of the cost would be provided by local public or private sources.
Moreover, if the financing can be placed on a broader base, the responsibility for construction will likewise be distributed among the State, local government and private interests.
This encourages local control and ownership of local improvement projects.
Equally important as the conservation of water resources is the contribution made to the national economic structure by the continuous administration since 1902 of the Federal Reclamation program by the Department of the Interior.
Long after project costs have been repaid fully through the sale of electric energy and operations of repayment contracts, the new wealth created through the Federal investment in the development of its own resources will be reflected in a continuing flow of tax revenues from the project areas and in trade with the rest of the Nation as well.
Developments during the year within the framework of the new partnership and cooperation policy point to increasing opportunities for expansion in the Nation's economic structure under the program.
Take, for instance, the Columbia Basin Project in the State of Washington.
Here the largest investor to date has been the United States.
As the project develops and private capital is used to develop farms, non-farm businesses, communities, public works, transportation facilities and other activities, the non-Federal investment is expected to greatly overshadow the initial Federal investment in the constructed project features.
In Arizona, the second 100,000 kilowatt steam generator at the Arizona Public Service Company's Saguaro steam plant was placed in operation during the year.
Through cooperative agreements among the Arizona Power Authority, the Company, and the Bureau of Reclamation, the energy generated in the privately-owned plant is wheeled over the Bureau's transmission system to the Company and the Authority's load centers.
Partnership operation between the Bureau and private and public utilities in the region has enabled the Bureau to fully coordinate its hydro generation with the utilities' steam generation, thereby providing maximum utilization of hydro energy with resultant conservation of natural resources.
The Bureau's system has also been utilized to wheel steam-generated energy from Arizona to meet shortages in Nevada.
On the Ventura Project in California, a contract was negotiated with the Ventura River Municipal Water District for advanced planning work for which the district has advanced $720,000.
Inereased emphasis was given to cooperative engineering effort with small irrigation districts.
There was continued improvement in rehabilitation, reconstruction and betterment of irrigation projects built many years ago under private initiative.
Indicative of this effort were the rehabilitation of irrigation facilities on the Dalton Gardens and Avondale irrigation systems in Idaho: the rehabilitation of the Isleta Diversion Dam and more than 180 miles of drains on the Middle Rio Grande Project in New Mexico; and rehabilitation of the Savage Rapids Dam on the Grants Pass Project in Oregon.
As marketing agent for the power generated at specified Federal dams in the Pacific Northwest, the Bonneville Power Administration plays a vital role in the use and development of the region's water resources, involving a close working relationship among Federal and local agencies, and other utility systems, both privately and publiclyowned.
At the present time BPA markets power from Federal plants with 3.6 million kilowatts capacity, and an additional 2.6 million kw are under construction.
Basie to BPA's operations is its relations with the agencies that build and operate the dams and power plants.
The Corps of Engineers operates Bonneville, McNary, The Dalles,1 Chief Joseph,1 Albeni Falls and The Willamette Valley projects; the Bureau of Reclamation operates Grand Coulee, Hungry Horse and Chandler.
BPA engineers work closely with the Corps and Bureau in the day-to-day operation of the projects, and participate with their engineer in system studies to determine the best methods of utilizing the reservoirs and waterflow of the Columbia River.
Through such cooperation the power plants are fully adapted to system conditions and contribute to the most economical construction costs and maintenance of the Federal generation and transmission system.
These economies are reflected in the low cost of power to consumers.
The Pacific Northwest as a region enjoys the lowest power rates in the United States.
An important factor is the integration of the Federal system with the other major utilities in the Northwest Power Pool, a notable example of partnership between Federal enterprise and local public and private enterprise.
The Pool stretches over an area of 700,000 square miles and encompasses 17,000 miles of transmission and over 7,000,000 kilowatts of capacity.
The Pool is a voluntary organization, a sort of confederacy of autonomous electrical systems.
Each system is self-administered, and Pool operations are conducted within a broad framework of understanding based on established operating principles.
Successful operation of the Pool depends on integration of all the hydraulic and electrical facilities in the combined systems.
There are 142 power plants in the Pool, of which 123 are hydro and 19 steam-electric.
Coordination of these power plants spread over 700,000 square miles is necessarily complicated.
The Pool has developed a system of reservoir regulation to take advantage of the diverse streamflow patterns in order to best serve its loads.
This calls for complete interchange of information between the operators of the Federal system and other members of the Pool.
All decisions are voluntary and unanimous and are made within the framework of interutility contracts, both Federal and non-Federal.
1. It permits the 11 major utility systems to make the most economic use of the energy sources available to the combined systems.
The result is a substantial saving in the cost of electricity to consumers.
2. Pool utilities not only obtain energy at lower cost because of economic transfers but also benefit from improved continuity of service.
3. Pool operations permit each utility to save on standby capacity to meet emergencies.
4. The integration of 11 generating and transmission systems adds some 600,000 kilowatts—more than one Bonneville dam—to the Northwest's power capacity without adding extra generators.
BPA's relations with its 119 customers—of whom 80 are publiclyowned utilities, 9 privately-owned utilities, 18 industrial plants and 12 Federal agencies, resemble that of a partnership as well as seller and buyer.
Close collaboration with the public and privately-owned utilities— who take over half of BPA's power deliveries—is essential in order to determine loads and the transmission facilities required to meet customer needs.
Cooperative studies of load growth and power flows by BPA and its customers serve as a basis for system extensions.
The customers are consulted also in the preparation of proposed construction schedules that are submitted to Congress.
At the semiannual customers' meetings the Administrator discusses with them mutual problems as well as BPA policies and plans.
The major non-Federal utilities, including private companies, municipalities, larger public utility districts and electric cooperatives, are planning additions to their generating systems in order to satisfy the rapidly growing power requirements of the Pacific Northwest.
Currently some 45 new projects are being actively considered by local utilities with a total capacity of almost 8 million kilowatts—in addition to about one million kilowatts under construction or definitely scheduled by non-Federal agencies.
BPA is cooperating with these non-Federal utilities in planning the transmission systems from projects under construction or consideration.
Some of the projects, such as Priest Rapids and John Day, are proposed for partnership development, with local utilities financing the power plants and the Federal Government responsible for navigation locks, irrigation facilities and fishways.
An important problem that surrounds nearly all of the proposed non-Federal or partnership projects is the transmission of power to markets.
Generally speaking, the energy produced from these dams must be marketed in more than one load center.
Integration with the Bonneville grid and the Northwest Power Pool therefore seems to be vital to their feasibility.
The power marketing program of the Department in the Southwest is conducted by the Southwestern Power Administration.
Because of the characteristies of power supply in the Southwest, the Department through Southwestern Power Administration initiated steps toward cooperation with privately-owned utility systems and with rural electric cooperatives which generate and transmit electric power generated from fuels.
On January 1, 1954, a unique power partnership contract was put into effect in Arkansas.
On that day, the Southwestern Power Administration began deliveries of peaking hydroelectric power to the Arkansas Power & Light Company in order to enable that company to supply low-cost electric power to the new aluminum plant of the Reynolds Metals Company, at Arkadelphia, Arkansas.
Under this three-party contract, the privately-owned power company and the Federal power system pooled their generating facilities to serve the new electric load.
The recent severe drought in the Southwest greatly reduced the amount of hydroelectric power and energy which had been available to the Southwestern Power Administration for sale and distribution.
During fiscal year 1955, contractual and operating arrangements were entered into with privately-owned utilities which permitted all the electric loads in the area to be served without curtailment or interruption.
On June 1, 1955, the Department initiated power deliveries through Southwestern Power Administration for another type of power agreement.
This involved a contract between the Federal Government and the Brazos River Transmission Electric Cooperative, Inc., and between that cooperative and the Texas Power & Light Company.
The combination of these two contracts place the Government, the cooperative, and the company in a power partnership.
Under this arrangement, the Government obtains the maximum revenue for the sale of power from the Whitney project; the company obtains the maximum value from the peaking hydroelectric power generated at that project; and the cooperative obtains the low-cost power and energy which it needs for its members.
During the year the Southwestern Power Administration successfully negotiated a contract with the Arkansas Power & Light Company which will become effective as soon as the Blakely Mountain Dam project on the Ouachita River is placed in commercial operation.
Under this contract, the Company receives the peaking power capability of the project subject to its own needs and the availability of water supply and, at a point approximately 150 miles from the project, delivers to the system of the Government the full rated power capacity of the project.
Thus, the company obtains the high value of the peaking hydroelectric capacity and the Government receives power where it is needed to serve other electric loads without incurring the cost of transmission.
This arrangement permits the Company to coordinate the use of water at the Federal project with the downstream Carpenter and Remmel hydroelectric projects which are owned by the Company, and assures the maximum utilization of the water resources of the Ouachita River Basin.
The statutory responsibilities of the Department's Southeastern Power Administration are carried out by means of cooperative contractual arrangements which the agency has or is negotiating with the operators of public and private power systems having transmission and generating facilities.
The scores of preferred agencies located in the Southeast are scattered over wide areas.
In order to avoid either excessive restrictions in the number of preferred ageneies receiving power or prohibitive construction costs, it has been desirable to seek cooperative arrangements with the operators of transmission systems where excess capaeity is available in such systems.
Only through such arrangements can the requirement for widespread use at the lowest possible rates be met.
Since adequate facilities are generally in existence to carry power from the projects to customers, cooperative arrangements permitting the use of such facilities to transmit power from the projects result in the cheapest means of delivering power.
The Federal hydroelectric developments in the Southeast for which Southeastern Power Administration is the marketing agency have operating characteristics such that power produced at these projects is usable by more preferred agencies only if it can be supplemented by fuel-generated energy during certain hours of the day when the hydroelectric plants are not operated in order to conserve water.
There presently exists contractual arrangements between the Department of the Interior, acting through Southeastern, and the Tennessee Valley Authority, the Virginia Electrie and Power Company, a privately-owned company, and the South Carolina Public Service Authority and Greenwood County Electric Power Commission, both agencies of the State of South Carolina, whereby their transmission facilities are utilized in transmitting power from Federal projects to preferred agencies and the operation of the Federal hydroelectric projects is integrated with the operation of fuel-generating facilities thus making power available on a usable basis to preferred agencies.
Our rapidly increasing industrial and agricultural production coupled with an ever-expanding population over the past quarter of a century has brought about a tremendous increase in consumption of our water resources.
In some areas serious water shortages exist at the present time which emphasizes the fact that our water resources are gradually being overburdened, exhausted, contaminated, or both.
The Department is continuing a research program aimed at developing economically feasible processes for converting saline water to fresh water suitable for municipal, industrial, agricultural and other uses.
The program is directed equally to the reclamation of inland saline waters and conversion of ocean water.
Attainment of this goal would go far in conserving and increasing the water resources of the Nation.
This activity is primarily a cooperative endeavor with private groups.
The Department carries out the program by: (1) Stimulating the interest of private and public organizations and individuals in the problem and encouraging research and development by correlating and coordinating activities in this field, and (2) conducting scientific research and development by means of federally financed grants and contracts and by a limited amount of research in Federal scientific organizations.
Not only is cooperation and coordination of saline water research activities carried out with private groups, such as State education and research foundations, private research institutes, and industrial institutions, but also with the various other governmental agencies in which there is an interest in the problem.
Such agencies include the Department of Defense, Atomic Energy Commission, Civil Defense Administration, National Science Foundation, Smithsonian Institution, Department of Agriculture, Department of Commerce, Department of State and the International Cooperative Administration.
Progress is being made in the development of practical processes for converting large quantities of saline water to fresh water.
However, lowering of process cost to an acceptable level is a very difficult problem to be solved.
The results obtained so far are sufficiently promising to indicate that with sufficient time economically feasible processes for the demineralization of both brackish waters and sea water are likely.
Progress in cooperation and encouragement of private groups in the development activities is exemplified by a number of research contracts now in effect, and in the promising results being obtained.
For example, in cooperation with one company a new method of distillation which is particularly applicable to sea water conversion has been developed and is now ready for testing under field conditions.
Another industrial firm has received contracts for the design, construction and testing of progressively larger electric membrane demineralization units which appear promising for brackish water conversion.
Field testing of the membrane type of equipment is now in progress and is carried out in cooperation with State, local and private organizations.
As another specific example, the solar distillation process is being investigated by three different contractors.
These investigations have resulted in a comprehensive evaluation of all work in this field, new designs for solar stills and the development of cheaper materials of construction.
Both the Department and these contractors are cooperating in supplying technical papers and exhibits for an international symposium on Applied Solar Energy.
Indian lands and associated resources, unlike most other lands and resources with which the Department is directly concerned, are the property not of the Federal Government but of individual Indians and Indian tribal groups.
The Federal Government's basic role in connection with these resources, which is exercised by the Department's Bureau of Indian Affairs, is that of a trustee holding title to the lands for the use and benefit of the Indian owners.
In the fiscal year 1955, the principle of partnership in the management, conservation, and development of Indian lands and their associated resources was broadened and strengthened on several fronts.
The Bureau's encouragement of Indian participation in such matters has been producing positive results.
Several tribes realizing the importance of their land and other resources as the principal source of tribal income, have not only been taking an active part in the management of these resources but also have contributed substantial amounts of tribal funds towards their protection, development and improvement.
Cooperation between the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the United States Public Health Service in dealing with Indian health problems has been going on for many years.
In fact, the Public Health Service has played an active part in the attack on these problems not only by providing technical advice and assistance but also by assigning physicians and other personnel in its commissioned corps for terms of duty at Indian hospitals and other field installations.
In recent years, the Indian Bureau has been obtaining a major share of its professional medical personnel by assignment from the Public Health Service.
On July 1, 1955, this process reached its logical culmination when the Public Health Service took over full responsibility for the Indian heaith program under the provisions of Public Law 568 of the 83d Congress.
Despite this shift in basic responsibility, however, it is fully anticipated that the excellent cooperative relationships which have been developed between the two agencies over the years will be maintained and strengthened.
Cooperative action has been of major importance in the education of Indian children.
Since enactment of the Johnson-O’Malley Act in the mid-1930's, the Bureau of Indian Affairs has been contracting annually with State Departments of Education and local school districts for education of Indian children in public schools.
In fiscal year 1955, such contracts were negotiated in 20 States and the Territory of Alaska, providing school opportunities for about 36,000 Indian or native children.
In addition to this perennial cooperation with State and local school authorities, collaboration of a much more extensive nature took place during the year under the Navajo Emergency Education Program.
To achieve the ambitious first-year goal of the program—provision of educational opportunities for an additional 7,000 Navajo children— the Bureau of Indian Affairs solicited and received cooperation from the public schools in the area, from a wide range of community organizations and agencies in the surrounding towns, and from the Navajo tribe itself.
Congress provided the funds, necessary to the Department's effort.
As a result, the first-year goal not only was achieved, but exceeded.
Total enrollment of Navajo youngsters in schools of all sorts increased from 16,215 at the close of the fiscal year 1954, to 23,679 at the end of fiscal 1955.
Mere statement of the statisties cannot completely tell the story.
There is a warm, human element to it which sets of figures standing alone cannot convey.
Social progress for a large group is involved, as well as laying the groundwork for good citizens of tomorrow.
In June of 1953, there were about 28,000 Navajo children in the normal school age bracket of 6 to 18.
Of this number, almost exactly half were enrolled in schools both on and off the Reservation.
The other half, ineluding many youngsters 15 or 16 years old, never had seen the inside of a classroom.
They were growing up totally illiterate.
This startling circumstance called for swift and sweeping action by the Department.
With excellent cooperation from Congress in providing the necessary funds, the Department went to work to correct the situation.
Trailers and quonset huts were pressed into service.
Existing Reservation schools were enlarged and reorganized to provide a maximum of classroom space.
Arrangements were made with nearby communities to receive the older Navajo children in the regular public schools and to have them provided with room and board at Government expense.
All along the line, throughout the arduous months of the program's progress, the utmost cooperation has been extended from every quarter.
The program is continuing unabated, and is expected by the middle of fiscal 1956 to have progressed to a point where educational facilities will be available for every school age youngster in the Navajo tribe.
Here is an instance in which partnership—the pooling of effort— has paid immeasurable dividends in development of human resources.
Primary concern of the National Park Service is with people and with the provision of a means for them to use profitably the inereasing amounts of leisure time they enjoy.
For this reason, the work and the objectives of the Service with respect to natural resource conservation and development differ fundamentally from those of other Federal agencies.
To accomplish its objective, the National Park Service has the responsibility of protecting and preserving major scenic, scientific and historic areas of the United States.
Expenditure of public funds at all governmental levels must be geared to the realization that parks are closely related to progress in all forms of endeavor.
Otherwise, they are not going to properly serve the America of the future.
Every dollar prudently spent for park purposes is an investment in the future of our Nation and our people.
It is necessary for the National Park Service to seek and to extend cooperation in many different ways.
Cooperative effort is required in the development and management of areas for which the Service is responsible; it is required to meet closely related responsibilities acquired, by the Service in the years since its establishment.
Numerous other Federal agencies are involved in cooperative agreements with the National Park Service.
Agencies of the various States often are parties to such efforts as are, to a growing degree, private individuals and groups.
Each in his own way contributes to the hastening of achievement of common goals.
The National Park Service forms partnerships with the Bureau of Reclamation and the Corps of Engineers to appraise possible recreational “dividends" accruing from construction of dams and reservoirs.
Detailed planning of recreational developments on reservoirs constructed by these other agencies makes the Service's recreational "know-how" available on a cooperative or partnership basis.
The Service is progressing steadily in its expansion to meet growing needs and toward more efficient and effective administration.
Inereased appropriations granted by Congress permit the Service to provide more adequate staffing, and to better manage the areas in its care.
The National Park System today is larger than it has ever been.
Since 1953, some 125,000 acres of parkland have been acquired and the boundaries of Everglades National Park were extended to take in an additional 271,000 acres.
Efforts are being made to advance a partnership program for park road construction under which problems of construction and maintenance would be worked out cooperatively with the affected States.
For more than three decades the Bureau of Public Roads has provided engineering and supervision for construction of major roads in areas administered by the National Park Service.
This arrangement has assumed greater importance during the past year, with the allocation of more funds than at any previous time in the Service's history for construction of roads, trails and parkways.
A total of $35 million has been authorized for roads and trails during the three years beginning with fiscal 1955.
The three-year total for parkways is $30 million.
Appropriations and contract authorizations within these sums are permitting the National Park Service to complete important roads on which progress has been halted, such as the Stevens Canyon Road in Mount Rainier National Park.
The Service is enabled to provide additional road mileage in recently established areas, and where the need is most urgent to modernize roads either worn out under the present traffic load or unsuited for modern traffic.
Forests of the national parks are more than essential elements of scenic beauty.
They include extensive stands of the most majestic forest growth in the United States.
It is both natural and necessary that there should be the closest inter-agency cooperation in the protection of this resource against fire, insect infestations and disease.
The National Park Service has as partners in this protective function the Forest Service of the Department of Agriculture, State forestry agencies, and private forest protective groups.
Problems involving non-Federal holdings within the established boundaries of National Park System areas are being met in part through authorizations to exchange these lands for lands in the public domain.
Best use of this authorization depends for its effectiveness upon the cooperation of the Bureau of Land Management, which has been extended freely and intelligently.
Notable examples are the steady progress being made in "blocking up" Federal ownership in Joshua Tree National Monument, and, more recently, at Saguaro National Monument.
In this latter instance, an agreement has been reached on an exchange with the State of Arizona.
In performing such tasks as the survey of the recreational resources of Alaska, the National Park Service has called upon such agencies as the University of Washington and the National Recreation Association to handle certain special phases of the study.
In the historical and geological study of the Cape Hatteras National Seashore Recreational Area, now in progress, the Service is receiving valuable assistance from the Office of Naval Research and from the Laboratory for Marine Studies of the University of Louisiana.
The endeavor to formulate a long range plan for the development and management of the National Park System—designated as Mission 66—has revealed numerous partnership opportunities.
In its earliest stages, Mission 66 disclosed the absolute necessity for close cooperation between the National Park Service on the one hand, and the Forest Service and other land management agencies on the other, if the forward-looking program is to come to its fullest realization.
The effort to bring about, as rapidly as conditions will permit, removal of public use developments which encroach seriously on major natural features also will require partnership activity.
It is contemplated that these public use developments would be relocated outside of park boundaries on lands administered by other agencies, insofar as possible.
Improved roads and more rapid transportation have lessened the necessity for placing all such facilities inside extensive park areas.
Thus, the way has been opened for their gradual removal to other sites involving less serious impairment of the natural scene.
There has been a close though informal degree of cooperation between the National Park Service and State agencies, from the early days of the Service.
Since 1936, cooperation in planning has been a Service responsibility stipulated by Congress, to be exercised only upon request of the responsible State authority.
Closely related is the task of investigating surplus Federal properties sought by State or local agencies for recreational or historic site purposes.
During the past year there were 11 such investigations in 8 States and the Territory of Hawaii.
Yosemite National Park for the first time is on the way to having fully adequate telephone and radio communications, to be furnished by the Pacific Telephone & Telegraph Company.
A similar arrangement is being worked out for most of Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Parks.
This is expected not only to provide first-rate service, but also to save the Government about $6,000 a year.
These are examples of the kind of progress which is being made steadily, in getting out of certain types of activity which are unduly costly and in which the Service cannot expect to attain satisfactory proficiency.
Ten of the areas administered by the National Park Service benefited from completion of such arrangements during the year, and others are projected.
The past year has seen continuance of an important trend of contributions to advancement of National Park Service objectives, by private individuals, corporations and foundations.
As long ago as 1920, the Congress authorized acceptance of donations to be used in furthering Service projects for the public benefit.
In 1935, it created the National Park Trust Fund and Trust Fund Board.
Both recognized that the objectives of the Service and the National Park System it manages are a particularly desirable field for benefactions.
Donors appreciate that lasting benefits will result.
A notable case was the contribution last year of $500,000 by Jackson Hole Preserye.
Inc., to match a Federal appropriation.
This nonprofit corporation established by John D. Rockefeller, Jr., also provided funds for the new Jackson Lake Lodge completed this summer in Grand Teton National Park.
In all these varied cooperative activities, the cause of Federal economy is advanced, there is a fair sharing of responsibility among public and private agencies, and the goal of adequate outdoor recreational opportunity for everybody comes more nearly to realization.
Wildlife management is proving to be one of the most challenging problems in the field of natural resource development because of the ever-mounting number of people and the increased competition for land use.
In meeting common problems of resource development, the Department of the Interior has encouraged the philosophy of a working partnership among the Federal Government, State and local governments, and private interests.
On of the most satisfying experiences of the past year for the Fish and Wildlife Service has been the progress recorded in implementing this philosophy by bringing the Service closer to the States and local communities in the truest sense of partnership.
In every field in which the Service operates, greater effort was directed to cooperative participation and understanding.
As a result, the foundations have been laid for one of the most rewarding eras in the history of wildlife conservation in this country.
Aware of the rapidly increasing number of sportsmen and the proportionately greater demands year by year upon fish and wildlife resources, the Service is proceeding as expeditiously as it can in expanding its activities to meet these growing needs.
Since 1953, eight new wildlife refuges have been established and three more are in process of being established.
Presently the Service administers 264 national wildlife refuges in 42 States, Alaska, Hawaii and Puerto Rico, as well as 89 fish hatcheries in 42 States.
In all, almost 80,000 additional acres have been acquired for wildlife preservation.
Conversely, the Service and the Department has resisted efforts to reduce the effective work underway in any of these areas.
Great strides are being made toward improving cooperative ties between Federal and State governments in the management of migratory birds.
Within the past few years all States have organized their waterfowl management programs along flyway lines—the flyway being the unit of management for migratory birds.
This action has led to a better understanding of the problems associated with waterfowl management.
The Service has encouraged this organized endeavor by frequent meetings with the Flyway Councils to consider waterfowl management problems.
Each of these organizations is represented on the Director's Advisory Committee on Waterfowl so that the State and local viewpoint is presented to the Service before the annual hunting regulations are amended.
Surveys made on the waterfowl breeding grounds are also cooperative in nature.
The Fish and Wildlife Service, the Canadian Wildlife Service, the Provincial Game Branches, and Ducks Unlimited combine their manpower and equipment to cover all of the important nesting areas in Canada.
Service biologists cover the important areas in Alaska, while the State conservation agencies, with some help from the Service, carry on surveys in about 25 States.
A vigorous program of land acquisition, to assure living space for waterfowl and other migratory birds, continues as a high priority need in the over-all protection program.
Both State and private groups are assuming greater responsibilities each year in supplementing Federal programs in this connection.
The Department has held firm to the ban on baiting—an important though controversial aspect of waterfowl management and protection.
In California, most of the natural waterfowl wintering areas have shrunk because of agricultural expansions.
California winters most of the waterfowl of the Pacific Flyway, but the State no longer has sufficient natural habitat.
In search of food, the birds concentrate in the three great valleys of California—the Sacramento, the San Joaquin and the Imperial.
Heavy damage to California crops resulted from this concentration.
Over the years, several methods of frightening the birds away from unharvested or growing crops were utilized, with varying degrees of success.
In 1953 the California State Legislature approved an act designed to relieve crop depredation by migratory waterfowl through permitting the feeding of birds to attract them away from crop areas.
Specified conditions were adopted by the California Fish and Game Commission.
The Fish and Wildlife Service has maintained close watch on the experimental feeding program, with the determination that it should not result in abuses which would lead to revival of baiting.
It has been made elear that nothing in the California regulations are to be construed as license to violate the Federal ban on baiting which applies to all 48 States.
Basic to the management of wildlife resources is a knowledge of game and fish populations.
This is common ground for Federal and State administrators regardless of which eventually exercises jurisdiction.
Not infrequently, local and private interests are directly concerned.
In this area of common interest, cooperative effort is a recognized necessity and an accomplished fact.
In studies of bird migration, 48 State conservation agencies and numerous universities and scientific organizations cooperate with the Service in banding thousands of birds to trace their migration routes.
The concept of team research—bringing together specialists in several fields to concentrate upon a complex research problem—has been greatly extended in fishery research during the past fiscal year.
Devices proving effective and advantageous to both "partners" include: Contract research with universities, marine laboratories, and oceanographic institutions; cooperative arrangements with State fishery research units for joint work on problems of mutual interest; and invited participation on cruises of research vessels of specialists in fields related to or supporting fishery biological research.
Faced with increasing fishing effort in Alaska and a serious decline in certain of the salmon runs due in part to unfavorable natural conditions, the Service in 1954 imposed drastic restrictions on commercial fishing in Prince William Sound and southeastern Alaska and redoubled its enforcement efforts to provide more adequate seeding of the pink salmon spawning streams.
Although seriously affected by these restrictions, the salmon industry cooperated to the fullest extent.
Cannery operations were consolidated and the plans of operators and fishermen alike were tailored to achieve a substantial reduction in fishing intensity.
Initial results of this vigorous restoration program are encouraging.
Increased numbers of spawning pink salmon have brightened the prospects for larger runs in those areas in 1956 and succeeding years.
In fisheries exploration and gear research, cooperative effort is producing valuable discoveries and developments.
Commercial fishermen, industry members, and local fishery commissions are consulted in project planning.
Researchers from universities and State and private agencies accompany Service research vessels and contributę special skills and knowledge to the problems of finding, evaluating, and efficiently utilizing fishery resources.
In cooperation with the Navy Bureau of Ships, underwater television has been adapted to the study of fishing gear.
Service specialists advise commercial fishermen on the proper gear and equipment for entering new fisheries, such as the recently discovered Gulf of Mexico tuna grounds.
In fiscal year 1955, under the terms of the Saltonstall-Kennedy Act which was approved by the President on July 1, 1954, the Service embarked upon a research program designed to help the ailing commercial fishing industry of this country to expand production and to develop new markets for fishery products.
In order to produce practieal results for the industry in the shortest possible time, the Service, the States, and the industry joined forces in drafting a research and development program.
Now, at the end of the first year of this new coordinated Government-industry effort, it can be said that the American commercial fishing industry is in a better position to realize its production and marketing potential than at any previous time in its long history.
An excellent example of a highly successful partnership is that participated in by the Service and the farming and stock raising industries of the country to protect livestock and erops from depredations by predatory animals and destructive rodents.
Savings amounting to many millions of dollars annually have resulted, at a relatively slight cost.
Cooperators paid 82 percent of the total cost in the past year.
The Federal program for stocking fish in inland waters is being carried on in cooperation with the States to provide better sport for the millions of licensed fishermen.
In fiscal year 1955, the Service operated 89 fish hatcheries in 42 States as its contribution to the maintenance of the sport fishery resource.
A large percentage of the fish reared in Federal hatcheries was liberated in waters on Federal land, near military installations and veterans hospitals, and on State-Federal management areas.
Another outstanding example of the partnership concept is the Service's Pitman-Robertson and Dingell-Johnson programs.
Under these programs Federal funds from the excise taxes on sporting arms and ammunition and sport fishing gear are matched in the ratio of three to one with State hunting and fishing license revenues to restore and improve the living conditions for fish and game.
The projects are selected and planned by the States and, after approval by the Fish and Wildlife Service, are carried out by the respective State fish and game departments, with the resulting improvements belonging to the States.
The Pittman-Robertson program for wildlife has furnished the vehicle by which the States cooperate with farmers, ranchers, soil conservation distriets and others in the planting of food and cover to improve game environment.
Each year several thousand new game areas are created in the gullied portions or odd corners of cooperative farms.
With Dingell-Johnson funds many new fishing lakes were developed last year on lands acquired and donated to the States by private individuals and sportsmen's clubs.
In several States large scale lake rehabilitation projects have been carried out as cooperative ventures.
One of the most important cooperative research activities is a study of the striped bass on the Atlantic coast.
The investigations are guided by a coordinating committee representing the Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission, with the Fish and Wildlife Service providing technical direction.
Within our Nation, there are few areas where the concept of partnership in the conversation and development of resources is more meaningful than in the Territories of the United States.
In most of these areas the hope of economic and political progress in the future is dependent upon wise application of cooperative principles today.
The essence of this partnership is found in two kinds of cooperative adjustments: The relation of the Federal Government to territorial and local Governments, and the relation of all governmental institutions—Federal, territorial and local—to the initiative and enterprise of territorial citizens.
In past years, the trend toward Federal interferences and dominance had come to be regarded as desirable in itself, independently of its results.
In the Territories—though in some more than others—the Federal Government completely overshadowed local governments, while private and free enterprise often had become neither private nor free.
In Alaska, for example, land withdrawals were made on the theory that only the Government knew best.
Land titles were so entangled with procedural red tape that it sometimes was difficult for an Alaskan to acquire legal ownership of his own home.
An effort is now being made to change this trend.
In the Territories this has meant a transfer of Federal responsibilities to territorial and local Governments, wherever those responsibilities can better be exercised by the local Governments.
It has meant also a renewed emphasis upon private rather than Government enterprise, with the Federal Government ceasing to perform economic funetions which are not normally within its sphere, and which individual citizens or groups of citizens are prepared effectively to undertake.
Finally, it has meant a policy of affirmative aid and encouragement to programs of economic development by the Federal Government when such a course is deemed in the best interests of all of us.
Expressed in these terms, the partnership principle is by no means inflexible.
The usually varying and often unique characteristics of many of the Territories make possible and, in fact, require differing applications of the principle.
In a sense, they are workshops for testing new ideas and differing techniques in applying the concept of partnership to particular times and circumstances.
While the ultimate goals can be the same fundamentally, it would be quite unreasonable to attempt the same methods of cooperation in conserving and developing both human and natural resources in a primitive Pacific island as in modern and politically mature Hawaii.
In Alaska, with the Federal Government owning more than 90 percent of the land, economic problems cannot be handled in the same fashion as in California or Hawaii.
Thus, the Department of the Interior continues to operate The Alaska Railroad.
This is not because of a belief in the inherent superiority of Government enterprise, but because the Railroad as yet cannot be operated in accordance with the economic standards which normally prevail in private business.
On the other hand, the Railroad has divested itself of such subsidiary activities as the operation of river boats and the maintenance of commissaries, because these operations were ready to be assimilated within the ordinary scope of business operations.
It has been emphasized that a cardinal feature of our territorial policy has been decentralization of responsibility by transferring from the Federal Government such functions as the Territories can handle effectively.
For politically mature Territories, such as Hawaii and Alaska, this means taking over from the Federal Government all those functions that customarily are performed by State Governments elsewhere.
In Hawaii this process has advanced to such a degree that the Territory is ready for statehood.
Military and economic problems so far have delayed a similarly direct solution as applied to Alaska.
Several events of the past year illustrate the Department's concept of partnership as between the Federal Government and Alaska's Territorial Government.
For many years the care of Alaska's mentally ilì has been a Federal function administered by the Department's Office of Territories.
The Department has devised a program for transferring this function to the Territory of Alaska, and has drafted legislation to implement that program.
To help solve financial problems incident to the transition to territorial control, the Department has proposed Federal grants for construction of mental hospital facilities in Alaska and for aid in meeting operational expenses during the initial years.
Granting of substantal acreage of Federal land also has been proposed as a further aid.
Highway development in Alaska is another example of progress resulting from the Federal Government working in conjunction with the Territory.
For a half-century the construction and maintenance of primary or "through" roads in Alaska have been solely a Federal responsibility.
Most of this responsibility has been exercised by the Department of the Interior through the Alaska Road Commission which operates with Federal funds.
During the 1955 session of the Territorial Legislature, the Governor urged and the Legislature approved an increase in the motor fuel tax which would make more territorial funds available for highway expansion.
By increasing the total amount of territorial money available for road building and maintenance, Alaska is assuming at least a portion of the responsibility which in the past has been shouldered by the Federal Government.
The contribution of highway facilities to development of resources is readily discernible.
Final liquidation of the Puerto Rico Reconstruction Administration should be mentioned as another example of transfer to a Territory of what had been a major Federal responsibility.
This Federal ageney was born of depression and performed an essential function during a time of hardship in Puerto Rico.
Meanwhile, Puerto Rico has become a Commonwealth of the United States, and the emergency for which the Puerto Rico Reconstruction Administration was created has passed into history.
The agency has been liquidated completely, and several millions of dollars returned to the Treasury.
Such economic functions of the defunct Federal agency as the Government of Puerto Rico wishes to perform now will be a Commonwealth responsibility and not one of the Federal Government.
As another example, the public works for the Virgin Islands—which has been administered by the Department of the Interior—is being transferred to the Virgin Island Government under a Revised Organic Act.
In the development and conservation of resources, economic cooperation means not only withdrawal from activities in which the Government has been competing with its own citizens, but it means affirmative aid in those instances in which the Federal Government can assist its citizens to do a better job.
Action of The Alaska Railroad in disposing of commissary and river boat operations is illustrative of the first sort of partnership between government and industry.
Similar consideration has been shown for the economie interests of citizens in other Territories.
In the Virgin Islands, the Federal Government has gone out of the hotel business and has sold a Government distillery.
In the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, the Department of the Interior has liquidated a Federal Agency, the Island Trading Company, which had been engaged in trade and distribution operations throughout the islands.
Economic functions of the agency have been turned over to native-owned trading companies.
In American Samoa, the Department of the Interior has leased a government-owned fish cannery, and as a result exports of that Territory have doubled in value in one year.
Alaska provides dramatic examples of Government aid and encouragement in the conservation and development of resources.
The Department of the Interior is in the forefront in this sort of Federal activity through the work of the Office of Territories, Bureau of Mines, Geological Survey, Bureau of Land Management, Bureau of Reclamation, Fish and Wildlife Service, and Bureau of Indian Affairs.
The record bears ample testimony to the beneficial effect these various Federal activities have had upon Alaskan development.
One of the Federal aids in the development of Alaska to which the Department of the Interior can point with particular pride is The Alaska Railroad.
During fiscal year 1955, the Railroad enjoyed one of the best years in its history from a financial standpoint.
At the same time, it improved its train schedules and its service to shippers.
Plans are far advanced for a seatrain service to Alaska which gives promise of bringing a revolutionary and beneficial change to Alaskan shipping habits.
This is expected to be accomplished through cooperation between The Alaska Railroad and a large ocean shipping concern.
Through the work of Department's Alaska Road Commission, more than 3,000 miles of high standard highways have been constructed and are being maintained throughout the Territory.
Much of this highway mileage is kept open during the winter months.
The Alaska Publie Works Program has continued to make possible additional schools, water systems, paved streets, sewers and other utilities in Alaska's fast-growing communities.
On the industrial front, one of the greatest accomplishments thus far has been the building and operation of a $50 million pulp mill near Ketchikan.
This achievement was made possible through partnership among Federal and Territorial Governments and private business.
The mill has completed its first year of operation, using logs secured not only by its own force of loggers but those purchased from surrounding communities as well.
Thus, its economic benefits have been distributed over a wide area of Alaska.
This mill represents the first large scale use of the rich timber resources of the Tongass National Forest.
The Ketchikan pulp mill is a forerunner of similar developments elsewhere in the Territory.
At Wrangell, Juneau and Sitka there is more than just a possibility of other large scale uses of Alaska timber.
At Wrangell, contracts have been awarded, and at Juneau the timber to be utilized has been advertised for bid.
All these developments are based upon Federal encouragement of private use of publicly-owned timber.
Their success depends upon continuance of a partnership arrangement between business interests and the Federal and Territorial Governments.
The search for petroleum in Alaska again exemplifies the partnership principle.
Here also the Government, as landowner, must establish the conditions which will make resource development possible.
These conditions have been established in Alaska, and during the 1955 fiscal year the Bureau of Land Management leased oil rights on more than 500,000 acres.
Drilling is underway in several areas around Cook Inlet and in the coastal area east of Cordova.
In addition, the Department has made representations both to the Congress and to the Department of the Navy, looking toward modification of Public Land Order 82 so that 25 million additional acres of Alaska land with oil-bearing possibilities and located outside Naval Petroleum Reserve No. 4 can be opened to exploration.
With so much activity in regions where geologic characteristies are so promising, it seems likely that the search for oil in Alaska will be rewarded with major strikes.
In Hawaii, land for pineapples and sugar, and elimate and scenery for tourists are major resources.
Cooperation in their development and exploitation has emphasized partnership between the Territory and private industry, with the Federal Government occupying scarcely more than a junior-partner role.
Other than the Hawaiian Islands, Pacific areas cannot show similar large scale partnership results because, in general, their resources are quite meager as compared with either Hawaii or Alaska.
Nonetheless, in highly important ways the partnership principle has been extended to them, with the Federal Government necessarily in a senior-partner role.
Aside from the transfer of trading operations from a Federal agency to island-owned companies, already mentioned, the Federal Government fosters sea and air transportation in Pacific island areas, promotes introduction of new crops such as cocoa, encourages more widespread native ownership of land, assists the islanders in eradicating insect pests, and promotes health and education programs.
As this report has indicated, partnership offers a bright hope for meeting soundly and aggressively our pressing resource problems of today and those that are certain to face us increasingly in the future.
Our resource problems are twofold, involving both conservation and development.
In terms of development we must make available and use our resources on a tremendously expanded scale.
In recent years the dynamic energy of American technology has provided what is perhaps the prime key to this phase of our resource future.
Technology has shown us the way to make better and more complete uses of our old resource standbys—such as wood and coal—as well as enabled us to develop an almost infinite variety of new materials from hitherto little used sources.
We make a host of synthetics from coal tars; we take nitrogen from the air and magnesium from the oceans; titanium, zirconium, the rare earths, and many other new metals have emerged with vital roles to play in our exciting industrial drama.
Chemical technology has, indeed, opened wide the casements to a brave new world in which our material needs may be met on order— if we describe the properties of the new substance or material we need, chemistry stands ready to produce it.
Our plastic industry for instance, only a few years ago in its infancy, has grown overnight into a new productive giant through its ability to tailor new products from cheap and virtually inexhaustible raw materials.
The doors that atomie energy and other products of our inventive genius will ultimately open we can only guess.
But we can be confident that our path leads onward to a constantly better life for all our people as long as we stand firmly by the principles of creative enterprise and constructive teamwork in a partnership attack on the vast problems of sound resource development.
The second, and equally important phase of our resource mission, must be conservation for ourselves and for future generations, of the best and greatest of our heritage of natural beauty.
In our immediate preoccupation with our resource development goals, we cannot forget that man lives for more than material things.
The need for surcease from the very téchnology which offers us so much material progress grows apace as our population grows and our civilization becomes ever more complex and mechanized.
We need to freshen our spirits occasionally with the peace of untrammeled nature, with the pure joy of birds in flight, and glimpses into the eternal mystery of our destiny that come to us most often in communion with the things that God, not man, has made.
Thus, we must jealously guard the beauties of our parks and wildlife refuges placed in our trust for our own enjoyment and for that of our children far into the future.
If we keep our eyes firmly fixed on this dual resource task—development and conservation—we shall continue through a partnership of all the American people to use our resources for the perpetual progress of man to heights which today we can only dimly sense.
HE Assistant Secretary—Water and Power Development—is responsible for the supervision and direction of the water and power agencies of the Department.
These are the Bureau of Reclamation, Bonneville Power Administration, Southeastern Power Administration, and the Southwestern Power Administration.
The latter three agencies are solely marketing agencies for the sale of surplus electric power generated at Federal dams in their respective areas.
The Bureau of Reclamation undertakes the construction of projects whose primary purpose is the reclamation of arid and semiarid lands in the western part of the United States and also markets power in this area outside the boundaries of the Bonneville Power Administration and Southwestern Power Administration.
The activities of these agencies are more fully described in sections of this report covering each of the Department's bureaus and offices.
In addition, the Assistant Secretary—Water and Power Development—exercises responsibilities which are not exclusive to any one of the Department's operating bureaus or agencies, but which involve particularly the consideration of problems of a broad, overall, or policy nature.
These include the supervision of the saline water conversion program, which is described in a separate chapter in this report, and coordination, review, and preparation of departmental comments on water and power project proposals submitted by other Federal agencies to this Department.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 1955, the Department, through this office, reviewed 35 reports of the Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army, concerned primarily with flood control and navigation; 1 report of the Department of Agriculture concerned primarily with runoff and waterflow retardation; 3 reports of the Public Health Service, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, concerning water pollution; and 42 applications for permits and licenses under the Federal Power Act.
The Assistant Secretary—Water and Power Development—also exercises, under delegation from the Secretary of the Interior, direct supervision over activities in the field of defense electric power.
These activities are fully described in another section of this report.
The Assistant Secretary—Water and Power Development—actively participated in the negotiation of contracts for the marketing of power in the Southeast and Southwest during fiscal year 1955.
These negotiations included discussions with the Carolina Power & Light and preferred agencies for a wheeling arrangement to market the remaining one-third of the John H. Kerr project power in the company's service area.
Negotiations for contracts to replace inoperative lease operate with option to purchase transmission contracts and power sales and exchange agreements were continued with generating and transmission cooperatives in the SPA area.
Interim operating, sales, and purchase contracts were also negotiated with the G and T cooperatives for this year.
At the request of the Assistant Secretary, a review of the hydroelectric potential available, as a result of the recent severe drought in the Southwest area, was made by an interagency group of experts representing the Corps of Engineers, Federal Power Commission, and the Department of the Interior.
Policies were reviewed and formulated for the marketing of power and preparation of adjustments in rates by the Southwestern Power Administration.
Work was continued with the Bureau of Reclamation on general marketing criteria for guidance in the disposal of power.
Instructions were developed and issued for a comprehensive analysis and review of the Missouri Basin program in cooperation with the Inter-Agency Committee on Water Resources.
Studies were continued in cooperation with other interested Federal agencies of Canadian-United States reservoir storage and hydroelectric power projects.
The Assistant Secretary participated with representatives of the Department of the Interior and other interested Federal agencies in further discussions with representatives of the State of California on the proposal of the California Water Project Authority for State acquisition of the Central Valley project.
He also served as departmental representative on the Inter-Agency Committee on Water Resources.
The purpose of this Committee is to provide for the coordination of policies and programs of the various Federal agencies concerned with water resources development.
During the year, the Committee established field committees in the basins of the Columbia, the Missouri, the Pacifie Southwest, and the Arkansas-White-Red.
REATER participation by State governments and local communities, private industries and individual citizens paced the program of the Bureau of Reclamation in the development of the water resources in 17 Western States and Alaska during the fiscal year ending June 30, 1955.
Legislation enacted or pending in Congress at the close of the year pointed to an even closer partnership in sharing the costs, responsibilities and benefits of Federal Reclamation in 1956.
A highlight of the year was the dramatic service of the Colorado-Big Thompson project to the extensive irrigated areas in northern Colorado which in 1954 experienced the first serious drought in 20 years.
The availability of more than 300,000 acre-feet of water from the virtually completed transmountain diversion project prevented total disaster from a withering drought and assured economic and agricultural stability to a farflung area extending from the Rocky Mountains eastwards through the South Platte River Basin to the Colorado-Nebraska State line.
Project water deliveries which brought a gross repayment to the Government of $770,880, resulted in an increased crop income to the benefited area of not less than $22 million in that one season.
Increased emphasis was given to cooperative engineering effort with small irrigation districts.
There was continued improvement in rehabilitation, reconstruction, and betterment of irrigation projects built many years ago under private initiative.
Indicative of this effort were the rehabilitation of irrigation facilities on the Dalton Gardens and Avondale irrigation systems in Idaho; the rehabilitation of the Isleta Diversion Dam and more than 180 miles of drains on the Middle Rio Grande project in New Mexico; and rehabilitation of the Savage Rapids Dam on the Grants Pass project in Oregon.
The Bureau of Reclamation was represented at four international engineering conferences during the year including attendance by the Commissioner at the World Power Conference held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in August 1954, and as an official United States delegate designated by the Department of State at the Fifth International Congress on Large Dams held in Paris, France, in June 1955.
Construction completed during fiscal year 1955 on Bureau of Reclamation projects in the West and in Alaska provided irrigation facilities to serve about 315,000 acres of land, 133,500 kilowatts of hydroelectric generating capacity, 785 miles of canals, pipelines, laterals, and drains, and more than 470 miles of electrical transmission lines.
The investment in this new construction work and in related water resource and land development features totaled $122 million for the fiscal year.
During the fiscal year 482 separate contracts, having a total face value of about $46 million, were awarded for construction, materials, equipment, and supplies for Bureau project undertakings.
Of this total contract value, construction contracts comprised about $41 million, or about 89 percent.
The 186 construction contracts in progress at the end of the fiseal year had a total value of more than $145 million.
The 1955 fiscal year saw the completion of the Eklutna project in Alaska and the placing in service of the 30,000-kilowatt Eklutna powerplant; the"holing through" of the 6-mile long Tecolote Tunnel on the Cachuma project in California; completion of the Nimbus Dam and its 13,500-kilowatt powerplant on the Central Valley project in California; and completion of the 36,000-kilowatt Alcova powerplant on the Kendrick project in Wyoming.
Other outstanding construction events were the completion of the Sly Park Dam on the Central Valley project in California; the completion of the 3.3-mile long Gateway Tunnel on the Weber Basin project in Utah: the dedication of the Kirwin Dam on the Missouri River Basin project in Kansas; and the start of construction in the Missouri River Basin of the Glendo Dam in Wyoming and the Lovewell Dam in Kansas.
The 1956 fiscal year construction program will continue work on 34 projects and Missouri River Basin project units and will extend irrigation water service to 120,400 acres of new land, provide supplemental irrigation to 82,900 acres, and generate an additional 120,000 kilowatts of hydroelectric power.
Table 1 lists the major construction contracts (more than $1 million) awarded by the Bureau of Reclamation in fiscal year 1955.
Among features for which contracts were awarded were Glendo Dam on the Missouri River Basin project in Wyoming, Lovewell Dam on the Missouri River Basin project in Kansas, 7.6 miles of the Gateway Canal on the Weber Basin project in Utah, and 11.4 miles of highway relocation at the Monticello Reservoir on the Solano project in California.
The principal features completed on Bureau of Reclamation projects in fiscal year 1955 are listed in table 2.
The listing includes 1 storage dam, 3 powerplants, 785 miles of canals, pipelines, laterals, and drains, 474 miles of transmission lines, 2 rehabilitated diversion dams, and 189 miles of rehabilitated drains.
Development of the irrigation system for the Columbia Basin project in Washington progressed during the year to the stage that facilities were available to serve 247,000 acres of lands, the system having been extended to serve an additional 61,000 acres in fiscal year 1955.
Completed during the year were 333 miles of canals, laterals, and wasteways.
The system of main canals neared completion at year's end.
On the Palisades project in Idaho, excellent construction progress was made in placing the earth embankment of the Palisades Dam, following diversion of the Snake River through the dam's outlet tunnels in August 1954.
Good progress was also maintained on the 114,000-kilowatt Palisades powerplant.
Construction of the 12,000-kilowatt Chandler power and pumping plant on the Yakima project in Washington moved ahead of schedule to assure placement of the plant in service during the next fiscal year.
Excellent progress was also made on the irrigration system to be served by the pumping installation.
On the Central Valley project in California, substantial progress was made on the project's irrigation distribution and power facilities.
For the Friant-Kern Canal distribution system, 122 miles of pipe laterals were completed; 39 miles of open laterals were completed for the Madera Canal distribution system, and 10 miles of pipe laterals were constructed for the Plainview water irrigation distribution system on the Delta-Mendota Canal.
Construction on the American River Division of the Central Valley project advanced to the point of completion of the Nimbus Dam and its 13,500-kilowatt powerplant, and the placing in service of the first of three 54,000-kilowatt generating units of the Folsom powerplant.
With the installation of the remaining 2 Folsom units during the next fiscal year, Nimbus and Folsom powerplants will increase the project's power capacity by 175,000 kilowatts.
Sly Park Dam was completed as well as the 5.6-mile Camino conduit and the half-mile Camino Tunnel.
Also in California, following the installation of improved drainage and ventilation facilities, excavation of the remaining 4,700 feet of the Cachuma project's 6-mile-long Tecolote Tunnel was resumed in July 1954.
The tunnel, one of the most difficult Bureau construction undertakings in recent years because of large inflows of hot water and high humidity, was "holed through" in January 1955.
At year's end, the placing of the concrete lining continued in the tunnel.
Cachuma project work was also noted by completion of 61 miles of pipe laterals for the Carpinteria and Goleta distribution systems.
In southern California, the remaining 29-mile section of the San Jacinto-San Vicente aqueduct was completed ahead of schedule.
The entire 61-mile length of this second barrel of the San Diego aqueduct, which was designed and constructed by the Bureau for the Department of the Navy, was turned over for operation by the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California and the San Diego County Water Authority.
Extension of the Wellton-Mohawk and Dome distribution systems and installation of additional pumping units in the 3 Wellton-Mohawk pumping plants comprised the major work on the Gila project in Arizona.
Unit 1 of the Dome Canal, 27 miles long, was completed.
Progress of work on the Weber Basin project in Utah was highlighted by completion of the 3.3-mile Gateway Tunnel.
Construction of the project's Wanship Dam was ahead of schedule at the end of the fiscal year, and work on the 4-mile Weber aqueduct and on the 7.6- mile Gateway Canal proceded on schedule.
On the Middle Rio Grande project in New Mexico rehabilitation of the Isleta Diversion Dam and 189 miles of drains was completed and rehabilitation of the El Vado Dam was substantially completed.
In the same State, construction contracts for rehabilitation of the Vermejo project were essentially completed.
The comprehensive program for the development of the land and water resources of the Missouri River Basin project progressed at a good rate.
Kirwin Dam in Kansas, a large earthfill structure, was essentially completed.
Also in Kansas, Webster Dam neared the midway point of completion, and Lovewell Dam was placed under construction.
One of the basin project's major new starts of the year was Glendo Dam and the foundation for the 24,000-kilowatt powerplant construction, starting in December 1954, was sustained at a rapid pace throughout the year.
Other major work was completed on the Missouri River Basin project: 430 miles of "backbone" transmission lines which will transmit power from the large powerplants under construction by the Corps of Engineers on the main stem of the Missouri River in North and South Dakota; 20 miles of the Toston and Lombard canals and laterals in Montana; 43 miles of canals and laterals on the Bostwick division in Nebraska and Kansas; and 61 miles of canals, laterals, and drains under the Frenchman-Cambridge division in Nebraska.
On the Sargent unit, also in Nebraska, work was started on the Milburn Diversion Dam and Sargent Canal, the first of several irrigation and flood control facilities planned by the Bureau on the lower reaches of the Platte River and its tributaries.
Construction continued on Tiber Dam in Montana, Pactola Dam in South Dakota, and on about 500 miles of major electrical transmission lines in the Dakotas and about 230 miles of lines in Nebraska.
Alcova powerplant on the Kendrick project in Wyoming was completed, adding 36,000 kilowatts of installed capacity to the Bureau's hydroelectric power system in the Missouri River Basin area.
On the Colorado-Big Thompson project in Colorado, 21 miles of supply canals were completed.
The transmountain diversion project's basic facilities were completed last year, except for the authorized Big Thompson powerplant for which construction funds were not available.
Work on the South Platte Supply Canal in fiscal year 1956 will complete the final link in the project's water distribution system.
In Alaska, the 41/-mile Eklutna Tunnel was completed on the Eklutna project and the two 15,000-kilowatt generating units in the Eklutna powerplant were placed in full operation, bringing relief to the power-short Anchorage-Palmer area.
The Bureau continued its safety program during the year to prevent personal iniuries through the administration and enforcement of modern safety practices and other preventive measures against the hazards of construction work.
Indicative of the progress made in reducing the number of accidents in construction operations was the 7-percent reduction of the accident frequency rate below the previous year's rate.
Designs and specifications for 117 construction contracts were completed during the year.
The average cost for these engineering services as related to the overall Bureau of Reclamation construction and rehabilitation program for the 1955 fiscal year was 4.1 percent.
During the vear, for the first time in Bureau design undertakings, the technique of full-scale feld tests was applied in determining the performance and the most economical design for an earth dam.
To obtain necessary data on the settlement changes caused by the loading of the organic silt foundation for the proposed Willard Dam on the Weber Basin project in Utah, a 35-foot-high test embankment containing embedded measuring apparatus was designed and placed under construction on the project.
Considerable design activity centered on the enlargement and rehabilitation of existing dams.
Rehabilitation of the spillways and outlet works for many of these structures imposed complex problems not usually encountered in the development of new works and necessitated innovations in design techniques.
Dam, Weber Basin project, Utah; repair of the outlet works for Wickiup Dam, Deschutes project, Oregon; and replacement of the Crescent Lake Dam, Crescent Lake Dam project, Oregon.
A significant innovation in the design of fish protective facilities was the development of a system of protective louvered barriers at the intake to the Tracy pumping plant on the Central Valley project in California.
Fish from the Sacramento River, seeking the ocean and finding themselves at the intake, will be concentrated at the louvered barriers, and then be transported safely to the lower river.
To assure continued operation of waterway structures subject to icing during severe winter weather, a new method of electrical induction heating of exposed surfaces was incorporated in certain structure designs.
The formation of ice, which could render structures or equipment inoperable, is prevented by the heat generated by induction through an embedded electrical conduit.
Improved techniques were developed in analyzing vibrations in structures and equipment and were successfully applied to eliminate objectionable vibration of structures at five powerplants and one pumping plant.
To lower the cost of construction and make more efficient use of its engineering forces, the Bureau initiated the procedure of requiring the contractor on major construction work to perform all detailed construction surveys previously carried out by the Government; initial survey layouts and surveys for installation of certain major equipment requiring precise measurement will continue to be made by the Bureau.
European manufacturers continued to show active interest in Bureau equipment and materials advertisements.
During the year 27 contracts for electrical equipment were awarded to foreign manufacturers or their representatives.
These contracts, which included 19 Italian, 5 Austrian, and 3 English contracts, totaled $961,297.
For the first half of the fiscal year, under the "Buy American Act," a differential of 25 percent was added to all foreign bids before comparison was made with domestic bids.
However, by Executive Order 10582, dated December 17, 1954, the differential was reduced to either 6 percent or 10 percent depending upon how it was applied.
Although the total value of foreign awards was less than fiscal year 1954, the number of contraets awarded in fiscal year 1955 to foreign firms more than doubled over fiscal year 1954.
Investigations in the Bureau's engineering laboratories led to improved economy and serviceability of Reclamation projects.
In the hydraulic laboratory a novel and economical wave suppressor was developed for the Central Valley project's Friant-Kern Canal stilling basin to reduce excessive waves formed during high discharge from the 96-inch valves at Friant Dam.
Hydraulic laboratory investigations of alternative preliminary designs to provide additional flood capacity for the Alamogordo Dam spillway indicated that improved hydraulic characteristies in the spillway could be achieved at less construction cost than previously contemplated.
Other model studies demonstrated the feasibility of increasing the spillway capacity for the Palo Verde Diversion Dam, a minimum of sediment in water being discharged through the canal headworks.
Model studies were completed for the standardization of a weir box for dissipating energy and measuring discharge at turnouts from canals.
Economy in placing earth linings for canals was achieved on several projects as the result of the earth laboratory studies on blending soils to meet impermeability and erosion resistance requirements.
Laboratory investigations indicated the possible use of soil cement or an inexpensive concrete or mortar lining as canal lining for the proposed Ainsworth Canal in Nebraska, which will traverse the unstable dune sand area.
In concrete materials investigations acceptance standards were developed for lightweight pumice concrete roof slabs, first use of this type of construction having been applied to the Palisades powerplant.
Tests of waterproofing membranes for concrete roof and deck construction indicated that butyl rubber sheeting or prefabricated asphalt board may be an acceptable substitute for tar and felt.
The first phase of research in hydration of portland-pozzolan cements, conducted under a National Science Foundation grant—the first grant the Foundation has made to a Government agency—was completed with the collection of minerals required for the study.
In other areas of research, a survey of 5 types of buried asphalt membrane canal lining in service as long as 6 vears confirmed laboratory indications that catalytically blown asphalts processed with phosphorous pentoxide have the best prospects for longest service life.
Laboratory tests also showed that the toughness and tenacity of asphalt can be increased significantly by the addition of up to 5 percent of rubber in the liquid form.
During the year 141 laboratory reports were issued embracing the subjects of research and testing of concrete materials, hydraulic laboratory studies, bituminous materials, protective coatings, weed control, and structural studies.
Throughout the year the Bureau's engineering staff was called upon for numerous advisory and testing services by Federal and other public agencies.
Through the application of high-speed electronie computers and Bureau-developed techniques in the use of the equipment, work was performed for the Upper Colorado River Commission in the forecasting of seasonal runoffs.
Assistance was also given the International Boundary and Water Commission in the application of highspeed electronic computers to the Commission's extensive studies of reservoir operations for Falcon Dam and the proposed Diablo Dam.
Geologic advisory service was performed for the International Boundary and Water Commission in studies of the foundation problems at the Diablo Dam site.
The Atomie Energy Commission sought advice on the use of geophysical methods in locating uranium ore.
Bureau geophysicists and geophysical equipment were provided the Commission for experimental work in the exploration of uranium deposits in the Black Hills area in South Dakota and adjacent areas.
Bureau engineers participated in a conference with Department of the Navy representatives in recommending methods of repairing the cracks in the Navy's 50,000,000-gallon reservoir at Hawthorne, Nev.
During the year the Bureau completed its analyses of stress from strain meters embedded in the mass concrete of the city of Seattle's Ross Dam and prepared a comprehensive report on the analyses which had been conducted under a cooperative investigation program between the city of Seattle and the Bureau since 1943.
Also, for the city of Seattle, studies of the spillway designs for the Gorge High Dam were carried out in the Bureau's hydraulic laboratory.
Bureau laboratory advisory and technical services were also made available to the Bureau of Indian Affairs in investigations of the concrete in Coolidge Dam, to the International Boundary and Water Commission in its studies of controlling corrosion in the penstocks in both the United States and Mexican powerplants at Falcon Dam, and to the San Diego County Water Authority in hydraulic measurement studies for the San Diego aqueduct.
Although construction wage rates and material costs increased about 4 percent during fiscal year 1955, Bureau of Reclamation construction costs averaged about 4 percent less than costs experienced during the previous fiscal year.
However, construction costs began to increase during the second half of fiscal year 1955, and by June 1955 had risen to about the same level as June 1954.
Wage settlements and strikes near the end of the fiscal year, coupled with the record-breaking pace of the construction industry, were expected to force reclamation construction costs on up from the June 1955 level.
Bidding interest in all types of reclamation construction work decreased noticeably from the interest shown in fiscal year 1954, possibly reflecting the tremendous amount of other construction work in progress.
The average number of bids per construetion schedule, amounting to 8.8 for the second half of fiscal year 1954, dropped to 7.3 for the first half of fiscal year 1955, and to 6.6 for the second half of the fiscal year.
Table 3 shows cost indexes for Bureau of Reclamation construction work based on the combined costs of materials and labor supplied by contractors and materials and labor supplied by the Government.
Progressive improvement in the many aspects of the Bureau's drainage and ground-water activities continued during the year.
Important advances were made in the analytical approach to the solution of drainage and ground-water problems.
Basic theories and new mathematical formulas were derived to assist in predicting drainage problem areas and in forecasting the behavior of ground water after irrigation and the suitability of lands for irrigation.
New techniques were also developed for appraising the feasibility of drainage by pumping from ground water in irrigated areas and new formulas were derived for analyzing water movement in "tight" soils.
Limited and controlled water applications were studied as a means of reducing drainage requirements or of permitting irrigation of lands which cannot be readily drained.
Progress was also made in the drainage and ground-water phases of operating projects as indicated by the increased cooperative effort by water users on Bureau projects to adequate drainage and construction of new drains on irrigated lands.
Several projects constructed drains during the year and one project completely rehabilitated and improved its drainage system, restoring to productivity lands which for many years had been only marginal or entirely unproductive.
Other operating projects undertook drainage investigations, the Bureau advising and assisting in technical aspects and in reimbursable financing.
Technical studies were made for and counsel was given to water users' organizations and other entities on claims involving alleged damage from ground water resulting from project operation.
Close liaison among Bureau engineers and exchange of information with other Federal agencies and committees of technical organizations made the Bureau's progress in drainage and ground-water developments available to the profession.
Bureau engineers also assisted foreign engineers in their drainage and ground-water work, and in turn, gained information on foreign experiences for application to Bureau projects.
Se le.
The Division of General Engineering, formerly the office of the Assistant to the Commissioner—Engineering, was established in 1954 as a staff office in Washington, responsible for coordination and liaison activities on engineering matters requiring the attention of the Commissioner.
Throughout the 1955 fiscal year, coordination and liaison was maintained with the Department of Labor, the Renegotiation Board, General Accounting Office, and the Department on interpretation and clarification of regulations and policies relating to contraet actions.
Coordination of contract awards was provided in the Commissioner's office and departmental clearance obtained before award of contracts in excess of $10,000.
Two staff members of the Division of General Engineering were designated as alternate members of the Department's Board of Contract Appeals and also to render technical advice and counsel to the Board.
An index-type escalator clause for inclusion in reclamation contracts was developed which is agreeable to the electric equipment industry and other governmental contracting agencies.
As a result, index-type escalation clauses based on special indexes compiled and computed by Bureau of Labor Statisties are now available for use in contracts covering several categories of electrical equipment.
New procedures were established and instructions issued to insure compliance by reclamation contractors with the revised nondiscrimination provisions approved by Executive Order 10557, dated September 3.
The Chief of the Division of General Engineering was designated compliance officer for the Bureau to carry out the objectives of the Executive order and maintain liaison with the Department's compliance officer and the President's Committee on Government Contracts.
Plans were formulated for the protection of Bureau structures and facilities under the national security program, and other civil defense work prepared in cooperation with the Department.
Liaison activities with other agencies resulted in the formation of a joint interagency committee for studying the land-subsidence problems in the San Joaquin Valley, Calif.
As a result, the Geological Survey, the Coast and Geodetic Survey, Bureau of Mines, Bureau of Reclamation, State of California, Stanford University, and the University of California are cooperating in an investigation program.
During fiscal year 1955, the Bureau of Reclamation continued to cooperate in the technical-assistance programs of the United States Government, primarily at the request of the Foreign Operations Administration, which took over the work formerly performed by Technical Cooperation Administration and Mutual Security Agency.
The Division of Foreign Activities was established in December 1953 to administer the Bureau s participation in these programs formerly handled by a unit in the Commissioner's office.
This assistance consisted of the training of technicians from foreign lands, rendering service to observers and visitors, sending of individual specialists and missions of Bureau technicians to other countries, and the performing at the Reclamation Engineering Center in Denver of technical services, such as testing, research, and design and specification review for foreign water resources development.
Besides the work for the Foreign Operations Administration, the Bureau also handled a number of requests for assistance from the Department of State, UNRWA, IBRD, and other agencies directly concerned with waterresources development throughout the world.
The Department of State requests were under the authority of Public Law 402 and financed by funds made available by the requesting government.
The Training Administration Branch handled 103 in-service trainees during fiscal year 1955, including engineers and government officials from 21 different countries.
Also accommodated were 55 official observers and some 37 accredited visitors from 24 countries.
At the close of the fiscal year, there were 43 people on reclamation rolls on overseas assignments to Costa Rica, Égypt, Ethiopia, Formosa, India, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Pakistan, and Turkey.
During the year the Bureau of Reclamation received $2,726,480 from various agencies for financing these technical assistance and training programs, as compared to $2,329,000 for fiscal year 1953 and $2,438,000 for fiscal year 1954.
The Division of Irrigation is responsible for supervising facilities capable of delivering irrigation water to more than 7 million acres of land, on which approximately 125,000 family-size farms and more than 125,000 suburban units have been developed.
States.
The Bureau of Reclamation also provides municipal and industrial water service from Bureau-constructed works to over 2,000,000 people.
In addition to water delivery, the Division of Irrigation is responsible, through proper supervision, for protection of the Federal investment in constructed works by keeping project facilities in repair to assure good service and the economical use of water.
These facilities include 126 storage and 80 diversion dams, more than 19,500 miles of canals and laterals, over 5,700 miles of drains, 386 pumping plants, and an estimated 11,300 miles of operating roads.
During 1954, Bureau-constructed facilities were extended to about 103,000 irrigable acres of new land within the service area of Reclamation projects.
The bulk of this acreage comes from continued progress on the Columbia Basin project, in central Washington State, where facilities were completed to serve approximately 55,000 acres.
Significant progress was made on new acreage development in Arizona, California, Idaho, Kansas, Nebraska, South Dakota, and Montana.
Of the above total, 72,018 acres represent land in private ownership on the Gila, Central Valley, and Columbia Basin projects, the Coachella division of the All-American Canal system, the Bostwick and Frenchman-Cambridge divisions, and the Angostura and Crow Creek pump units of the Missouri River Basin project.
The remaining 30.056 acres embrace public land from units selected under the settlement program on the Gila, Minidoka, and Columbia Basin projects, and the Coachella division of the All-American Canal system.
The 1954 crop production on irrigated lands within the service area of Federal Reclamation projects was valued at $865,025,682.
This is the second highest year in Reclamation history and is exceeded only by the record production of 1952.
The value of crops harvested on Federal reclamation projects was $79.1 million greater than the previous year and only $70.7 million less than in 1952.
Also, 1954 was the fourth consecutive year in which the total crop value exceeded the three-quarters-billion-dollar mark.
Total crop production was divided into crop groups on the basis of utility as follows: Cereals, forage, miscellaneous field crops, seeds, vegetables, and fruits and nuts.
In terms of acreage, the most significant crop group was forage, with 52 percent of the irrigated lands producing these crops.
Cereal crops were the next most important group, followed by field crops, vegetables, fruits and nuts, and seeds, respectively.
In terms of crop value, the most significant crop group was miscellaneous field crops, with production being valued at $296.4 million.
The next most important crop group was forage, followed by vegetables, fruits and nuts, cereals, and seeds.
Forage and cereal crops together, which largely are used locally as supplementary feed for livestock and hence are not in competition on the open market comprise a total of 4,726,349 acres of irrigated land, or over 77 percent of all irrigated lands on Federal Reclamation projects.
Over 700 million acres of rangeland are grazed annually in the Western States.
This rangeland potential is seasonal in nature, and can be considered as a national asset only if livestock are available locally to graze these lands.
Irrigation farming greatly enhances the value of this great asset by producing livestock feeds which are used during winter months to supplement summer grazing.
Without irrigation, mueh of this great grazing potential would be lost because of prohibitive costs for shipment of cattle into and from these rangeland areas for the summer months.
Irrigated lands on the 69 Federal irrigation projects amounted to 6,125,766 acres in 1954.
Significant changes in the irrigated acreage from 1953 occurred on projects where new irrigation development is presently being undertaken, and on projects located in drought areas which have experienced lower than normal precipitation in recent years.
Of the new lands brought within the service area of reclamation projects in 1954, over 65,000 acres were irrigated.
The Columbia Basin project had an increase of 40,369 acres in irrigated acreage; Central Valley project, 12,484 acres; Minidoka project-North Side pumping division, 1,752 acres; the Missouri River Basin, 5,979 acres; the Coachella division of the All-American Canal system, 1,822 acres; and the Gila project, about 2,601 acres over 1953.
Projects in some drought areas were unable to furnish irrigation to as large an acreage in 1954, as was the case for 1953.
Projects in region 5, which comprises Texas, Eastern New Mexico, Oklahoma, a portion of southern Colorado and Kansas were in this category, as well as other projects located east of the Continental Divide.
The Rio Grande project had a decrease in the irrigated acreage of about 22,000 acres; Tucumcari project, 4,500 acres; Carlsbad project, 4,400 acres; North Platte project, 23,800 acres; and the Sun River project, 7,000.
However, notwithstanding the fact that drought conditions prevailed in many sections throughout the west, irrigation on reclamation projects increased 28,151 acres over 1953.
Region 1 had a larger acreage of irrigated lands than any of the other regions within the Bureau, and also had the highest gross value of production.
The average crop value per acre of irrigated land was $141.21, an increase over 1953 of over $12 per acre.
The highest average value per acre for all production was attained on the Tieton division of the Yakima project which averaged $874.89 per irrigated acre in 1954.
Fruit and nuts had the highest average value per acre of any of the crop groups ($527.43) and forage crops were lowest ($45.65).
The most significant individual crops produced on irrigated project lands from an acreage standpoint were alfalfa, pasture, barley, cotton, sugar beets, wheat, and dry and edible beans.
However, from a value standpoint cotton was the most significant crop followed by alfalfa, sugar beets, potatoes, grapes, apples, and beans.
Many foods which are used extensively throughout the country and which receive no price support assistance are produced only in the arid west on irrigated farms.
The 17 Western States account for the entire production of almonds, apricots, filberts, walnuts, fresh market fall and winter peas, olives, prunes, mustard seed, dates, figs, raisins, honeyball and honeydew melons, and hops; and produce about 90 percent of the early spring asparagus, lettuce, early cantaloupes, winter spinach, spring onions, pears, sweet cherries, and grapes.
The acreage and value of crops produced on each of the Federal Reclamation projeets are shown in tables 5 and 6.
Se o s blie.
During fiscal year 1955, the Bureau conducted 4 land openings on 2 reclamation projects, making 243 farm units embracing 23,514 irrigable acres of new land available for settlement.
As in previous vears, the majority of these units was on the Columbia Basin project in Washington where 149 units were offered for sale under provisions of the Columbia Basin Project Act.
The remaining 94 units were opened for settlement under provisions of reclamation and homestead laws in the Northside pumping unit of the Minidoka project in Idaho.
Public response to the announced availability of new farm units under the Bureau's settlement program continued at the high level evidenced since the close of World War II, with an average of nearly 100 qualified applicants for each unit offered.
Since the close of World War II, 48 land openings have been held on 13 reclamation projects.
A total of 2,166 new farm units encompassing nearly 183,000 irrigable acres of public land has thus been made available for selection by qualified applicants.
Both technical and financial assistance has continued to be available to settlers during developmental years through cooperative working relationships established by the Bureau with the Farmers Home Administration, the Agricultural Extension Service, the several State colleges and universities, and other similarly appropriate agencies.
During fiscal year 1956 the availability of additional new farm units is anticipated on the Columbia Basin and Yakima projects in Washington, the Minidoka project in Idaho, and the Gila project in Arizona.
The development farm program on new irrigation projects was begun in 1947 and has been continued in cooperation with Department of Agriculture agencies and State agricultural colleges.
The purpose of the farms is to demonstrate effective methods of irrigation and good cropping practices; to determine crops best adapted to the area, and water requirements of the crops; and to demonstrate other approved practices with which the new settlers may have had little or no experience.
The farms also aid in determining the feasibility of developing certain areas for irrigation where the quality of the soil and water may be questionable.
From 10 to 20 percent of most farms are set aside for research by the cooperating agencies on special problems which may be encountered in the area.
Field days, tours, and other educational media are employed to disseminate the information obtained from the research and to explain the demonstrations to the farmers on the project.
Over 22,000 local settlers and others interested in the work have visited the farms.
New settlers have been aided materially through the development farm program in making an early success of their irrigated farms, which in turn has helped safeguard the Government's investment in the construction of irrigation projects.
To date 23 development farms have been established of which 7 have served their purpose and have been discontinued.
It is expected that 2 or 3 of the presently operated farms will be discontinued at the end of the 1955 operating season.
Plans have been made to establish about 4 new farms next fiscal year.
The present farms are located in the Columbia Basin, Missouri River Basin, and Gila projects.
During fiscal year 1955 contracts were executed with nine irrigation districts for the repayment of the cost of new irrigation works.
Twenty-six water users’ organizations signed contracts for the purchase of storage water rights or for interim and long-term water service.
Pursuant to special authorizing legislation, basic amendatory construction repayment contracts were executed with 8 irrigation districts.
Negotiations of basic amendatory construction repayment contracts are under way or scheduled with 5 irrigation districts.
These contracts will require special congressional authorization.
Amendatory contracts were executed with an additional 20 organizations to provide for such matters as the transfer of operation and maintenance of the irrigation works to the water users and the repayment of the cost of rehabilitation and betterment programs.
The Bureau of Reclamation has continued its soil and moisture conservation program in keeping with the Department's policy of conserving the natural resources on lands under its jurisdiction.
The program objectives are accomplished in cooperation with other Federal agencies as well as State and local agencies.
Water users' organizations assist in planning the work and in many cases furnish a part of the labor, materials, and funds.
The activities have ineluded erosion control and water conservation on acquired and withdrawn lands, protection of reservoirs and other irrigation facilities, and general betterment of the lands in the Bureau's custody.
Some of the particular work undertaken during this year included reseeding watershed areas, sand dune control, salt cedar control investigations, soil stabilization and stream control.
Drainage for the disposal of surplus ground water is, of necessity, an integral part of an irrigation system.
It has been found, however, that it is not fully possible to predict the nature of a drainage problem prior to its actual occurrence on a project.
Hence, drainage problems fall into three stages of project development: First, the initial stages of project operation during which ground-water accumulations must be studied by analysis of systematically collected data on project ground-water elevations; second, a stage in which ground-water elevations adversely affect crop production and drains or wells must be constructed to remove surplus water; and third, a period of maintenance and minor extension of drainage to new problem areas.
There are Bureau of Reclamation projects in all of these stages but it is possible to report that during fiscal year 1955 there was no case of drainage problems being of great magnitude.
Ground-water elevations were being studied on new projects, particularly those in the Missouri River Basin project where problems are expected.
There were no major drains under construction during the year.
Regular maintenance of drains continued, with trouble from erosion being experienced in a few places.
The Bureau recognizes that prevention of ground-water accumulation would eliminate drainage problems.
Hence, many canals and laterals have been lined to prevent seepage.
In some areas, particularly on the North Platte project in Nebraska, lining has been so effective that it has been possible to abandon drains or to refill the drains and place the land in cultivation.
The Bureau also has a continuing program of education of water users in the proper use of water to the end that waste and overirrigation will be reduced with a consequent reduction in drainage problems.
During the past year, continued progress was made in developing and applying more economical methods of weed control.
Of particular importance in this field is the research being conducted in cooperation with the Weed Investigations Section, Agricultural Research Service, Department of Agriculture.
This research is undertaken at four field stations established in the West by that Department with locations at Phoenix, Ariz.
Prosser, Wash.
Logan, Utah; and Bozeman, Mont.
In the Bureau's Denver laboratories special attention has been given to developing better methods for controlling salt cedar, submersed waterweeds, and algae.
The use of radioactive isotopes in tracing the movement and concentration of herbicides in plant tissues also has been continued in Denver.
Both Federal and private irrigation districts have been kept advised of the new developments in weed control through motion pictures, slide lectures, Reclamation Era articles, handbooks, and other educational media prepared by the Bureau or prepared in cooperation with other agencies.
The Bureau of Reclamation has worked closely during the fiscal year with units in the Department of Agriculture, the State colleges and extension services, and other Federal, State, and local agencies.
Many phases of the Bureau's activities in planning, developing, and operating irrigation projects in the 17 Western States lend themselves to such cooperation.
The cooperative undertakings with these agencies have been carried out through memorandums of understanding or cooperative agreements.
Of the 158 agreements now in effect, 33 were executed during the past fiscal year.
Construction of dams and reservoirs for irrigation and power development provides incidental but very definite benefits through the creation of exceptional public use opportunities.
This is particularly true in the more arid parts of the West.
However, except as provided by law in specific instances, the Bureau of Reclamation is not authorized to expend funds for development of reservoir areas for public uses.
At certain reservoirs where possibilities for use by the publie are deemed to be of national significance, such as Lake Mead, on the Colorado River between Arizona and Nevada; Franklin D. Roosevelt Lake, on the Columbia River in Washington; Millerton Lake on the San Joaquin River in California; and Shadow Mountain Lake and Lake Granby on the Colorado River in Colorado, responsibility for the development and administration of public use facilities has been delegated to the National Park Service.
The National Park Service is, in effect, the agent of the Bureau in all publie use matters and negotiates for the development and administration, by local or State governmental agencies, of reservoir areas which are of local or State significance.
Facilities at reservoirs wholly or substantially within national forest boundaries are administered by the United States Forest Service.
Each step taken in the development of the Nation's basic resources moves the economy of the Nation to a new and higher plateau.
This is strikingly demonstrated in an analysis of Federal tax revenues from Federal reclamation project areas.
Based on the projected results of a sample study of 15 reclamation projects, the estimated cumulative return to the Treasury from the 73 projects or divisions of projects receiving water under the Federal reclamation program in 1954 now stands at approximately $4 billion.
This is an amount greater than total reclamation expenditures for all project works since the beginning of the Federal reclamation program in 1902.
The benefits accruing to the Nation through reclamation development are also measured in terms of families served, crop production and value, livestock raised, and acres irrigated.
They are expressed in rapidly expanding trade and business activity, in direct repayment to the Government by the beneficiaries of reclamation, in increased population on and adjacent to projects, and in a wide variety of other phenomena.
These are all tangible, measurable benefits of a broad and lasting nature.
They translate into expanding business activities in the project and surrounding areas.
They filter to every State in the Union and every segment of society.
They provide through this process additional economic stability to the Nation, which is reflected in part by increased revenues to the Treasury, and to the States and areas as well as on the projects themselves.
The estimate of Federal tax revenues from reclamation project areas is, therefore, only a partial measure of the true contribution of basic reclamation resource development to the Nation's tax structure and to the economy as a whole.
In 1954, individual income taxes paid directly by irrigation farmers and by persons of the neighboring towns and villages whose business or employment was affected by the construction of 15 selected reclamation projects were estimated at $106 million.
The aggregate individual income tax revenues from this sample study area since income tax collections started in 1916 is estimated at over $900 million.
In addition to individual tax revenues, an appropriate share of corporation and excise tax revenues collected in the same 15 project areas is directly attributable to reclamation development.
Estimated receipts from these sources total nearly $500 million.
The combined returns from individual and corporate tax revenues accordingly are estimated at $1.4 billion.
Total Federal project construction cost through June 30, 1954, for the same projects aggregated $273 million.
Thus far, Federal tax revenues from these 15 project areas total more than 5 times the total cost of project facilities and about 71/ times the direct cost of irrigation facilities.
The installed capacity and the generation of hydroelectric power from Bureau of Reclamation multipurpose projects and from projects for which the Bureau is responsible for marketing the power, increased 324,600 kilowatts during fiscal year 1955.
On June 30, 1955, the installed capacity of powerplants constructed and operated by the Bureau of Reclamation totaled 4,854,550 kilowatts whereas the capacity installed and operated by other agencies for which the Bureau is the marketing agent totaled 356,500 kilowatts.
Sale of electric power during the year aggregated 25,031,325,608 kilowatt-hours, with revenues from sales totaling $51,764,256.48, as shown in table 7.
This compares to the previous year's sales of 25,- 071,363,414 kilowatt-hours, and revenues of $50,812,260.06.
During the fiscal year ending June 30, 1955, the Bureau of Reclamation operated 34 powerplants with a total nameplate capacity of 4,854,- 550 kilowatts, an increase of 133,100 kilowatts over the fiscal year 1954 figures.
In addition, the Bureau marketed the power generated from plants constructed by the Corps of Engineers and the International Boundary Water Commission, totaling 356,500 kilowatts.
At the end of fiscal year 1955, the Bureau of Reclamation had under construction 4 powerplants, which will have an ultimate installed nameplate capacity of 198,000 kilowatts.
They are: Palisades, on the Snake River in Idaho; Chandler, Yakima River, Wash.
Fremont Canyon and Glendo, both on the North Platte River in Wyoming.
The United States Army Corps of Engineers is proceeding with the construction of its plants on the Missouri River Basin project.
The ultimate nameplate capacity of the 3 plants—Garrison, in North Dakota; and Gavins Point and Oahe, in South Dakota—under construction by the corps will total 925,000 kilowatts.
The Bureau of Reclamation will be the marketing agent for energy generated from these plants as in the case for other plants constructed by the Corps on the Missouri River Basin project.
Authorized but not yet under construction by the Bureau of Reclamation as a part of multipurpose Reclamation facilities are 31 powerplants with an ultimate total nameplate capacity of 1,037,350 kilowatts.
The status of hydroelectric powerplants on reclamation projects is shown in table 8.
On June 30, 1955, the Bureau of Reclamation's transmission system consisted of 9,069 circuit miles of line.
During fiscal year 1955, 321 circuit miles of transmission lines were completed to serve load centers where other trunk transmission facilities were not available.
These are shown in table 9.
During fiscal year 1955, there were 137 contracts executed for the delivery of electric power supply.
A number of these were renewals of operating contracts or revisions of existing contracts resulting from changed operating conditions.
20 with private utilities.
39 with REA cooperatives.
47 with municipalities.
6 with other Federal agencies.
13 with public power districts.
9 with State authorities.
1 with irrigation district.
2 miscellaneous type contracts.
The Bureau continued its policy of contracting whenever possible with private utilities, public bodies and cooperatives for wheeling power and energy over existing facilities.
The Bureau also entered into several interchange agreements with its customers.
A summary by classification of customers served by Reclamation during fiscal year 1955 is shown in table 10.
The Bureau at the end of fiscal year 1955 had 136 contraets under active negotiation.
This included 26 contracts with municipalities, 70 with REA cooperatives, 21 with private utilities, 2 with public power districts, 10 with other Federal agencies, 3 with State authorities, 2 with irrigation districts and 2 miscellaneous type contracts.
A number of these are to renew the existing contracts, or to revise contracts in existence due to changes in operating conditions.
1 Does not include energy sales and revenues in transactions between Bureau projects.
2 Totals include 14,573,567,701 kilowatt-hours delivered to Bonneville Power Administration for marketing and $15,956,430 in payments by that agency.
The project development program provides for the investigation of plans for potential projects for the utilization of the water resources of the West for irrigation and for other purposes and for advance planning on newly authorized projects awaiting the initial construction funds.
During fiseal year 1955, the Bureau of Reclamation continued the Arkansas-White-Red River Basin survey in cooperation with other interested Federal agencies under the field committee established by the Federal Inter-Agency River Basin Committee on June 12, 1950.
By the end of the fiscal year the field work had been practically completed and work was under way on the preparation and review of the comprehensive report with the objective of completing all work early in fiscal year 1956.
Several other basin surveys also were under way but by the end of the fiscal year none had been completed.
Chief Joseph Dam project, Foster Creek Division, Washington.
Deschutes project, North Unit, Haystack equalizing reservoir, Oregon.
Michaud Flats project, Idaho.
Palo Verde diversion project, Arizon-California.
Rogue River Basin project.
Talent division and rehabilitation of Medford and Rogue River Valley irrigation district, Oregon.
Santa Margarita project, California.
Santa Maria project, California.
The 1955 Interior Department Appropriation Act provided funds for the start of construction on the Alamogordo Dam spillway enlargement of the Carlsbad project in New Mexico and the Crescent Lake Dam project, Oregon.
The Glendo unit of the Missouri River Basin project was reauthorized by a joint resolution of Congress based on a report submitted in accordance with special provisions of recent Interior Department appropriation acts.
Legislation was also passed by Congress to authorize the Ainsworth, Lavaca Flats, Mirage Flats Extension and O'Neill units in the Niobrara River Basin in Nebraska as integral units of the Missouri River Basin project.
By the end of the fiscal year reports had been submitted to Congress and ordered to be printed as congressional documents for the Juniper division of the Wapinitia project in Oregon and for the Washoe project in California and Nevada.
In addition, planning reports for the Crooked River project in Oregon and the McMillan Delta Water Salvage Channel in the Pecos River Basin in New Mexico and a supplemental report on the Trinity River division of the Central Valley project in California were completed and submitted to the interested States and Federal agencies for review.
A report was also completed and under review by the end of the fiscal year by affected States and Federal agencies for the Ainsworth unit of the Missouri River Basin project in anticipation of its being submitted to Congress as a basis for approval of construction as required by the authorizing legislation for this unit.
A feasibility report on the Ventura River project in California had been submitted to the President and was under review by the Bureau of the Budget by the end of the fiscal year.
During the year bills were considered in Congress to provide permanent authorization for the Bureau's investigation program in Alaska, which in the past had been undertaken on a year-to-year basis based on special language in the annual Department of the Interior appropriation acts, and to authorize construction of the Trinity River division of the Central Valley project in California.
Both bills became law by congressional passage and Presidential signature shortly after the end of the 1955 fiscal year.
Bills were introduced to authorize the following projects and hearings were held in both Houses of Congress: The Colorado River storage project and participating projects in Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, Wyoming, and Utah; the Fryingpan-Arkansas project in Colorado; the Ventura River project in California; and the Washita Basin project in Oklahoma.