CONSERVATION” is a magic word of many meanings, but the common denominator of most definitions is the concept that sound conservation demands wise and prudent use—without either waste or abuse—of our natural resources.
Within the framework of this concept, the Department of the Interior has promulgated the policies to which it adheres in carrying out the resource programs which are its responsibility.
Judicious use of our natural resources is of paramount concern to all Americans.
Each succeeding generation faces the ever-present responsibility to put natural resources to their most beneficial use, all the while employing conservation practices that will assure future generations of abundant supplies for their own use and enjoyment.
During the earlier years of our still-young Nation, many envisioned our natural resources as inexhaustible.
As modern-day American society became increasingly complex, and a growing population made more and more demands upon natural resources, the view of inexhaustibility gave way to recognition of the necessity for conservation.
It became clear that our natural resources supply indeed was not limitless and that appropriate conservation measures were urgently needed if current and future requirements were to be satisfied.
Thus, the trend swung from capricious disregard for conservation to a serious effort to provide for the future and at the same time derive the greatest benefit for the greatest number.
Conservation practices may vary in the sense that conservation as applied to one type of resource may not be identical to the practices employed to conserve other resources.
While the modus operandi may differ, the end result spells conservation nonetheless.
In the case of resources such as timber and water, conservation calls for programs to promote renewal of the resources.
Sustained-yield timber management, for example, can assure our Nation of abundant and continuing supplies of this valuable resource.
Many sections of the country already are confronted with water shortage problems, and these problems give promise of becoming more widespread and more acute in the years ahead.
We still have about the same amount of water available, but we are using more of it—an increase of 24 percent from 1950 to 1955.
Because this is true, the water situation rapidly is developing into one of the most critical in the natural resources field.
It is becoming more and more imperative that we intensify our efforts to make better use of the perpetual supply from the heavens.
Only 17 percent of the water we have available is put to use, with about one-fourth of the water used being consumed during use; the remainder still is available for reuse.
Part of the solution may be found in more effective water storage facilities on the surface and replenishment of underground supplies, to conserve for beneficial use a greater portion of the presently unused runoff.
Research is continuing meanwhile to develop economical methods of converting saline and brackish waters into fresh water.
Development of large-scale, low-cost means of conversion may write a whole new chapter in this Nation's water history.
All of our resources, however, are not renewable in the same sense as water and trees.
Some resources, indeed, once used, are gone forever.
Because such resources as minerals and coal and oil do not renew themselves, the problem concerning them is twofold.
First, we must find and develop new deposits and improve our processes for making full use of low-grade ores.
Secondly, we must continue and expand our efforts to develop substitutes from those resources we have in abundance.
In both areas the Federal Government and the Department of the Interior bear grave responsibilities to aid industry in solving the problems.
Increasing imports of such minerals as copper, bauxite, lead, and zinc indicate the extent to which this Nation is relying upon foreign supplies sources.
A combination of increased requirements with decreasing reserves has magnified the importance of effective action to forestall depletion and to make better use of low-grade ores and substitute sources.
Thus, it is in the national interest for the Federal Government and this Department to combine forces with industry in seeking answers to many questions relating to these resources.
Our aim must also be to protect the unsurpassed beauty of our national parks, and to preserve their scenic grandeur in its original state, so far as is possible.
The basic act which created the National Park Service to promote and regulate the use of national parks, monuments, and similar reservations, declared that the fundamental objective must be to“conserve the scenery and the natural and historic objects and the wildlife therein and to provide for the enjoyment of the same in such manner and by such means as will leave them unimpaired for the enjoyment of future generations.
Through the years the Department of the Interior has conducted its programs in the spirit of that ideal, rejecting invasions or impairment of the parks and providing for their public enjoyment in a manner that will preserve their wonders for Americans yet unborn.
Congress has provided for multiple use of our wildlife areas where this is compatible with primary wildlife values.
There are some areas, however, upon which economic uses are not permitted unless such uses contribute directly to wildlife values.
These areas are principally those which provide habitat for rare and endangered species and where nonwildlife use would be detrimental to the primary values.
In its assigned function as the Nation's principal resource agency, the Department of the Interior bears a special obligation to see to it that our expendable resources are conserved, that those which can be are multiplied, and that all of them contribute their full measure to the progress, prosperity, and security of America, now and in the future.
The manner in which the Department pursues the search for new and more efficient ways to utilize resource supplies, the diligence of its exploration for fresh reserves, the vigilance to resist wasteful processes, and the safeguarding of irreplaceable features of scenic beauty-—all can contribute to our Nation's natural wealth and to the well-being of tomorrow's citizens.
Sound conservation, successfully achieved, requires a realistic partnership shared by all Americans.
The several levels of Government, Federal.
State, and local, necessarily assume leadership in this endeavor; but the role of the private individual and groups of individuals should not be minimized.
Governmental leadership should not be construed either as domination by Government or as a device to relieve private initiative from carrying out its rightful share of responsibility in furthering resource conservation.
This is a task which demands alertness from all.
We must employ our best talents in working toward solution of natural resource problems for our common good.
The Department of the Interior is keenly aware of the solemn obligation upon the present generation to conserve our physical and scenic resource for our children and our children's children.
We are conscious, too, that America's high standards of living today provide ample proof that intelligent conservation and orderly development of natural resources are compatible.
The sections of this report which follow outline the specifie applications of the conservation policies of the Department of the Interior policies dedicated to the basic philosophy that our natural resources should be so administered that they may yield the greatest good for the greatest number, over the greatest period of time.
Minerals resources are irreplaceable assets indispensable to our Nation's continued prosperity and security.
A dozen years ago, many analysts were stunned by World War II's drain upon these resources.
They proclaimed that we should rely heavily upon imported metals and petroleum, hoarding our own reserves for some future emergency.
Today, the Nation's mineral policy recognizes that hoarding will not assure future generations an adequate supply.
This poliey is founded upon the premise that wise and full use over the longest possible period of time is true conservation.
With this recognition has come acceptance of the concept that continuing technologic advance, leading to more efficient and less wasteful extraction, treatment, and use of basic materials and to the creation of new mineral commodities, is the best road to an improved domestic situation.
It has brought us to a new era of industrial greatness and prosperity.
The Department of the Interior carries heavy responsibilities in furthering mineral conservation.
The breadth of the field is indicated by a 1,042-page Bureau of Mines report, “Mineral Facts and Problems," published during the past fiscal year.
In independent ehapters, this reviews the background, outlook, and problems of 85 separate mineral commodity groups.
Recognizing that the United States must continue to rely upon imports for certain materials where our native supplies are inadequate or negligible, such as manganese, niekel, and tin, the Department's mineral conservation program cannot be aimed at complete selfsufficiency, Rather, its objective is to determine how materials, whether imported or domestic, can be utilized most efficiently and if new metals and nonmetals can be won from new or latent domestic sources, even to the extent of replacing those traditionally used.
The Department approaches this objective through several channels.
It conducts research on producing metals and minerals from lower grade and more complex materials, learning more about submarginal deposits and improving techniques for utilizing newly developed materials, and recovering metals more effectively from scrap.
It helps preserve and, where necessary, expand foreign sources of materials in which we are deficient.
It keeps close watch on developments abroad, often aiding important foreign mineral enterprises to assure continued or improved availability of their products to the United States.
It strives to create an improved environment for the beneficial investment of private capital in foreign mineral properties.
In addition, the Department works with the International Cooperation Administration to help friendly nations conserve and develop their own mineral resources, sending technologists to advise on applying advanced engineering and metallurgical principles to local problems and training foreign technologists in the Department's laboratories.
As a Government agency, the Department coordinates its research with that of private groups, whether in industry, universities, or foundations, concentrating on projects that other organizations cannot or will not undertake or cannot pursue as expeditiously.
Many of its findings are basic or preliminary, since it carries its studies only to the point where it has laid a groundwork on which private groups are able and willing to build commercial enterprises.
Exceptions are projects of great national interest, such as the development and temporary production of the new metals, titanium and zirconium, the Government's urgent need for which would not permit waiting for industry to develop production techniques and facilities.
The Department is engaged in a broad basic researeh program designed to develop instruments, equipment, and methods for more efficient mining and substantially higher recovery of coal and ore.
This involves field tests and observations and laboratory studies.
Such research lies at the very heart of mineral conservation, since it paves the way for fuller and less wasteful use of our resources.
Some of the Department's more significant recent metallurgical research has been in light metals.
Investigation of low-grade aluminous materials now lying fallow has included making aluminumsilicon alloys directly from those high in silica.
Economic production of aluminum, most plentiful metal in the earth's crust, from such sources would broaden our resource base immediately and solve complex supply problems.
Growing demand for steel motivates other research.
Besides seeking ore-dressing methods to permit mining lower grade iron ores, this includes studies designed to reduce the 25-percent loss of niekel in treating nickeliferous lateritic iron ores and to recover the cobalt, chromium, and iron now largely lost.
Demonstration that titanium can be substituted for manganese to prevent hot shortness in steel and discovery that considerable manganese and potash can be recovered from blast-furnace flue dust now wasted are among recent significant results.
Less advanced, but filled with promise, are studies of the rare earths, a group of 15 little-known metals.
These are rare only in the sense that techniques for their economic separation and utilization are yet to be developed.
Our use of energy has risen steadily for years, and conservative estimates point to a further rise of at least two-thirds in the next 25 years.
For the foreseeable future, the major source will continue to be fossil fuels—coal, of which our known reserves are greatest; petroleum, and natural gas, on which we have drawn for years; and oil shale, whose utilization has been brought nearer by the Department's research.
Recent studies showing that for every ton of coal mined in this country over the years, another has been left in the ground illustrate the magnitude of opportunities for conserving fuels through technologic advancement.
Loss of petroleum is believed equally great, although information is much less exact.
Loss of natural gas was enormous in the oil industry's youth, when gas that was produced with petroleum was wasted into the air.
This loss has been reduced greatly in recent years.
Besides contributing to more efficient mining, the Department's research and factfinding have aided in technologic advancements in mechanical cleaning of coal.
Determination of the technologic factors involved in mechanical cleaning has aided industry in providing the consumer with an acceptable fuel, despite the progressive deterioration in quality of mined product as a result of increased mechanization underground and the more active exploitation of inferiorgrade deposits.
The Department is continuing its cooperation with industry in experimentally gasifying coal in the ground.
Many difficulties have been encountered and more are expected, but ultimately this process may permit us to use coal in beds which are too thin or of too low quality for conventional mining.
To supplement the naturally occurring fluid hydrocarbons and to conserve them for their highest end use, which ultimately may be preponderantly as primary chemical substances rather than as fuels, the Department studies conversion of coal to fluid fuels, both liquid and gaseous.
These conversions long since have been shown to be technically feasible, but their economics are unfavorable, as yet.
Accordingly, emphasis is placed on improving the economies of known processes and on developing new processes with prospect of economie advantage.
Since declining demand leading to abandonment of collieries is a major and immediate threat to our anthracite reserves, the Department is conducting research directed principally toward expanding the market for "hard" coal, bringing about more effective utilization, and developing improved mining methods to conserve reserves.
Preliminary testing indicated that heat-treating lump anthracite improves its physical properties; the treated fuel will be tested in metallurgical furnaces during the coming year.
In petroleum and natural gas conservation, the Department has exerted leadership for nearly half a century.
Often called “the father of petroleum engineering," its present standing is attested by industry's financial participation in a large number of its research projects.
Many of the industry's standard production practices stem from the Department's early engineering studies.
By developing technical data to assure efficient use of the energy associated with oil and gas in natural underground reservoirs, the research leads to improved methods and greater ultimate recovery.
Petroleum is more susceptible to irrecoverable loss than other resources, since between point of production and ultimate consumer it suffers varying degrees of waste and loss because of its liquidgaseous, evaporative-explosive nature.
These losses are minimized by numerous conservation precautions devised by Government and industry.
The Department encourages conservation and prevention of waste, more by suggestion than compulsion.
Through administration of the Connally Act of 1935, which prohibits interstate shipment of contraband oil, the Federal Government does not regulate oil production or interfere with a State's right to do so, but does assist States in enforcement of their own laws.
While this is compulsive observance of conservation, the act's greatest virtue is as a deterrent to would-be violators of conservation practices.
For several years the American Gas Association has contributed part of the cost of fundamental research on transportation, including studies of the flow of natural gas through pipelines at high pressures and velocities, phase relationships of gas-condensate fluids, and underground storage of natural gas.
The findings enable industry to reduce waste of energy and materials.
In cooperation with industry, the Department continually compiles data on the quality and characteristics of motor and aviation gasoline and diesel and burner fuels sold in the United States.
Related projects, financed partly by industry and the Department of Defense, provide data on the composition and availability of aviation and diesel fuels, stability in storage, and compatibility of like fuels when mixed.
An 11-year research and development program, begun as a hedge against petroleum shortages during World War II, has taken oil shale to the threshold of economic utility.
The research phase, which is continuing on a limited scale, has contributed significantly to knowledge of the technologic, theoretical, and economie aspects of oil shale.
This program is typieal of the Department's contributions to development of new sources of raw materials to replace or supplement those that are scarce or nonrenewable; like many others, it has provided a wealth of facts that can be drawn upon when the need arises.
The Department's helium program is another outstanding example of conservation in action.
It has transformed helium, a minor constituent of a few southwestern natural gases, from a laboratory rarity with no practical uses, to a strategic, industrial, and medical gas of ever-increasing importance.
Lightweight, nonflammable helium has as its oldest and still most familiar application the job of lifting airships and balloons.
Its combination of unique properties, however, particularly suits it for such modern developments as shielded-arc welding, titanium and zirconium production, atomie energy, and electronies.
Through research, development, and finally large-scale production, the Department has made it a valuable national asset.
A thorough study eompleted during fiscal year 1956 emphasized the need for saving more of the helium being lost in burning unprocessed helium-bearing natural gas.
This study also disclosed that 70 percent of the helium shipped from the Department's plants is used directly by Federal agencies and another 15 percent by companies working on Government contracts.
Besides its technologic researeh, the Department has two action programs to conserve coal reserves.
Under the first, it has saved more than 250 million tons of coal from destruction by fire during the past 7 years.
The Government pays the full cost of controlling fires on its own land and requires local sources to pay half the cost of controlling those on private holdings.
The second program, designed to save anthracite reserves from loss by flooding, was authorized early in fiscal year 1956 and still is in its early stages.
Under it, the Department is to contribute up to $8.5 million, on a matching basis, to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the construction of facilities to control water in the anthracite formations.
The Department's function is to review and approve proposed projects and inspect approved ones during construction and upon completion.
Actual construction is the Commonwealth's responsibility.
The complexities and rapid expansion of the Nation's economy require frequent decisions in Government and industry to prevent crippling shortages of minerals or fuels.
The Department is responsible for collecting and assembling much of the economic and statistical information on which such decisions can be based soundly.
The Geological Survey has long been a proponent of conservation, and will continue to sponsor or encourage all cooperative effort to this end.
Cooperation is extended to or derived from various State bodies and such Federal departments as Justice, Defense, Agriculture, Health, Education, and Welfare, and the Office of Alien Property.
There is also a high degree of intradepartmental cooperation between the Bureau of Land Management, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Geological Survey, Fish and Wildlife, as well as with private organizations, industrial companies, etc.
With such cooperation, the conservation of our mineral wealth is assured.
Unitization or unit operations of a common source of supply has resulted in prolonging the life of many oil pools and has often doubled or even tripled the ultimate oil recovery from such fields.
Unit operation of oil pools benefits all parties because it results in greater ultimate recovery with a minimum expenditure of money and materials.
It works equally well in aid of secondary recovery when applied to waterflooding operations, pressure maintenance, gas eycling or gas injection.
In fact, more often than not, secondary recovery operations would not be economically feasible except through unitization.
A solution leading to better conservation of mineral resources has been reached between the conflicting interests of oil and potash operators in southeast New Mexico through cooperative efforts of the Department of the Interior with State officials and industry.
Rules have been promulgated whereby dual development of lands in the area may be accomplished with safety and without waste.
Mineral deposits unlike agricultural crops are nonrenewable.
New sources of minerals and mineral fuels must be developed constantly either through discovery of new deposits or through adaptation of lower grade, offgrade, or entirely new types of materials.
True conservation of minerals therefore, means wise use of known resources backed up by a vigorous, imaginative and sustained program of search for deposits usable under current practices and conditions— plus an equally sustained and imaginative effort to develop ways in which materials not now usable can be utilized.
In the Nation's expanding economy such a program cannot remain static.
It must be flexible enough to take advantage of all technologic improvements in methods of exploration, on the one hand, and to meet the challenge of shifting use patterns and enlarged demands, on the other.
The Department conducts a program of exploration for domestic sources of strategic and critical minerals.
This program plays an important part in the conservation of these resources.
Under this program a continuing search is made for new sources of minerals vital to the Nation's welfare.
More emphasis is placed on the search for searcer minerals than for those in greater supply.
Depending upon the mineral or minerals sought, the Government will participate in cooperation with industry, to the extent of 50 or 75 percent of the cost of the exploration work, with certain repayment provisions.
Topographic mapping has continued to be an essential part of the Department program for the conservation and development of our natural resources.
During the past fiscal year some 1,800 new maps were published, and mapping projects were underway in every State of the Union, the Hawaiian Islands, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, and Alaska.
A marked upswing in mineral activities on both the public domain and acquired lands owned by the United States, particularly with respect to uranium, contributed to the national economy and to national defense during the year.
The Department's programs foster conservation and beneficial use of federally owned mineral resources for some 750 million acres of lands in the United States and Alaska.
New procedures and regulations were promulgated to further the conservation objective in connection with new legislation enacted during the fiscal year.
A major contribution toward development of a sound water policy to assure conservation of the Nation's water resources was the "Report of the Presidential Advisory Committee on Water Resources Policy."
This group, consisting of the Secretary of the Interior, as chairman, the Secretary of Agriculture, and the Secretary of Defense, submitted its report to the President on December 22, 1955.
Their report, which the President transmitted to the Congress on January 17, 1956, outlines policies embodying a framework within which the Federal Government with State and local governments and other non-Federal interests may effectively develop our water resources.
The deliberations of this body led to several general conclusions and principles upon which it based its recommendations for a water policy.
First, the greatest single weakness of the Government's activities in the field of water resources development has been the lack of cooperation and coordination of the Federal agencies with each other and with the States and local interests.
This has been occasioned by the fact that the Federal interest in water resources development has been expressed in different laws empowering different agencies to pursue particular programs for different purposes.
Second, it is not practicable and certainly not desirable for the Federal Government alone to assume responsibility for the complete development of the Nation's water resources.
This reasoning stems not only from the practical impossibility of assuming the financial burden which such a policy would require but also from the fact that such complete Federal assumption of responsibility would tend to create local and regional dependence on Federal action, to destroy individual and local initiative, to destroy the effectiveness of the government of the States, and to work a profound and undesirable change in our traditional plan of government.
Lack of funds and regional rivalries have delayed for years many meritorious projects in the expectation of Federal action which has not been forthcoming.
Third, it is believed that the principle of equal contribution for equal benefits received should be applied to the beneficiaries of all Federal water resources developments, although it is recognized that historically the programs of the Federal agencies have differed widely as to the contribution required from the beneficiaries of such projects.
Fourth, and last, there has been a great controversy raging between those persons who believe they have vested water rights—property rights lawfully acquired under the laws of the States, and those who believe that the Federal Government has a superior right to all of the water in all of the streams of the United States.
On the basis of these general conclusions, the Committee approached the overall problem by first recognizing that basic data form the foundation of any water resources policy.
The first major recommendation in the report is that the present program of basic data collection (such as streamflows, rainfall, soil conditions, hydrology, meteorology, and other factors which control the quantity, usability, and the desirability of water uses) be accelerated and be programed and carried out on a more consistent and definite basis.
The report makes clear that there is no one national water problem, but that there are dozens of problems; and that they differ from State to State and from area to area.
It recognizes that a uniform national blueprint for water resources development is neither practical nor desirable; and that each area must be considered in the light of its own present and anticipated problems which can be solved only by utilizing the best collective judgment possible, as to what is most needed for the river basin, the State, the region, and the Nation.
Consideration is now being given to the implementation of the Advisory Committee's report and it is expected to provide a sound basis for the Nation's future water resources developments.
The Department has actively supported efforts to resolve water resource problems by means of interstate compacts between States having mutual problems arising from the allocation and use of interstate streams.
This is in accord with the policy of encouraging a full measure of responsibility for water resource development at the State and local level.
The inereased demand for water can be partially met by conservation, but a need exists for entirely new sources of fresh water as well.
In recognition of the needs and the potential benefits to be gained from large-scale purification of saline waters, the Congress authorized a research and development program directed toward the development of processes for producing fresh water from saline and brackish waters.
The resulting program of the Department has as its primary objective the development of economically feasible processes of this nature.
The Department carries out the program by sponsoring scientific researeh and development through federally financed contracts and grants, by some research in Federal scientifie organizations, and by stimulating and coordinating private activities in this field.
Gradual progress is being made toward low-cost production.
Even now, existing conversion processes compete economically with the development of fresh water sources for specialized purposes.
With continued improvements in processes, steady inerease in the number of uses is assured.
Saline water conversion may be expected to take the form of many different processes, of many sizes, ranging from small household stills to large municipal and industrial plants.
Each serve specific uses dictated by geography and availability of saline and other water, climate, local conditions, and the value of the end product for which the water is used.
Federal cooperation with State and local agencies in wise development and use of our water resources began in 1902, when President Theodore Roosevelt approved the first Federal Reclamation Act.
Some of the earliest and most successful reclamation projects are in operation today as monuments to the wisdom of that act.
Among these are the Salt River project in Arizona, the Yakima in Washington, the Boise in Idaho, the North Platte in Wyoming and Nebraska, and the Newlands in Nevada.
These and other projects were created under cooperative agreements by which the water users, organized into irrigation distriets, contract to repay the cost of construction to the Federal Government.
Years later, the Colorado River was harnessed by construction of Hoover Dam to help meet the water and power needs of the Southwest.
This world's highest concrete dam structure demonstrated the feasibility of such colossal structures and opened a new era of reclamation development.
Today, after 54 years of partnership with the water users, Federal reclamation projects are capable of furnishing water for more than 7 million acres of land through water conservation faeilities in the 17 States.
The facilities include 136 storage dams and reservoirs, 105 diversion dams, about 24,000 miles of canals and laterals, and about 7,600 miles of drains.
A notable event was authorization of the Colorado River storage project and 11 participating projects.
This monumental authorization by the Congress, which was signed by President Eisenhower on April 11, 1956, will permit continued economic expansion of four Upper Colorado River States in an area of rich resources which is now virtually untapped.
Coupled with the existing reclamation development in the Lower Colorado River Basin, it will ultimately establish the most complete control and utilization of the water resources of any major river basin in America.
360,000 acres of land in Colorado, New Mexico, Utah, and Wyoming, and have about 1 million kilowatts of hydroelectric generating capacity.
Equally significant to the upbuilding and strengthening of the economic structure of the West was the further acceptance by the Congress in the enactment of the Colorado River storage project of the precept that development of and revenue from the sale of hydroelectric power is an essential paying partner of reclamation.
During the early decades of Federal reclamation, the simple, inexpensive projects were virtually all completed.
These were the projects with the most favorable ratio of benefits to cost.
Today, it is clearly evident that the unit costs of most future reclamation work will continue to rise.
Since repayment is the foundation of the reclamation program, and the cornerstone of congressional acceptance of the case for Federal development, the return by the beneficiaries of irrigation of their fair share of the cost must continue as a primary requirement.
However, it seems problematical whether many major water developments of the future can be undertaken which can be completely repaid by the water user.
There are a great many smaller projects with tremendous implications for the future, which the people of the West can and undoubtedly will build for themselves—often by individual or cooperative action among themselves—and, when occasion requires, in partnership with the Federal Government.
Nevertheless, it is apparent that we must continue to look to power, even more in the future than in the past, as the paying partner of reclamation.
On June 30, 1956, the installed capacity of powerplants constructed and operated by the Bureau of Reclamation, as a part of multipurpose projects, totaled 4,974,550 kilowatts, and the capacity installed and operated by other agencies for which the Bureau is the marketing agent totaled 596,500 kilowatts—a total of 5,571,050 kilowatts.
Sale of electric power during the year aggregated 25,181,596,876 kilowatt-hours, with revenues from sales totaling $55,362,728.71.
The primary function of the Bonneville Power Administration is to market the electric power and energy produced at hydroelectrie projects operated by the Army Corps of Engineers and the Bureau of Reclamation.
For this propose, the BPA constructs, operates, and maintains a high-voltage transmission system.
This transmission grid forms the backbone system permitting the integration of both Federal and non-Federal power generating systems in the region, and allows for "pool" operation of the facilities of the major utilities in-the Northwest.
By means of the Northwest power pool, large blocks of power are transferred on a scheduled basis, and within contractual arrangements, between different areas in the Northwest.
The pool arrangement permits the major utilities to coordinate their operations, including the use of both steam and hydroelectric generating facilities, and thus enables the most economic use of the areas' total energy resources.
The flexibility of the pool operation makes it possible to utilize the water resources in such a manner as to generate the maximum amount of prime power for the region.
The diversity of streamflows in various parts of the Northwest served by the Bonneville transmission grid makes it possible to send surplus power from one part of the area to another at certain times of the year and to reverse the process at other times of the year.
The ability of the transmission grid to supply electric energy to widely scattered parts of the Northwest makes it unnecessary to build standby steam generating facilities in those areas where streamflow conditions make hydroelectric generation inadequate for certain periods each year.
This results in a reduction in the investment required for generating facilities as well as a saving of nonreplaceable energy sources such as coal, oil, and natural gas.
New generating facilities, Federal or non-Federal, when connected to the backbone transmission system serve the power loads located closest to them and release generation closer to load centers.
This, in contrast to a nonintegrated system, saves the building of duplicate transmission lines, reduces the required capacity of lines, reduces powerline losses to a minimum, and thus provides more power at the load centers at lower cost to the consumer.
The coordinated operation of the main transmission grid with the generating facilities of the Federal and non-Federal generating plants permits the most economical use of water released from storage at upstream plants.
This storage release is scheduled so that water may be used not only at plants releasing it from storage, but reused many times at downstream plants.
Uncoordinated operation of these facilities, on the other hand, might easily mean less power available at downstream plants due to the release of storage at times when these downstream plants were not eapable of utilizing additional quantities of water.
While the coordinated operation of hydroelectric generating facilities is the most important contribution which Bonneville makes to the conservation of natural resources, this operation must also take into account uses of the river for purposes other than electrie power production.
The operation of the power system also takes into account the minimum streamflows required for navigation and the maintenance of fishlife.
Release of water from storage is designed not only for power production but also flood control and to keep adequate water in the river for navigation and fish migration and pollution abatement.
Southeastern Power Administration's power sales contracts provide for the integration and the generation of power produced from water available from flood control projects of the Corps of Engineers of the Department of the Army in a manner which best meets the need of the area in which a particular project is located, in the light of the type and location of other power generating facilities in the area.
The Federal projects generally are operated to produce as peaking power.
Energy is made available from the projects on the basis of long-range and day-to-day operational studies showing the most efficient use of available water, and the day-to-day dispatching of power available is done in accordance with the needs of the power systems into which such power is delivered.
Conservation of water resources will also result from the integrated operation of various Federal hydroelectrie projects and other power systems in the Southeast.
Negotiations are continuing to affect these operations.
The Southwestern Power Administration operates and leases extensive high-voltage electric power transmission facilities for the integration of Federal hydroelectric power with many public and private power systems in the area to produce economy and flexibility in servicing power sales contracts.
Power generated at flood control projects of the Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army, is thus integrated with other systems to secure reliable sources of electric energy for customers throughout the area.
In the interest of conservation of our natural resources, comprehensive planning is performed in connection with hydroelectric generation and other purposes for proper coordination in use of water stored in the several Federal reservoirs.
Recently, the marketing of power has been reviewed extensively by congressional committees and other interested groups.
Southwestern Power Administration is engaged in striving towards meeting the objective of optimum benefits from all the Nation's resourees as well as the comprehensive planning of resources development measures.
Partnership with the water users in the initiation, finaneing, construction, and operation of multiple-purpose water conservation projects in the West was a guiding policy in 1956.
A striking example of the effectiveness of this policy was the $27.5 million Ventura project in California.
As a result of prompt completion of a repayment contract and the advancement to the Bureau of Reclamation in 1954 by the local water officials of $700,000 for preconstruction and design work, construction was advanced more than a year.
It was the first time in 54 years of reclamation history that a repayment contract had been ready for signature on the same day that the President approved authorization of the project.
The Department was especially diligent during 1956 in its effort to transfer the responsibility for operation and maintenance of irrigation projects to the water users.
With a few important exceptions, the Federal Government actually operates and maintains only the reserved work of multiple-purpose projects, while the balance of the facilities are operated and maintained by the various irrigation districts.
During fiscal year 1956, the irrigation distribution facilities serving approximately 85 percent of the total irrigable acreage included in Federal reclamation projects were operated and maintained by the water users.
Approximately 9,858,000 persons enjoyed the use of recreational facilities on 140 reservoirs on reclamation projects throughout the 17 Western States in 1956.
Estimates on expenditures at these reclamation playgrounds vary considerably, but is conservatively calculated at about $6 per day.
This represents an appropriate share of investments in boats, hunting and fishing equipment, etc., traveling expenses, and food and lodging.
Applied to the total number of visitors, this estimate indicates an “extra dividend" each year of approximately $59 million from reclamation.
The use or acquisition of public lands by the people of the United States through the Department programs as custodian of the publie domain is governed by a system of land elassification which assures wise use with minimum depletion of our land resources.
Land classification and subsequent lease or disposal actions are based upon established conservation principles including that of attaining the highest and best use of lands.
This requires close cooperation and coordination with a wide variety of conservation organizations, including the land management agencies of various Federal, State, and local governments, as well as the representatives of various major land users such as farmers, ranchers, owners, and lumbermen.
Of foremost consideration in the lands program is the concern for the continuing growth and expansion of the economy of the Far West and Alaska.
As the Federal Government is the greatest single land custodian in these two large geographic regions, it has become incumbent to pursue a program fitted to the developmental requirements of these areas, which form a vast and vital part of the national economy.
As the demand for land intensifies, a closer look must be given to the factors which control the optimum uses for lands.
Where conflicting land uses become manifest, a reconciliation of those uses must be effected wherever possible.
In so striving, assessment must be given to all factors which determine the highest and best land use.
Wherever practicable, and when the circumstances permit, compatible use demands are being molded to permit simultaneous multiple use of public lands.
The nonrenewable nature of some of the basic land resources points up the need for continuing "minimum depletion, wise use, without abuse" conservation policies.
The technology and skills developed by the Department in evaluating various land uses and applying the principles of multiple land use, assure a well conceived and balanced program for the proper management and orderly lease or disposal of the public domain lands in the United States.
Fundamental to that program is completion of a project for modernizing the basic land records.
With the aid of modern technology, wornout documents are being permanently preserved on microfilm and electronic tabulating cards to permit easy reference and the preparation of plat diagrams that will greatly facilitate record searching and use by the public as well as other agencies.
Adequate cadastral surveys are essential to the successful management and conservation of the natural resources of the public lands.
These surveys create, reestablish, and identify the public land boundaries, indicating the limits of the lands under the Department's jurisdiction and subdividing the areas into usable economic units.
Of major importance, especially to some of the Western States, has been the stepped-up survey of school sections in those States so that they could obtain title to the lands granted to them and thus utilize the resources of those lands.
The Department's responsibility for conservation of Federal rangelands in the United States and Alaska is of vital importance to the future of the Nation.
The range livestock industry, one of the more important activities of the western range, is basic to the economy of the Western States.
Closely related to this is utilization of the range for food and shelter by wild game birds and animals.
For a number of years effort has been directed toward apportionment of livestock grazing privileges to qualified range users on the basis of the best grazing capacity survey information obtainable.
Cooperation with the various State game agencies continues to improve with active participation by the Department in evaluation of game range grazing capacities, determination of desired populations and proper hunter licensing, and in research for improvement of wildlife habitat.
Coupled with this is the intensive range improvement and protection program which encompases: supervision of range use; protection from fire, insects, rodents, noxious and poisonous plants; and a comprehensive land treatment program.
The Bureau of Land Management has reseeded over a million acres of rangeland which will be passed on to the next generation in much more productive condition.
The forest lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management fall into three categories: the revested O & C Railroad grant lands and other areas generally identified as O & C lands; the public domain forest lands in the continental United States; and the public domain forest land in the Territory of Alaska.
They approximate 21/2 million acres in the O & C area, 41/ million acres of the United States publie domain, and 40 million acres in Alaska.
These forest lands comprise a basic resource having an actual value of billions of dollars.
The estimated sustained allowable annual cut of sawtimber is approximately 4 billion board-feet, or about 10 percent of the annual national consumption.
In addition, the woodland areas provide a permanent source of material for fuel wood, posts, poles, and other products equivalent to an allowable cut of 21/2 billion board-feet per year.
Proper management of this invaluable asset dictates that the allowable annual cut (the quantity which nature and man can replace) be harvested each year in order to provide an everlasting supply of timber for future generations.
Wise and judicious perpetuation of this national resource by attaining the maximum allowable harvest is the Department's responsibility.
For the past 5 years, the O & C lands have been unique in that they are one of the few major forest areas under Government administration in which the actual cut has come up to the allowable cut for perpetuation of the forest, without exceeding the allowable cut.
Wherever feasible, the practice of private tree farming is facilitated and extended either by integrating the management of publie domain forest with such enterprises, or by disposal of isolated tracts.
Controlled cutting, intelligently planned access roads, increasingly better protection, constantly improving forest practices, and more and more reforestation reflect proper management.
These activities expedite the harvesting of salvage and overmature timber, and turn more acres over to the immature growing stock that will supply future generations with wood products, insure recreation values, and protect water supplies.
The Department has trust responsibility for somewhat more than 39 million acres of tribal and about 14 million acres of allotted Indian lands.
Unlike public lands, these lands are the private property of the Indians with the fee title held in trust by the Federal Government.
The resources involved include an estimated 3,600,000 acres of farmland, of which 860,000 acres have irrigation facilities available.
Indian rangelands comprise slightly more than 44 million acres with an annual forage production sufficient for 880,000 cow units, and having an annual use value of $6,500,000.
There are about 6 million acres of commercial timber with an estimated volume of 30 billion board-feet.
The value of the annual cut is aproaching $11,750,000.
While the acreage of land under which minerals may be found is unknown, in excess of 5 million acres are covered by oil, gas, and other mineral leases which earned approxi.
In connection with its trust responsibilities, it is the aim of the Department to assist the Indians in obtaining maximum return from the use and development of the resources consistent with sound management and conservation practices; to preserve the renewable resources in a perpetually productive state; and to build up to optimum productivity those resources where they have deteriorated.
Soil and water conservation activities are an integral part of the Department 20-year plan of soil and moisture conservation development program.
During the first few years of activity in this field, the critical erosion condition of the land and the magnitude of the problem made it necessary to limit basic investigation to sites where structural and other control measures were being applied.
The most pressing situations have now been met sufficiently so that attention can be given to securing a complete inventory of improvements, soil, water, forage, and wildlife resources.
Coordinated surveys have been initiated in all areas within the past 2 years.
It is anticipated that such surveys will be completed within the 15-year goal set by the President for a complete inventory of the Nation's soil and water resources.
Watershed, farm, ranch, and reservation development and management plans are formulated in accordance with these basic data.
Conservation activities and practices now being applied on Indian lands are transforming them into some of the most productive lands in their respective localities.
Over one-half of all Indian lands in the United States are included in organized soil conservation districts.
Active participation on the part of land owners and operators has increased materially as a result of leadership and technical guidance furnished by the Department, as well as that furnished by State and local agencies.
These activities are permitting Indians to realize an increasing amount from each dollar spent on conservation.
An analysis of the results of applying conservation practices made on 15 reservations where the program has been in effect since 1945 on 2,309,379 acres treated showed an increase in 1955 of 51.29 percent in agriculture production.
This was a return of $37.97 for each dollar expended by the Federal Government.
Cooperators contributed $13 for each dollar expended by the Department.
Practically half of the Indian land was critically or severely eroded.
In some areas approximately one-fourth of the cultivated land had been abandoned.
The most severe erosion has been materially chécked and the productivity of extensive areas materially improved.
About 20 percent of the total estimated job has been completed.
The management of Indian rangelands during 1955 was high-lighted by the development of new grazing regulations for the Navajo Reservation after several years of consultation with tribal representatives.
The regulations place considerable responsibility in central and district grazing committees in administration of grazing permits which provide for the conservative use of the Navajo range.
Agricultural development by irrigation on most of the reservations in an arid and semiarid West constitutes an important opportunity whereby Indians may become self-supporting and make proper use of their lands.
The continued development of Indian irrigation projects is essential to preserve the water rights appurtenant to the reservations which have been established by treaties or other Federal enactment.
Indian irrigation projects create wealth in the same measure as do reclamation projects, but are constructed primarily for the benefit of the resident reservation Indian families.
Thus they serve in part to discharge the obligation of the Federal Government to the Indian people in promoting their welfare toward true equality with their fellow Americans.
A very important resource requiring full-time conservation efforts and wise use are the Indian forests.
These forests are working forests in the sense that they are expected to make their full contribution to the economic welfare of the Indian owners.
The primary objective in managing these forests is to provide a continuing harvest of usable wood products.
There are also the collateral objectives of watershed protection, forage production for grazing purposes, the development of fish and game resources, and the preservation of scenic and recreational values.
In recent years, a few Indian tribes have authorized the use of tribal funds to finance inventories of their timber resources.
These inventories, based upon modern techniques of aerial and ground surveys, have supplied the information required for a more exact determination of allowable cut under sustained-yield management.
The results have been impressive.
On the Navajo Reservation, for example, logging operations have formerly been restricted to a maximum cut of about 14 million board-feet a year, because the meager data available regarding the forest did not justify any larger scale operations.
A careful inventory, begun in 1952, revealed that the annual eut can be increased safely to 28 million board-feet.
This doubling of the annual cut has been approved, and plans are nearing completion for putting it into effect.
There is reason to believe that the time is approaching when all Indian forests will be making their full contribution to the economic welfare of the Indian owners, and to the stabilization of dependent wood-using industries.
In addition to the surface resources, Indians also possess considerable wealth in oil, gas, and various other minerals.
Indian tribes and individual Indians are encouraged to lease their trust land for oil and gas and other mineral development with the aim of obtaining a maximum recovery and income consistent with a sound conservation program.
Conservation is promoted by providing for mineral development under leases, the terms of which authorize supervision of operations and cooperation with the lessees in proceeding with development.
Under the terms of the leases, if the Secretary believes that economie conditions are unsatisfactory, he may authorize mining lessees to suspend operations for definite periods.
Oil and gas leases contain specific provisions requiring the lessees to abide by any act of Congress or order or regulation concerning conservation.
Regulations have been promulgated governing oil and gas operations.
These leases also provide that the Secretary of the Interior may impose drilling and production restrictions in the interests of conser.
As a conservation device Indian lands under oil and gas leases are frequently ineluded in approved unit development agreements along with lands owned by other individuals and also lands owned by the State and Federal Governments.
The lands included in the agreements are operated as a single unit without regard to separate ownership.
The planned drilling program authorized in the agreements results in the economy of drilling fewer wells, conservation of the gas energy and higher ultimate recovery.
Where conditions warrant, authorizations are given for the injection of air and gas in the oil sands for repressuring.
Likewise, under proper conditions, agreements are approved for secondary recovery under waterflooding programs.
The existence of the national park system is proof that the American people believe that the best use to be made of the finest of the Nation's natural scenery and the most significant of its historic and prehistorie resources is to give them the fullest possible degree of protection, and to devote them to the inspiration and enjoyment of present and future generations.
The Congress has repeatedly made it clear that this kind of management was to be applied to these great possessions of all the people of the United States.
The national park system contributes tremendously to present-day needs of the American people.
This is shown conclusively by the steady and rapid inerease in volume of patronage, up nearly 150 percent since World War II, to more than 50 million visits in the calendar year 1955.
The increased rate of use is even more rapid the first half of the 1956 calendar year.
As expanding benefits of our thriving national economy provided increasing millions of Americans with the leisure time and the means to enjoy the great inspirational and cultural resources of our park system, grave problems involving the conservation of those resources arose.
So it was that, a year and a half ago, it became apparent that increasing park use, accompanying changes in American vacation and travel habits and requirements, necessitated a complete new look at the development, staffing, and adequacy of the park system to meet the challenge it faced.
Out of this study emerged a bold and comprehensive long-range program designed to provide the American people with a park system adequate in all ways necessary for their enjoyment and inspiration.
This program is seheduled for completion in 1966—the golden anniversary of the establishment of the National Park Service.
It is known as Mission 66.
In February the program was submitted to the Congress with the firm endorsement of President Eisenhower.
The President informed Congress that “Unless vigorous action is taken, many Americans visiting the parks will be frustrated in gaining the scenic and educational benefits they seek and deserve.
Congressional approval of the objectives of Mission 66 was evidenced in the 1957 appropriations which provided the National Park Service with $68,020,000, an increase of $19,153,700 over 1956 appropriations.
Advanee planning permitted an immediate start on a number of Mission 66 projects and tangible evidence of the program's benefits will begin appearing in the parks next summer.
The program calls for substantial annual increases in Service appropriations to overcome longstanding deficiencies and to make possible the effective use and satisfactory maintenance of the additional facilities which will be provided.
Although considerable construction will be required to provide the campgrounds, interpretative facilities, roads, trails, lodges and maintenance facilities, Mission 66 essentially is a program of conservation.
Preservation of the wilderness qualities and primitive settings which give precious meaning to the existence of our parks and national monuments is a paramount goal of Mission 66.
By providing facilities which discourage overcrowding and permit fuller understanding, the park system can benefit greater numbers of people and still be passed on unimpaired for the enjoyment of future generations.
The conservation character of Mission 66 is emphasized in all phases of the program whieh fully recognizes the need for alertness to prevent any damaging impact on the superlative feature of the national park system.
The problem of providing healthful outdoor recreational facilities extends well beyond the national park system.
The rapidly increasing population and the consequent shrinking of undeveloped areas require the provision of a greatly expanded system of public recreation areas throughout the States and Territories.
This calls for understanding cooperation between Federal, State, and local governments.
An important facet of the Mission 66 program is the provision for developing by 1961 a national recreation plan and to cooperate with other Federal, State, and local agencies in meeting the growing need for additional recreation facilities.
Even before funds for starting the national recreation study became available, the Service with a limited staff assisted the States and Territories on 350 occasions on a wide variety of park and recreation programs.
Development of the Mission 66 program was a venture in which all employees of the Service, regardless of rank, were invited to contribute ideas and suggestions.
It represents a distillation of the contributions of literally hundreds of men and women, who saw in it promise of a remedy for conditions which were threatening—which had, indeed, already resulted in serious damage to—priceless and irreplaceable resources.
As originally conceived the program represents the best estimates of the men closest to our parks and monuments of the needs of the system in the years ahead.
Mission 66 was conceived, however, as a dynamic, flexible program which will require adjustments from time to time to keep abreast of changing costs and variations in the visitor travel pattern.
The national park system was enlarged and strengthened in numerous ways during the past fiscal year.
Two new areas were established—Cumberland Gap National Historical Park, in Kentucky, Tennessee, and Virginia, and Fort Union National Monument in New Mexico.
Pending as the year closed and subsequently enacted were bills authorizing establishment of the Virgin Island National Park on the Island of St. John in the Caribbean; Pea Ridge National Military Park, Ark.
Zion National Monument and Zion National Park were incorporated into a single national park.
Some 46,000 aeres of private holdings within the boundaries of national park areas were acquired during the year by purchase, donation, or exchange.
Thus as the fiscal year ended and Mission 66 was launched, the national park system embarked on what promises to be the most rewarding era in the history of the National Park Service.
To keep pace with the inroads which industrial and agricultural progress is making on the fish and wildlife resources of the country, the Department continued to expand its programs to assure sound conservation, full development, and wise use of these resources.
The policy is based primarily on the concept that conservation is concerned as much with the proper utilization of the fish and wildlife resources as it is with their protection, since the maximum value to the Nation of these renewable resources comes only when they are fully utilized, consistent with good management.
Any intelligent program of natural resource management, therefore, is constantly in pursuit of facts.
Facts are needed to establish management procedures permitting full realization of maximum production.
Facts are necessary to establish annual population levels and to show the portion of such an annual population that can be harvested without detriment to the capital stock.
Thus, basie research becomes the foundation of the Fish and Wildlife Service's operational activities.
Fishery biological research is largely concerned with reaching explanations of fluetuations and with using such understanding for the benefit of fishermen and good management of the resource.
What now seem to be capricious changes in fish behavior, or overfishing, or mismanagement, but which probably are interrelated effects of changes in climate, currents or flows, food, predation, disease incidence, and fishing effort, will be understood when many skills and specializations are brought to bear upon the forces which affect fish.
With fuller understanding through research will come fuller realization of true conservation.
For many species it will be possible to direct fishing to take fish at the time in their lives—considering growth rates and mortality rates—when the yield is greatest, and to deploy fishing time to encourage the most profitable and productive balance among fish stocks.
With more knowledge gained from research, fishery conservation will move closer and closer toward the concept of true fish husbandry—wise use, maximum sustained yield, and greater produetivity.
The marine fisheries are a vast resource, capable of considerable further development.
It is the Department's responsibility, through its commercial fisheries program, to explore and develop this potential national wealth and at the same time seek the wisest utilization of the resource which insures its conservation for future generations.
Exploratory fishing and gear research is directed towards the most efficient utilization of the nation's fishing resources.
Deepwater and distant-water explorations have developed new potential resources, thereby widening the scope of opportunity for the present fishing fleet.
This also results in reduced fishing pressure for presently heavily fished areas, thereby aiding in conservation but not redueing the total output of the commercial fishing industry.
Applied research on fishing gear function has resulted in methods to harvest fish and shellfish in new fishing areas.
Because of the depleted condition of the pink salmon runs in southeastern Alaska and Prince William Sound, a vigorous restoration program was initiated in 1954 and continued in 1955.
This consisted of complete closure of the pink salmon fishery in Prince William Sound, and a reduction in trap fishing effort by 50 percent in southeastern Alaska coupled with large increases in closed areas in various bays to reduce purse seine catches.
This program of reserving a large proportion of the runs for spawning stock resulted again in generally satisfactory escapements of pink salmon from which larger future runs can be expected.
The Bristol Bay red salmon restoration program of recent years also began to pay dividends in 1956, and much improved runs appeared in the major districts, yielding 50 percent larger catches than the parent year, and at the same time providing an adequate seeding of the spawning grounds.
If wildlife is to survive and continue to perpetuate itself, it must have adequate habitat.
This required food and cover is affected by the use man makes of the land.
Inereasing human populations which require more food, more building materials, and more intense use of the land cause radical changes in living conditions for wildlife.
Wild animals, however, are tough and resilient and can respond and acclimate themselves remarkably well to certain of these changes.
In recent years, for instance, wildlife investigators have found that wildlife can withstand much heavier hunting than was previously thought possible.
To obtain these facts for the basis of an efficient management program, some 80 wildlife biologists are stationed throughout the United States and Alaska engaged in research on a wide variety of species and problems.
Development of the Department of Agrieulture's soil bank program has opened up new opportunities for the preservation and enhancement of wildlife habitat throughout the country.
The Fish and Wildlife Service has taken an active part in planning for the implementation of this program to assure that full consideration of measures to improve wildlife habitat is included in the policies and practices established for the program.
The nationwide wetlands preservation and development program made considerable progress during the past year.
Cooperative preservation programs with numerous State fish and game agencies got under way.
Several committees, both statewide and regionwide, were set up to create greater interest in wetlands.
In the sport fishery field under the Dingell-Johnson program, many new impoundments were created and stocked to provide more recreational opportunities for the millions of Americans who annually search for good fishing spots.
Means by which productivity of both the manmade and natural fishing waters could be increased were the subject of a wide variety of research spread across the country.
Wildlife restoration operations under the Pittman-Robertson program were varied and highly productive.
Field surveys and investigations stressed the assembling of information that was used to set open seasons and bag limits to insure the most effective cropping of game bird and mammal surpluses.
Two new national wildlife refuges were placed under administration during the past year.
This was made possible by the secondary use of two flood control reservoirs which were secured by agreements from the Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army.
One of these new refuges, the McNary Wildlife Management Area, is on the Columbia River in Washington; the other, the Snake Creek National Wildlife Refuge, is on the Garrison Reservoir in North Dakota.
Nearly 1,500 acres were purchased in fiscal year 1956 for the Quivira National Wildlife Refuge in Kansas.
This refuge was established in the preceding year because of the need for a waterfowl wintering area in that part of the Great Plains.
Several years ago the management of migratory birds entered a new era with the establishment of organizations built around the four flyways which in turn are the management units for most migratory birds.
Beginning primarily as an organization including administrative heads of the respective State conservation departments, each of the flyway organizations has since developed within their ranks technical committees composed of trained personnel from all 48 States.
The control of destructive animals is frequently necessary to maintain populations of these wildlife species at a level where their numbers will not be in serious conflict with human interests.
Operations to accomplish this were conducted during the year on both public and private lands to reduce losses to livestock and game caused by wide-ranging predatory animals.
The work also included measures taken for the suppression of various forms of field rodents destructive to agricultural crops, horticulture, irrigation structures, timber production, and range vegetation.
The economic livelihood of many persons engaged in the utilization of these resources is dependent upon keeping losses from all causes at a minimum.
The Fish and Wildlife Service cooperates very closely with the States and other agencies of the Federal Government in the maintenance of the inland fisheries in all parts of the country.
It is Federal policy to aid the States wherever and whenever it is necessary to maintain and preserve game-fish populations.
Studies are condueted on large management areas to obtain information on fish habitat, environmental factors affecting reproduetion and carrying capacities, and on wise utilization of the fishery resource.
The operation and maintenance of 91 fish hatcheries is an important part of the program.
The fish produced at these hatcheries are distributed to areas where the restocking of waters is most urgent and to the States for supplementing programs as necessary.
The work of the several international fishery commissions of which the United States is a member continues to demonstrate the usefulness of this type of organization as a means for bringing about cooperation between governments.
Broadening this system to deal with yet unsolved problems, the United States and Canada established during the last year a new organization known as the Great Lakes Fishery Commission.
An equally important function is the promotion and coordination of general fishery research in the Great Lakes to obtain information which will enable the two Governments to assist the commereial and sport fishermen in solving problems which have plagued them for years.
The story of conservation in the Territories can best be told in terms of cooperative action rather than through separate consideration of the work of individual bureaus of the Department.
It is a story which largely concerns Alaska.
While both Hawaii and Puerto Rico have larger populations and more land in current use, neither can compare with our great northern Territory in those natural resources which are the Department's special province.
The Department's conservation responsibilities are not, however, confined to Alaska.
In the Pacific the Department's Office of Territories often deals directly with conservation problems since in American Samoa, and particularly in the Trust Territory, it exercises direct governmental funetions.
In these areas land resources, while meager, are all important to islander standards of living.
The Department is therefore greatly concerned with the conservation and use of island agricultural lands, not only for the production of tropical crops such as coconuts, taro, breadfruit, cocoa and coffee, but also for truck crops and livestock as well.
In the Virgin Islands the scarcity of fresh water makes the conservation of water resourees a major problem.
Here the Virgin Island Corporation has been engaged for a considerable period in a program of building small dams to impound surface runoff.
Those completed to date have an impounding capacity of over 400 million gallons.
This program has had an invaluable effect in raising water tables and thus inereasing the availability of well water.
VICORP is also engaged in both land clearance and reforestation activities and operates a livestock improvement program.
In the Hawaiian Islands resources in sugar and pineapple land and in scenery and climate, which have made tourism a major industry, are the prime concern of the Territorial Government and little Federal assistance is needed.
The National Park Service contributes to the conservation of the scenic wealth of Hawaii by maintaining the Hawaii National Park on the Island of Hawaii and Maui.
Emphasis on natural resources should not overshadow a most important Department function of helping to conserve resources in human beings in areas under its jurisdiction.
Through active and often direct promotion of Territorial health and education programs, and through a program of training islanders in the difficult art of self-government, the Department is increasing both the significance and the usefulness of its other conservation activities.
While the conservation programs deseribed previously are all important to the people whom they affect, they are dwarfed by the conservation effort of the Department directed toward Alaska.
In that magnificent region, one-fifth as large as the area of the States, currently used natural resources—fish, fur, minerals, coal, forests, and water—produce a great deal of Alaska's annual income, while currently unused resources constitute a tremendous storehouse of wealth for the future.
The Federal ownership of all but an insignificant percentage of Alaska's land greatly magnifies Federal responsibility for these resources and also affords a dramatic opportunity for the Federal Government to transform conservation philosophy into practical down-to-earth realities.
What can be accomplished in this respect has been demonstrated impressively in the Pribilof Islands, home of the fur seal.
Once under Russian ownership and once again after Alaska was purchased by the United States, unrestricted commercial exploitation all but exterminated the Pribilof Island seal population.
A combination of international cooperative control measures, protection of the rookeries and of seals in the open sea, and strict control over the number of seals taken each year, has brought the herd back to its former abundance.
Not only have the fur seals been saved from extinction but the Federal Government now grosses over $3 million annually from the sale of skins.
The salmon of Alaska represent the Territory's most important and most difficult conservation problem.
The current year provides a bright exception to a long-term trend of decline in the size of the salmon pack.
The annual wholesale value of the pack, even in a relatively poor season, is more than $60 million, an amount whieh is certain to be exceeded by the time all the returns are in for 1956.
The Department's program of salmon conservation measures includes control over fishing gear, control over fishery waters and over the periods during which fish may be caught, protection of spawning salmon, the destruction of predators, an intensive research program, and cooperation with the Territorial Department of Fisheries in all phases of salmon research and conservation.
The place of fish traps in a conservation program is still a matter of great controversy in Alaska.
Irrespective of the conflict between those who regard fish traps as having economic rather than conservation significance and those who hold the reverse of this view, it is obvious that strict control of the use of fish traps is essential to any salmon conservation program.
This conclusion represents a major premise in the Department's efforts to protect the salmon runs.
Thus, the Department has substantially reduced the number of fish traps in many areas of Alaska.
The work of the Fish and Wildlife Serviee is also of great importance in protecting sport fishing as well as Alaska's great wealth in wildlife, including fur-bearing animals.
Both sport fishing and hunting constitute fascinating attractions to the visitor to the Territory and the resource could not be maintained without careful control measures.
The Alaskan moose represent a prime illustration of the success of wildlife conservation.
Their numbers have increased and their range has extended northward.
This has been accomplished by strict control of hunting, by the establishment of game refuges, and by the control of predators of which the wolf is the most dangerous.
Each season sees hunters get their quota of these handsome but vicious animals.
Even more important to the economic development of Alaska are the Department's conservation measures in connection with coal, minerals, oil, forests, and hydroelectric resources.
It is axiomatic that wise use and conservation of these sources of much of Alaska's wealth are but opposite sides of the same shield.
Because many of the natural resources of the Territory remain to be developed, wise use is often the most important side of this shield.
The Department, through its railroad and highway building and maintenance activities, also makes possible both wise use and conservation in areas that, without these means of transportation, would remain inaccessible to economic development.
Petroleum is still a relatively unknown quantity among the Territory's natural resources.
The Department's leasing program is encouraging a widespread and responsible search for oil.
With an eye to future conservation requirements, a development contract was secured during the year, covering 1,200,000 acres in 470 Federal land leases in the Icy Bay-Cape Fairweather region of Alaska.
An auspicious beginning has been made in the appraisal and conservation of Alaska's water and hydroelectric resources.
Intensive surveys of many potentially valuable water power sites have been made.
Some, like the Eklutna project near Anchorage, are already adding to Alaska's wealth through production of electricity.
It is apparent from this consideration of the Department's conservation programs in Alaska that the Territory is providing a unique opportunity for a demonstration of the effectiveness of the partnership principle, both in extracting wealth from Alaska's natural resources and in conserving them for the wealth they will provide in the years to come.
THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY for Water and Power Development discharges the duties of the Secretary with respect to the Department's programs in the field of water and power development.
In this connection, the Assistant Secretary exercises secretarial direction and supervision over the Bureau of Reclamation, Bonneville Power Administration, Southeastern Power Administration, and Southwestern Power Administration.
The principal function of the latter three agencies is to market surplus power generated in their respective areas at Federal projects.
The Bureau of Reclamation construets water-use projects whose primary purpose is the reclamation of arid and semiarid lands in the West, and also markets surplus power produced at Federal projects in the West outside the boundaries of the Bonneville Power Administration and Southwestern Power Administration.
The Assistant Secretary for Water and Power Development is also responsible for carrying out the defense functions of the Secretary with respect to electric power and for supervising and directing the Ofice of Saline Water.
The activities of the water and power agencies of the Department and the Office of Saline Water are more fully described in sections of this report covering each of the Department's bureaus and offices.
The table on the next page, prepared on a consolidated basis for fiscal year 1956, shows the installed capacity of plants whose power is marketed by Interior Department agencies, net energy generation, energy marketed, and gross revenues.
The Assistant Seeretary for Water and Power Development participated in the negotiation of contracts for the marketing of power in the operating areas of Southwestern Power Administration and Southeastern Power Administration.
Negotiations were also completed and a three-party arrangement for sale, wheeling, and firming was signed on May 16, 1956, with the Georgia Power Co. to serve preferred agencies in Georgia for the marketing of one-half of Clark Hill project power.
Service to preferred agencies in Georgia was initiated on June 20, 1956.
In the Southwest, at the direction of Congress, 4 inoperative lease-operate-with-option-to-purchase transmission agreements and 4 companion power sales and exchange agreements with generation and transmission cooperatives were reactivated.
Negotiations were conducted to remove the option-to-purchase provision and to have operation performed by the cooperatives.
The Assistant Secretary for Water and Power Development directed a review of cost allocations and power rates for certain projects in the Southeast and Southwest.
In the Southwest, a proposed upward adjustment of the average rate level for firm power was the subject of extensive review by the Congress and other interested agencies.
The existing interim rate has been extended by the Federal Power Commission on a temporary basis.
Studies indicated the necessity of an increase to provide repayment of the Federal investment in production and transmission facilities allocated to power on a 50-year basis with 21/2-percent interest.
As a part of the partnership program approval was given Bonneville Power Administration to enter into long-term firm contracts with non-Federal generating utilities for transmission of power over the Federal transmission grid in the Northwest.
In order to obtain full regional integration and to secure the most economical use of resources, Bonneville Power Administration will build feasible additional transmission facilities as needed.
Reimbursement will be on a use-offacilities basis.
During the fiscal year ending June 30, 1956, the Department through the Assistant Secretary for Water and Power Development reviewed 31 reports of the Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army, concerned primarily with flood control and navigation, and 34 applications for permits and licenses referred to the Department by the Federal Power Commission.
Total construction costs of these projeets is estimated at over $2.4 billion.
The desire of non-Federal agencies to participate in the Federal Government's partnership program continues to be evidenced by the large number of applications for licenses to the Federal Power Commission to construct hydroelectrie projects.
The total estimated construction cost of applications for licenses reviewed by the Department during the year is estimated at over $1.3 billion.
A number of statutory provisions assure special consideration of Interior Department interests.
In presenting its views to the Commission, the Department has taken the position that non-Federal development of hydroelectric power resources is desirable where such development is consistent with the publie interest and, to the extent necessary, the Department has recommended special provisions which would safeguard the public interest and insure coordination with overall river basin programs.
The Assistant Secretary for Water and Power Development served as departmental representative on the Interagency Committee on Water Resources and on the President's Advisory Committee on Federal Public Works.
Staff of the office served as departmental representatives on interagency committees concerned with radio frequency allocation, turbine procurement, international water developments, public works planning, coordination of water resources projects, cost allocation, financial practices, economic analysis, atomie energy, and similar subjects.
Other significant activities of the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Water and Power Development during the 1956 fiscal year included coordination of studies on Canadian-United States reservoir storage and hydroelectric projects and initiation of review of the Hetch Hetchy power operation of the eity and county of San Francisco, Calif.
An economic analysis of the Missouri River Basin completed by the Bureau of Reclamation was discussed with concerned congressional and State interests.
Reappraisal of certain irrigation benefits was initiated with the cooperation of the Department of Agriculture.
EFFORTS of the Federal Government in cooperation with State and local agencies and private interests in the Western United States resulted in major progress in planned development and use of our water resources during 1956 fiscal year.
The Bureau of Reclamation added irrigation facilities to serve 203,000 acres of land with a new or supplemental supply of water and provided 120,000 additional kilowatts of hydroelectrie generating capacity in multipurpose dams.
About $160 million was added to the Bureau's $2.6 billion investment in western projects through completion of these and other irrigation and power features.
Partnership with the water users in the initiation, financing, construction, and operation of multiple-purpose water conservation projects in the West was a guiding policy in Bureau of Reclamation administration in 1956.
A striking example of the effectiveness of this poliey was the $27.5 million Ventura project in California.
As a result of prompt completion of a repayment contract and the advancement to the Bureau in 1954 by the local water officials of $700,000 for preconstruction and design work, construction was advanced more than a year.
It was the first time in 54 years of Reclamation history that a repayment contract had been ready for signature on the same day that the President approved authorization of the project.
Another notable feature is the steadily increasing use which is made of reclamation facilities by seekers of recreation.
Last year more than 10 million persons visited water playgrounds in the arid West made available on Reclamation projects through cooperative administrative arrangements between the Bureau, the National Park Service, the Forest Service, or State recreational agencies.
Bureau of Reclamation reservoirs rendered extraordinary service during the year in helping to control floods from heavy spring snowmelt in several States.
In Washington, Idaho, and Oregon, particularly, the runoff of most streams of the Columbia River Basin was of flood proportions and storage in Bureau reservoirs prevented several local disasters as well as reducing the flood crest of the Columbia River.
In California, flood control regulation of releases of water was required in varying degrees at all of the Bureau's 12 reservoirs but one—Cachuma.
The total harvest from all Reclamation projects in calendar year 1955, which included one-half of the 1956 fiscal period, was valued at over $827.7 million, an average of $132.18 per irrigated acre.
This was the fifth consecutive year in which the total crop value exceeded the three-quarter-billion dollar mark, inereasing the cumulative value of all Reclamation harvests through 1955 to more than $11.3 billion.
The Bureau of Reclamation has been especially diligent in its effort to transfer the responsibility for operation and maintenance of irrigation projects to the water users.
With a few exceptions, the Bureau actually operates and maintains only the reserved works of multiple purpose projects.
The balance of the facilities are operated and maintained by the various irrigation districts.
During fiscal year 1956, irrigation distribution facilities serving approximately 85 percent of the total irrigable acreage included in Federal reclamation projects were operated and maintained by the water users.
A notable event of the year was authorization of the Colorado River Storage Project and 11 participating projects.
This monumental authorization by the Congress, which was signed into law by President Eisenhower on April 11, 1956, will permit continued economic expansion of four Upper Colorado River States in an area of rich resources which is now virtually untapped.
Coupled with the existing Reclamation development in the Lower Colorado River Basin, it will ultimately establish the most complete control and utilization of the water resources of any major river basin in America.
To undertake the design and construction of features of the Colorado River storage project and other new projects in fiscal year 1957, as well as proceed with engineering activities on projects under construction, the Bureau strengthened its staff by several administrative changes, undertook recruitment of new engineering personnel, largely from university graduates, and streamlined procedural techniques for greater efficiency and economy of operations.
These facilities included 136 storage dams and reservoirs, 105 diversion dams, almost 24,000 miles of canals and laterals, and almost 7,600 miles of drains.
The total harvest from all Reclamation projects in calendar year 1955 was valued at over $827.7 million, an average of $132.18 per irrigated acre.
Irrigable lands for service totaled 7,367,735 acres, of which 6,261,761 acres were actually irrigated.
As compared to 1954, this represents an increase of 135,995 irrigated acres.
Forage crops were produced on 52.6 percent of the net area irrigated on all Reclamation projects, and 25.3 percent of the irrigated lands were utilized in producing cereals.
The crops within these two groups, totaling more than 14.8 million tons, are utilized principally as livestock feeds, generally in the local areas of production.
Over 5.6 millions of tons of fresh vegetables, fruits, and nuts were produced from more than 719,000 acres of irrigated lands in 1955, and miscellaneous food crops such as dry beans, sugar beets, mint, hops, ete.
The volume of agricultural produetion totaled over 27 million tons in 1955, an increase of almost 458,000 tons over 1954.
Increases were noted for all erop groups except miscellaneous field crops, which decreased more than 735,000 tons.
The production of cotton was down more than 200,000 bales, sugar beets decreased almost 600,000 tons, and dry beans fell off about 18,000 tons.
Average per acre crop yields were slightly higher than in 1954 for the principal crops produced on most Federal irrigation projects, and in all, 1955 was a good crop year.
Average unit prices received by irrigation farmers for their products were generally somewhat lower than in 1954.
This was true for all the principal crops except alfalfa hay, lettuce, dry onions, and peaches, which increased slightly in 1955.
The most significant individual crops produced on irrigated project lands in 1955 were barley, wheat, alfalfa hay, pasture, sugar beets, cotton, dry beans, late potatoes, tomatoes, lettuce, carrots, sweet corn, apples, peaches, table grapes, and citrus fruits.
The 73 Reclamation irrigation projeets, located throughout the 17 Western States, are divided into 7 regions for administrative purposes.
Region 7—Eastern Colorado, Nebraska, northern Kansas, and southeastern Wyoming.
Region 1, with 2,229,614 acres of irrigated lands, the largest in area irrigated of the seven Bureau Regions, produced crops valued at over $242 million.
This region contains 36 percent of the irrigated lands and accounted for 29 percent of the total value of crops produced on all Reclamation projects in 1955.
Region 3, with less than half as much irrigated land as Region 1, produced erops valued at almost $213 million, or 26 percent of the total production from all Federal projects during this same year.
Each of the 17 Western States participated in the Reclamation harvest for 1955.
Idaho had a larger acreage of irrigated project lands than any of the other States, followed by California, Colorado, Washington, Oregon, Arizona, Nebraska, Utah, and Montana.
The gross value of crops produced on Federal projects located in California was higher than for the other Western States; however, the average gross crop value per acre was highest for Arizona, followed by California, Texas, Washington, New Mexico, Oklahoma, etc., respectively.
The acreage and value of crops produced on each of the Federal Reclamation projects in calendar year 1955 are shown in table 1, while similar cumulative figures for all projects for the years 1906 to 1955, inclusive, are listed in table 2.
During fiscal year 1956, the Bureau conducted 4 land openings on 4 Reclamation projects, making 235 farm units embracing 26,898 irrigable acres of new land available for settlement.
The greatest number of the foregoing were on the North-Side Pumping Unit of the Minidoka project in Idaho where 194 units were opened for settlement under the provisions of reclamation and homestead laws.
Similarly, 17 farm units were offered for homestead entry on the Kennewick division of the Yakima project in Washington.
Fifteen farm units on the Columbia Basin project in Washington were offered for sale under the provisions of the Columbia Basin Project Act, and 9 units on the Wellton-Mohawk division of the Gila project in Arizona were offered for sale under provisions of that project's authorization aet.
Publie response to the announced availability of new farm units under the Bureau's settlement program continued at the high level evidenced since the close of World War II, with an average of nearly 88 qualified applicants for each unit offered.
Since the close of World War II, 52 land openings have been held on 13 Reclamation projects.
A total of 2,394 new farm units encompassing approximately 200,000 irrigable aeres of publie land has thus been made available for selection by qualified applicants.
Both technical and financial assistance has continued to be available to settlers during developmental years through cooperative working relations established by the Bureau with the Farmers' Home Administration, the Agricultural Extension Service, the several State colleges and universities, and other appropriate agencies.
During fiscal year 1957 the availability of additional new farm units is anticipated on the Columbia Basin project in Washington, the Minidoka project in Idaho, and on the Gila and Yuma projects in Arizona.
Additional privately owned lands in the Central Valley, Columbia Basin, and Missouri Basin projects will be supplied with irrigation water.
A considerable amount of this privately owned land may be available for sale by the owners.
The development farm program which was started in 1947 is a vital part of the settlement program on areas being newly developed for irrigation.
These farms are conducted in cooperation with various Department of Agriculture agencies and State agricultural colleges.
The field scale operations demonstrate to the inexperienced irrigation farmers the layout of most practical farm irrigation systems, the best methods of irrigation, the crops best adapted to the area, and most effective cultural practices.
During fiscal year 1956 there were 16 development farms in operation loeated in the Columbia Basin, Gila, and Missouri River Basin projects.
Several new farms are proposed for the latter project.
During fiscal year 1956, contracts were executed with a number of districts for the repayment of the cost of new project works.
The repayment contract for the Ventura River project, signed 6 days after the President approved authorization of the project, established a new record for promptness in securing repayment contract coverage.
The contract is the first to require repayment of municipal water costs with interest during construction.
The rate of interest, established by the Secretary of the Treasury, is 2.591 percent.
Execution of the repayment contract for the Santa Maria project on April 6, 1956, cleared the way for initiation of construction as the authorizing legislation required execution of a repayment contract in advance of construction.
Construction of the Cachuma project was completed and supply works except for Cachuma Dam were transferred under a special contract to the local water users' organizations for operation and maintenance.
Officials of the Corning and Colusa County water districts approved forms of water service contracts—the first to be agreed upon by water users' organizations of the Sacramento Canals unit, Central Valley project.
Rehabilitation and betterment contracts were negotiated for the Salt River, Riverton, Orland, Boise, and Rogue River projeets.
Construction was initiated on the Michaud Flats project following the execution of a repayment contract with the Falls irrigation district.
Construction was also initiated on two units of the Foster Creek division, Chief Joseph Dam project, following execution of repayment contracts by the Bridgeport Bar and Brewster Flat irrigation districts.
Execution of an amendatory contract by the Frenchman-Cambridge irrigation district, Missouri River Basin project, permitted continuation of construction of distribution system works.
Special legislation enacted by the Congress this year authorized execution of a repayment contract with the Yuma Mesa irrigation and drainage district, Gila project.
The contract, negotiated pursuant to section 7 of the 1939 Reclamation Project Act, adjusted reimbursable obligations for the Yuma Mesa division, and the repayment contract was executed in May 1956.
Legislation was also adopted by the Congress authorizing the execution of a repayment contract with the Tule Lake irrigation district, Klamath project.
The draft of repayment contract was accepted by the district board and in July 1956 was approved by the local electorate.
Enactment of S. 2202 by the Congress authorized negotiation of a repayment contract providing for final repayment settlement for the Valley division of the Yuma project.
Legislation was also adopted authorizing a contract with the Riverside irrigation district, Idaho, and amendment of existing contracts with the city of Rapid City, S. Dak.
Table 3 shows that the total value of repayment contracts on June 30, 1956, amounted to $747,342,204.79.
Óf this amount, a total of $121,473,956.73 had been repaid and delinquencies were insignificant.
In addition, over $100 million will be returned to the Government in water service payments under contracts now in force.
The Bureau of Reclamation has continued to make progress in its objective to protect the land and facilities under its jurisdiction from wind and water erosion.
This program, which is in keeping with the Department's overall conservation policies, has included structural installations, reseeding, and other means of erosion control and stabilization.
The planning, financing, and performance of the work are accomplished in cooperation with other Federal agencies and State and local agencies, including water-users' organizations.
During fiscal year 1956, the weed-control program conducted by the Bureau on irrigation systems has proved effective in reducing the problems caused by undesirable vegetation and in decreasing operation and maintenance costs.
It also has aided materially in reducing water losses resulting from transpiration, evaporation, and seepage due to weed growths.
More efficient and economical methods of controlling weeds infesting banks and channels of irrigation systems have been developed and put into practice through the research programs conducted by the Agricultural Research Service, Department of Agriculture, for and in cooperation with the Bureau of Reclamation.
This work has been accomplished at field stations at Phoenix, Ariz.
Prosser, Wash.
Bozeman, Mont.
Under the provisions of the Halogeton Glomeratus Act (P. L. 529, July 14, 1952), the Bureau is cooperating in the control of the poison ous weed Halogeton on Bureau lands in Utah, Nevada, Colorado, Wyoming, Montana, and Idaho.
When the Bureau of Reclamation constructs a dam which creates a reservoir for irrigation and power development, this by no means represents the full extent of the benefits to be derived from the project.
Storage space in which to confine rampaging floodwaters and facilities for recreation at water playgrounds in the otherwise arid portions of the West, are two additional dividends paid under the Federal water resource conservation partnership.
Bureau reservoirs were able to render extraordinary service in helping to control floods during 1956.
In Washington, Idaho, and Oregon, particularly, the runoff of heavy snowmelt on most streams of the Columbia Basin was of flood proportions, and storage in the Bureau of Reclamation reservoirs prevented several local disasters as well as reducing the flood crest of the Columbia River itself.
The peak flow of the Columbia River at The Dalles, Oreg.
Had it not been for upstream storage, this peak would have been 110,000 cubic feet per second higher.
Translated into river level, the flood crest would have been 2.7 feet higher were it not for the storage which was largely provided by existing Reclamation reservoirs.
In the Upper Snake River area in Idaho, the operation of Jackson Lake, the principal reservoir of the Minidoka Reclamation project, as a flood-control reservoir reduced the peak flow at Heise, Idaho, nearly one-fourth.
In the Boise Valley in Idaho, although the upstream flow was about 23,000 cubic feet per second, the Boise River was held to 7,500 cubic feet per second at Boise by the operation of Anderson Ranch, Arrowrock, and Lucky Peak Reservoirs.
Anderson Ranch and Arrowrock are Bureau of Reclamation structures, and Lucky Peak was built by the Corps of Engineers as a flood control structure whose releases are coordinated with those from Anderson Ranch and Arrowrock for irrigation purposes during the summer.
The peak flow of the Payette River at Emmett, Idaho, reached on May 27, was 15,000 cubic feet per second, which was about equal to flood stage.
At the same time, Cascade and Deadwood Reservoirs, upstream, were storing at the rate of nearly 12,000 cubic feet per second.
Had it not been for this storage, the river, already flowing at flood stage, would have sharply increased its peak crest.
Numerous other reservoirs on the Snake River and its tributaries were filling during the spring runoff and thus contributed to cutting down the crest.
These included the American Falls Reservoir in Idaho and the Owyhee Reservoir in Oregon.
The peak flow of the Yakima River at Parker, Wash., was about 19,000 cubic feet per second on May 20.
This is 4,000 feet over flood stage.
Were it not for water stored in five irrigation reservoirs upstream, the peak flood flow would have reached 37,000 cubie feet per second.
Hungry Horse Reservoir on the South Fork of the Flathead River in Montana curtailed the peak flow of the Flathead at Columbia Falls where it emerges from the mountains by 31,000 cubic feet per second, or nearly one-third.
Operation of this single reservoir is estimated to have curtailed the flood crest of the Columbia by more than 6 inches.
In California, flood control regulation of release of water was required in varying degrees at all of the Bureau's 13 reservoirs but one-Cachuma.
An estimated 9,858,000 persons enjoyed the use of recreational facilities on 140 reservoirs on Reclamation projects throughout the 17 Western States in 1956.
Estimates on expenditures at these Reclamation playgrounds vary considerably, but it is conservatively calculated that out-of-town and local visitors spend about $6 per day.
This represents an appropriate share of investments in boats, hunting and fishing equipment, ete.
Applied to the total number of visitors, this estimate indicated an extra dividend each year of approximately $59 million from Reclamation.
A folder entitled"Reclamation Recreational Opportunities" issued during the year, contains information concerning the location of these western water playgrounds and describes the facilities available for swimming, fishing, boating, hunting, camping, picnicking, and lodging.
It is the policy of the Bureau to transfer recreational areas at Federal Reclamation reservoirs to other Federal, State, or local agencies for development and administration.
Areas of national significance, such as Lake Mead, at Hoover Dam on the Colorado River in Arizona-Nevada, are administered by the National Park Service, areas wholly or substantially in the national forests are transferred to the Forest Service, U. S. Department of Agriculture, and areas of local interest are transferred to State or local government agencies.
The Bureau of Reclamation administers recreational facilities on only 40 of the 140 reservoirs.
On June 30, 1956, the installed capacity of powerplants constructed and operated by the Bureau of Reclamation, as a part of multipurpose Reclamation projects, totaled 4,974,550 kilowatts, whereas the capacity installed and operated by other agencies for which the Bureau is the marketing agent totaled 596,500 kilowatts.
The installed capacity of hydroelectric powerplants at Bureau of Reclamation multipurpose projects and at projects for which the Bureau is responsible for marketing the power, increased 320,000 kilowatts during fiscal year 1956.
Sale of electric power during the year aggregated 25,181,596,876 kilowatt-hours, with revenues from sales totaling $55,362,617.68 as shown in table 4.
This compared to the previous year's sales of 25,031,325,608 kilowatt-hours, and revenues of $51,764,256.48.
During the fiscal year ending June 30, 1956, the Bureau of Reclamation operated 35 powerplants with a total nameplate capacity of 4,974,- 550 kilowatts.
In addition, the Bureau marketed the power generated from plants constructed by the Corps of Engineers and the International Boundary and Water Commission, totaling 596,500 kilowatts, which is an increase of 240,000 kilowatts during fiscal year 1956.
At the end of fiscal year 1956, the Bureau of Reclamation had under construction four powerplants, which will have an ultimate installed nameplate capacity of 154,250 kilowatts.
Provo River in Utah; Roza (11,250 kw.) on the Yakima-Roza Canal in Washington; and Glendo (24,000 kw.) on the North Platte River in Wyoming.
The United States Army Corps of Engineers is proceeding with the construction of its plants on the Missouri River Basin project.
The ultimate nameplate capacity of the two plants—Gavins Point and Oahe, in South Dakota—under construction by the Corps will respectively be 100,000 and 425,000 kilowatts.
The Bureau of Reclamation will be the marketing agent for energy generated from these plants as is the case for other plants constructed by the Corps on the Missouri River Basin project.
The status of hydroelectrie powerplants for which the Bureau of Reclamation has responsibilities is shown in table 5.
On June 30, 1956, the Bureau of Reclamation's transmission system consisted of 9,371.4 circuit miles of line.
During fiscal year 1956, 302.4 circuit miles of transmission lines were completed.
These are shown in table 6.
During fiscal year 1956 there were 120 contracts executed for the delivery of electric power supply.
A number of renewals of operating contracts and revisions of existing contracts resulting from changed operating conditions were consummated.
18 with private utilities.
53 with REA cooperatives.
29 with municipalities.
5 with other Federal agencies.
3 with public power districts.
7 with State authorities.
1 with irrigation district.
4 miscellaneous type contracts.
The Bureau continued its policy of contracting whenever possible with private utilities, public bodies, and cooperatives for wheeling power and energy over existing facilities.
The Bureau also entered into several interchange agreements with its customers.
Contracts for wheeling Palisades project power to preference customers were executed with Idaho Power Co. and Utah Power and Light Co.
A summary by classification of customers served by Reclamation during fiscal year 1956 is shown in table 7.
The Bureau at the end of fiscal year 1956 had 123 contracts under active negotiation.
This included 28 contracts with municipalities, 44 with REA cooperatives, 9 with non-REA cooperatives, 21 with private utilities, 4 with publie power districts, 5 with other Federal agencies, 7 with State authorities, 1 with an irrigation district, and 4 miscellaneous type contracts.
A number of these are to renew the existing contract or to revise contracts in existence due to changes in operating conditions.
Through its design and construction accomplishments in developing the water resources of the western United States, the Bureau of Reclamation in fiscal year 1956 made a major contribution to the conservation of the Nation's natural resources.
The dimensions of the year's achievement in construction are indicated by the completion of irrigation facilities to serve 203,000 acres of land and installation of 120,000 kilowatts of hydroelectric generating capacity.
Construction was completed on 4 storage dams which have a combined capacity of more than 2 million acre-feet, 507 miles of electrical transmission lines, and 585 miles of canals and related water conveyance facilities.
An investment of about $160 million was added to the Bureau's $2.6 billion investment in western projects through completion of these and other irrigation and power features.
Awarded for the fiscal year period were 496 construction, material, equipment, and supply contracts.
The total value of these contracts was about $63 million.
Contracts for construction totaled about $57 million of this amount, or about 90 percent.
The 220 construction contracts in progress at the end of the year had a total value of $122 million.
Highlights of the year were completion of Tiber, Webster, and Kirwin Dams on the Missouri River Basin project and Crescent Lake Dam on the Crescent Lake Dam project in Oregon; the placing in full service of the 162,000-kilowatt Folsom powerplant in California and the 12,000-kilowatt Chandler power and pumping plant on the Yakima project in Washington; and the beginning of full operation of the Cachuma project in California, following completion of the 6-mile Tecolote Tunnel.
In August 1955, the completion of the Eklutna project, first major Bureau project in Alaska, was dedicated.
Of signal interest were the new starts of construetion on the Palo Verde Diversion Dam on the Palo Verde diversion project in California-Arizona; the American Falls pumping plant on the Michaud Flats project in Idaho; the 5,000-kilowatt Deer Creek powerplant on the Provo River project, Utah; the 11,250-kilowatt Roza powerplant on the Yakima project, Washington; and the diversion tunnel for the Trinity Dam on the Central Valley project in California, which will be a principal feature in the transbasin diversion of water from the Trinity coastal basin into the Central Valley.
On the Santa Maria project in California a contract was awarded for construction of the Vaquero Dam.
Table 8 lists the major construction contracts (more than $1 million each) awarded by the Bureau of Reclamation in fiscal year 1956.
Among features for which contracts were awarded were Vaquero Dam and access road on the Santa Maria project in California, Palo Verde diversion dam and levee system on the Palo Verde diversion project in California-Arizona, the diversion tunnel for the Trinity Dam on the Central Valley project in California, 19.5 miles of the Texas Hill Canal and distribution system on the Wellton-Mohawk division of the Gila project in Arizona, and 19 miles of the Sargent Canal on the Sargent unit of the Missouri River Basin project in Nebraska.
Listed in table 9 are the principal features on Bureau of Reclamation projects completed in fiscal year 1956.
The table includes 4 storage dams, 2 diversion dams, 2 powerplants, 46 pumping plants, rehabilitation and enlargement of 2 storage dams, 507 miles of transmission lines, 585 miles of canals, pipelines, laterals, wasteways, and drains, and 102 miles of rehabilitated drains.
On the Columbia Basin project in Washington, construction progressed rapidly on the irrigation system.
The system was extended to serve an additional 54,000 acres in fiscal year 1956.
Completed were 272 miles of laterals, wasteways, and drains, and 26 pumping plants.
In Idaho, on the Palisades project, good progress was made on placing the earth embankment of the 13-million cubic yard Palisades Dam.
The structure for the 114,000-kilowatt Palisades powerplant was completed and the turbines and generators were being installed at year's end.
The Chandler power and pumping plant on the Yakima project in Washington was completed and the plant's two 6,000-kilowatt generators were placed in service.
Also on the Yakima project, the Amon pumping plant and a 12-mile section of the Kennewick main canal were completed.
Construction of the project's 11,250-kilowatt Roza powerplant was begun during the year and was about 30 percent completed at the end of the year.
Crescent Lake Dam on the Crescent Lake Dam project in Oregon was completed, and Haystack Dam on the Deschutes project, in the same State, was placed under construction.
The unit A pumping plant on the Minidoka project in Idaho was essentially completed.
In California, a construction highlight was completion of the 6-mile Tecolote Tunnel on the Cachuma project.
The tunnel, one of the most difficult of the Bureau's construction undertakings in recent years because of large inflows of hot water, was placed in service to connect the project's Cachuma Reservoir with the south coast conduit serving the Santa Barbara area, thus augmenting the community's municipal water supply.
On the Central Valley project in California, construction was completed on the Folsom powerplant and the last 2 of the plant's 3 54,000-kilowatt generators were placed in service.
Lateral distribution pipelines totaling 91 miles in length on the project's Friant-Kern Canal distribution system were completed for unit 3 of the Delano-Earlimart irrigation distriet and units 2 and 3 of the Exeter irrigation district.
Work was started on the Shafter-Wasco irrigation district distribution system.
A significant construction milestone on the Central Valley project was start of work on the diversion tunnel for the Trinity Dam late in the spring of 1956.
The 500-foot high dam, to be placed under construction in fiscal year 1957, will probably be the highest earthfill dam in the world.
On the Solano project in California, concrete placement for the 302-foot high Monticello Dam neared two-thirds of completion at year's end.
A 10-mile section of the highway relocation at Monticello Reservoir was completed, and another 5-mile section neared completion at the end of the fiscal year.
A “new start" late in the fiscal year was the beginning of construction under the Palo Verde diversion project for the Palo Verde diversion dam and levee system on the Colorado River between California and Arizona.
Work on the Gila project in Arizona included bringing the Texas Hill Canal and distribution system to substantial completion; construction began on the project's Mohawk laterals of the Ralph's Mill area.
In Utah, the Stoddard diversion dam and the 10-mile Gateway Canal were completed on the Weber Basin project.
Work on Wanship Dam, an earthfill structure, was ahead of schedule; placing of the dam embankment was brought to about 80 percent of completion.
The first 17-mile section of the Davis Aqueduct was about two-thirds completed.
Work continued on the 4-mile second section and on the 4-mile Weber aqueduct.
Enlargement of the Pineview Dam neared the midway point of completion.
On the Provo River project in Utah, work was begun on the 5,000- kilowatt Deer Creek powerplant.
Indicative of the Bureau's efforts to improve existing irrigation facilities were the rehabilitation of the El Vado Dam and 102 miles of drains on the Middle Rio Grande project, and the rehabilitation of the Vermejo diversion dam and Vermejo and Eagle Tail Canals on the Vermeio project, all in New Mexico.
On the Carlsbad project in the same State, the enlargement of the earthfill Alamorgordo Dam was completed.
Progress on the Missouri River Basin was highlighted by completion of three major earthfill dams—Tiber in Montana and Webster and Kirwin in Kansas.
In Nebraska, the Milburn diversion dam was completed.
More than 500 miles of major electrical transmission lines which extend to areas in North and South Dakota, Minnesota, and Wyoming were completed.
The high-voltage lines were placed in service to transmit initial power from the Corps of Engineers' Garrison and Fort Randall powerplants on the main stem of the Missouri River, in North and South Dakota, respectively.
Work continued on an additional 240 miles of "backbone" transmission lines in the Dakotas.
In Wyoming, rapid construction progress was made on the Glendo Dam and 24,000-kilowatt powerplant.
Overall construction was about 65 percent completed in 50 percent of the contract time.
State, six pumping plants for the project's Hanover-Bluff unit were completed, and construction on the Lucerne Canal and pumping plant on the Owl Creek unit was advanced to the point that completion is expected early in the next fiscal year.
The earthfill Pactola Dam in South Dakota is also scheduled for completion early in fiscal year 1957.
In other areas of the Missouri River Basin project, construction was begun on the Upper Meeker Canal on the Frenchman-Cambridge division in Nebraska, which will convey water from the completed Trenton Dam.
On the Bostwick division, Kansas, the final section of the Franklin Canal and laterals were completed, a 35-mile reach of the Courtland Canal was completed to the Lovewell Reservoir, and the earthfill Lovewell Dam was about 50 percent completed.
The Bureau continued its efforts to prevent accidents and minimize the occupational hazards of construction work by maintaining its safety program during the year.
Significant progress was made in the reduction of accidents on construction operations; the accident frequency rate for the fiscal year 1956 was lowered 12 percent below the fiscal year 1955 rate.
Design work was facilitated by increased efficiency of operations, and by adoption of new techniques.
Major economy in certain designs was an accompanying achievement.
The average cost of design as related to the overall Bureau construction and rehabilitation program for the 1956 fiscal year was 4.1 percent.
Design work proceeded on the 500-foot-high, 30-million-cubic-yard Trinity Dam.
A new source of impervious material for this earthfill structure was investigated which will provide embankment material at a considerable saving in cost over that considered in the preliminary design.
Underwater television equipment was demonstrated as an effective means of surveying certain eroded areas of the spillway bucket at Shasta Dam on the Central Valley project.
The television camera carried underwater by a diver to a depth of 38 feet scanned the eroded areas.
The images of the areas appeared on monitors mounted on a barge where they were viewed and evaluated by engineers.
Substantial economies in construction of the new Vaquero Dam on the Santa Maria project in California, will be realized by a design modification in which the outlet works were enlarged to function as a service spillway, and a secondary tunnel spillway was selected to serve as an auxiliary or emergency structure.
A design method was developed to start the generators at the Kortes powerplant by remote control from the Seminoe powerplant, features of the Missouri River Basin project and Kendrick project in Wyoming, respectively.
At a signal from the Seminoe powerplant a master relay at the unattended Kortes plant operates a control to open the turbine gates and start the generators.
Designs were completed on the Bureau's first microwave radio system.
The system, which will operate between Parker Dam and Phoenix, Ariz., will provide 5 telephone channels for voice communication regarding the power system between Hoover, Parker, and Davis powerplants, the Metropolitan Water District, and the city of Phoenix, 19 telemetering channels for dispatching of data on power generation, and a service channel.
The new Wanship and Gateway powerplants on the Weber Basin project were under design as fully outdoor structures, the first such installations to be built on a Reclamation project.
In addition to savings in construction made possible by selection of the outdoor type of design, economies will be achieved in switchyard equipment and steel structures by use of "package-type" switchyard equipment for the powerplants.
Utilizing equipment loaned by the U. S. Geological Survey, the Bureau applied for the first time in its geophysical exploration work a new seismic geophysical technique on the Weber Basin project.
By detonating explosives in relatively shallow holes, shock waves were "bounced back" from different strata underground.
As a result, it was possible to secure data on the thickess and continuity of possible water-bearing strata to depths up to 4,000 feet.
The Bureau also utilized for the first time in its geophysical investigations the technique of “air shooting" (seismic exploration using small explosive charges suspended above the ground surface), thus minimizing the hazard of damage from flying rock particles or pebbles.
A total of 40 contracts, principally for electrical equipment, was awarded to companies offering equipment manufactured outside the United States.
These contracts, which included 20 Italian, 6 Austrian, 3 English, 5 German, 2 Lebanese, and 4 Swiss, totaled $2,166,763.
This total value of awards to foreign manufacturers during fiscal year 1956 was an increase of 125 percent over the value of foreign awards during the previous fiscal year.
A differential of 6 percent was added to all foreign bids before comparison was made with domestic bids, in accordance with departmental regulations applying to determinations under the "Buy American Act."
An additional 6-percent differential was added if the low domestic bidder indicated that equipment or materials would be produced in an area of substantial labor surplus, as determined by the Secretary of Labor.
The Bureau's engineering laboratories continued test and research programs to help solve design and construetion problems and to improve the economy and serviceability of Reclamation projects.
A combined retarding, air-entraining, and plasticizing agent for concrete, which had been subject to intensive laboratory and field testing, was used successfully as a retarder to facilitate lining operations at the Tecolote Tunnel on the Cachuma project in California and at a canal on the Gila project in Arizona where high temperatures tended to accelerate setting of the concrete.
A heated precipitation gage developed by design, planning, and research engineers was constructed on the Eklutna project in Alaska.
The gage, having a thermostatically controlled heating system, will operate unattended throughout the winter to provide valuable data for forecasting seasonal water yield inflow to Eklutna Lake.
In soils research, methods were developed for rapidly determining soil density and moisture content.
Included were radioisotope methods for density determinations, and calcium carbide, alcohol ignition, and alcohol hydrometer methods for moisture determinations.
Radioisotope methods were successfully used at Soap Lake, Washington, in studving the mixing characteristics of the lower level highly saline water with fresh water introduced in the upper level of the lake.
In protective coatings research, a zinc-silicate inorganic type of protective coating, particularly notable for its abrasion resistance, was found to be one of the more promising new materials under test in the laboratories.
In weed control research, tests of variously treated concrete slabs submerged in the Pole Hill Canal on the Colorado-Big Thompson project indicated that incorporation of sulphur in the surface of concrete at the time of casting of the slabs is beneficial to inhibiting algae growth.
During the year 106 laboratory reports were issued covering the subjects of research and testing of concrete materials, hydraulic laboratory studies, earth materials investigations, and protective coatings investigations.
The Bureau continued to contribute its technical resources and skills to the solution of problems of other public organizations and of private agencies.
Construction costs on Reclamation projects increased about 8.5 percent during fiscal year 1956.
Although adequate competition was received under most of the construction specifications and supply invitations for which bids were opened, bidding interest in all types of reclamation construction work continued to decrease from the interest shown in fiscal years 1954 and 1955.
The average number of bids per construction schedule, amounting to 8.5 in fiscal year 1954, dropped to 7 in fiscal year 1955, and to about 5.4 in fiscal year 1956.
Table 10 shows cost indexes for Bureau of Reclamation construction work based on the combined costs of material and labor supplied by contractors and materials and labor supplied by the Government.
During the fiscal year major facilities on 34 projects and minor facilities on 21 projects were inspected to assure that equipment and structures were in safe operating condition and were properly maintained.
Facilities on 9 projects were transferred from operation and maintenance by the Bureau to similar responsibility by the water users.
Facilities for an additional 18 projects were cleared for such transfer.
A total of 22 contracts for project repayment and water service was reviewed.
The project development program involves preparation of comprehensive plans for development of river basin resources and the investigation and planning of potential projects for the conservation and utilization of the water resources of the West.
It also includes detailed preconstruction work on newly authorized projects awaiting the initial allotment of construction funds.
During fiscal year 1956, the Bureau of Reclamation was engaged in comprehensive surveys in 13 basins throughout the West.
Of these, the studies in the San Luis Obispo County Basin and the Santa Ynez River Basin were completed and by the end of the fiscal year, field work on the Upper American River Basin survey was substantially completed.
Final review of the comprehensive report on the Arkansas-White-Red River Basins was completed by concerned Federal agencies and the report was transmitted to the Congress by the Director, Bureau of the Budget, on June 18, 1956.
Permanent authorization was provided for the Bureau's investigation program in Alaska which in the past had been carried forward on a year-to-year basis on language in the annual appropriation acts.
Feasibility reports were completed on the Norman project in Oklahoma, the Harlingen and Mercedes division of the Lower Rio Grande rehabilitation project in Texas and the Rio Grande and Weminuche Pass divisions of the San Luis Valley project in Colorado, and the reports were under review by the affected States and interested Federal agencies.
By the close of the year reports had been submitted to the Department for the Palisades reregulating dam and reservoir in Idaho and the San Angelo project in Texas preparatory to their being submitted to the States and Federal agencies and for the San Luis Valley unit of the Ultimate Central Valley project preparatory to its being submitted to the Bureau of the Budget.
Chief Joseph Dam project, Foster Creek division, Washington.
Michaud Flats project, Idaho.
Rogue River Basin project, Talent division, Oregon.
Santa Maria project, California.
Legislation was passed granting consent of the Congress to the negotiation of compacts between the States of Oregon and California regarding the Klamath River; the States of Kansas and Oklahoma concerning the Arkansas River; the States of Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, and Texas regarding the Red River; and the States of California and Nevada regarding the Truckee, Carson, and Walker Rivers.
Studies have been performed in several of the basic problem areas experienced in hydrologic investigations of proposed reclamation projects, encompassing the fields of flood control, sediment, water utilization, and evaporation.
Flood studies involving snowmelt and interflow problems and complex storm patterns were developed utilizing the Blackfoot and the Beaverhead River Basins in Montana as data source areas.
Investigation of evaporation along several lines has continued in collaboration with the Geological Survey.
The final report on the Lake Mead study was released to the public.
High-altitude studies at Granby Reservoir, and ultra-high-altitude study on Pikes Peak, both in Colorado, were initiated to assist in evaluating reservoir evaporation in the higher and more remote areas of the Western States.
Evaluation of river flow forecasting methods of the Bureau of Reclamation by comparison with those of other agencies was continued.
Investigation in collaboration with the Geological Survey of total sediment transport covered the computation of total sediment transport in alluvial streams for flows with no ice cover and temperatures of 32° F. to 39° F.
The Bureau of Reclamation is represented on two International Engineering Boards of the United States section of the International Joint Commission.
The Souris-Red Rivers Engineering Board continued its engineering studies of the Souris River for use of the Commission in its consideration of an apportionment of waters of that international stream between the United States and Canada under the Souris-Red Rivers reference of January 12, 1948.
During the fiscal year the Waterton-Belly Rivers Engineering Board was inactive in connection with the Waterton-Belly Rivers reference of the same date.
Greater efficiency in the maintenance of detailed work schedules and statistical services essential to the estimating, financing, accounting, and reporting of the Federal reclamation program was achieved by continued refinement of bookkeeping and reporting procedures in the Bureau during 1956 fiscal year.
Programing of operation and maintenance activities on an organizational rather than a functional basis was instituted and proved to be simpler to prepare and more informative than the method previously used.
Financial operations included plans for the preparation annually of a "Statement of Project Costs and Repayment"; a uniform guide for compliance factors, accounting procedures, and internal controls; study of developments in the field of electronics and other mechanical equipment; and centralization of accounting in regional offices.
Inquiries by the Bureau of the Budget and the introduction of legislation in the Congress indicated the possibility of a requirement to prepare appropriation requests on the basis of costs rather than obligations.
In anticipation of this change, studies were made to determine the applicability of existing scheduling procedures to such a requirement.
This analysis indicated that the Bureau's activity programs as presently prepared will meet the requirements of a cost-type budget presentation with little or no revision.
Briefs, Monthly Federal Civilian Employment, Bureau Quarterly Progress, Quarterly Office Budget—Employment, Statistical Appendix to Commissioner's Annual Report, Fund Tables, Commissioner's Cost Report and other related interim reports and chart exhibits on all activities as the official source for frequently required administrative and management data.
The Bureau's initial Annual Consolidated Financial Report for fiscal year 1955 was compiled.
Plans were completed for preparing manuscript and publishing new editions of the three related volumes entitled "Reclamation Project Feasibilities and Authorizations," “Reclamation Appropriation Acts and Allotments," and "Reclamation Repayment Histories and Payout Schedules," to bring these 1952 publications up to 1957 in accordance with the 5-year timing element of the Bureau's long-range statistical publication program.
Appropriations made available to the Bureau of Reclamation for fiscal year 1956 totaled $180,155,000 including $160,000 in supplemental funds to cover the cost of pay increases authorized by Publie Law 533.
This does not include revolving funds or in permanent appropriations.
The appropriation for 1956 was $16,948,000 more than was appropriated for fiscal year 1955.
With an unobligated balance of $17.3 million, plus funds advanced by water users, trust funds, and a continuing fund for emergency expenses, Fort Peck project, the money available to Reclamation was $208.6 million.
Of this amount there remained unobligated at the close of 1956 funds in the amount of $36.2 million.
Obligations for 1956 totaled $172.4 million or 83 percent of the obligations programed as compared with 94 percent of the program accomplished in 1955.
The 1956 Appropriation Act, as in recent years imposed certain restrictions upon the Bureau.
The Bureau was again directed not to initiate construction on transmission facilities in areas covered by power wheeling contracts unless the wheeling agencies were unable or unwilling to provide this service.
The limitation on the amount of money which may be expended for work by Government forces (force account work) was repeated in the 1956 act.
This limitation provided that not to exceed 12 percent of the allotment for any one project or unit of the Missouri River Basin project, with a maximum of $225,000 for any such project or unit, was to be so used.
Also again as in recent years a limitation was placed upon the amount of money that could be expended for information services.
By administrative determination this limitation was placed at $18,250.
1 Prior to fiscal year 1916 funds were made available to Reclamation Service by allotments from the reclamation fund, authorized by the Secretary of the Interior.
Allotments made prior to Fallon, Nev., Conference on July 27, 1907, were canceled and summary allotments issued.
Original amounts exeluded from total column.
Strengthening of the various segments of service elements in the Bureau organization was carried forward in 1956 to insure continuing efficient administration of the Federal reclamation program.
Responsibility for Bureau activities is vested in the Commissioner of Reclamation.
The Assistant Commissioner and Chief Engineer directs operations of the engineering center in Denver, Colo.
Regional offices under the supervision of Regional Directors are located at Boise, Idaho; Sacramento, Calif.
Boulder City, Nev.
Salt Lake City, Utah; Amarillo, Tex.
Billings, Mont.
An Alaska District Office, headed by a district manager, is maintained in Juneau.
Examination of internal functions and activities was continued in an effort to identify and, where feasible, to discontinue any such functions and activities which were in competition with private enterprise.
As a concrete example of the results of this undertaking, it was decided privately owned printing plants in the Nevada-California area could adequately handle printing formerly performed by our own employees in that area, and such plants were invited to bid to perform this work without competition from our own printers.
During the year the Bureau disposed of unneeded real property having an acquisition cost of $3,761,105, resulting in a substantial reduction in costs of operating and maintaining such property.
The Bureau disposed of 750 housing units, 22 percent of its housing, which were either no longer needed in connection with program activities or were located in areas where private housing was available.
Disposal of trailer houses and demountable-type houses was curtailed in anticipation of an expanded construction program.
Several of such units were rented to other bureaus of the Department and other Government agencies on a short-term basis.
Retention of these units paid handsome dividends, as nearly all have been put to use at new construction sites within the Bureau, thus saving the acquisition cost of replacement units.
Operating offices of the Bureau were established, abolished, or adjusted as to scope and staff in keeping with the progress of the Bureau's program.
Principal activity in this respect related to the formation of field organizations and staffing requirements for the units of the Upper Colorado River storage project.
The Incentive Awards Program increased in all respects.
A total of 831 suggestions was received from employees.
Of those evaluated, 362, or 46 percent, were adopted.
Tangible savings of $132,028, plus intangible benefits, were realized for which $9,630 was paid in cash awards.
Superior performance awards were presented to 159 emplovees for outstanding performance of duties; and four special act awards were granted for specific improvements in Bureau operations.
Considerable intangible benefits were gained through the operation of the incentive awards program.
These were in the form of better employee morale, increased job satisfaction, and a greater sense of achievement through the wise use of manpower, money, and materials.
The volume of stored Bureau records was reduced within the fiseal year from 123,000 cubic feet to 112,000 cubic feet.
Savings of approximately $155,000 in the cost of space and equipment alone resulted from the disposition of 18,500 cubic feet of documents by destruction or by transfer to low-cost space.
In response to 3,300 requests for the Bureau's publications and informational material received from individuals in this country and in foreign countries, more than 12,000 copies of technical publications and informational pamphlets were sold at Denver or distributed from there.
Sales of Bureau publications at Denver totaled $24,300, approximately one-half of this total being made to foreign countries.
Sales of publications sold by the Bureau as agent for the Superintendent of Documents totaled $7,800.
In response to 800 requests for Bureau publications, the Publications Branch at Washington, D. C., distributed 12,500 copies.
Of these requests, 150 were of congressional origin for 545 publications and 170 were from agencies of the executive branch of the Federal Government for 1,425 copies.
The branch at Washington received 160 requests for photographs for illustration or exhibition purposes.
One thousand four hundred prints were provided for reproduction in Bureau publications, non-Government text books and encyclopedias, various agricultural and engineering magazines and newspapers, and to supplement exhibits and lectures.
Requests by mail and in person for visual materials were also received from congressional offices and from agencies of the executive branch of the Federal Government.
Some of this material was published, and some was exhibited or used to illustrate lectures in the United States or abroad.
Six hundred ninety-six films were distributed to television stations, agricultural and engineering institutions, water users' associations, organizations of farmers, and to conventions in the United States and abroad.
The greatest number of requests were for the Bureau's construction film, Hoover Dam.
Coordination and liaison was maintained throughout fiscal year 1956 with the Department of the Interior, the Renegotiation Board, General Accounting Office, the Department of Labor, and other agencies on matters relating to the Bureau's activities.
The Bureau participated in the work of the Departmental Advisory Board on Safety and in the activities of the Departmental Safety Council.
A highly successful record was established by the Bureau in its participation in the National No-Accident Week.
An award to the construction forces of Webster Dam, Kansas, for 4 years without a single disabling lost-time injury or motor-vehiele accident was approved by the Secretary of the Interior, and a gold seal certificate and citation of outstanding safety performance presented shortly after the close of the fiscal year.
The Bureau's participation in professional, scientific, and technical activities, and committee assignments was reviewed and coordinated.
A grant was awarded to the Bureau by the National Science Foundation for basic research in concrete.
Arrangements were carried out for participation and the presentation of papers at international meetings of the World Power Conference, the International Commission on Large Dams, CIGRE, and the International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage, and for the exchange of technical and scientific information with these organizations.
During the past year added emphasis was placed on the constructive aspects of audit reporting, both as to quality and effectiveness of reports, and the highlighting for management of the more significant segments of audit determinations.
Special effort was also concentrated on the major aspects of financial administration and the adequacy, accuracy, and effectiveness of the accounting system.
With management support, timely and speedy consideration has been given to the recommendations in the audit reports.
Fifty-four field audit assignments were completed during fiscal year 1956.
Included were 40 financial audits of individual projects; 3 financial audits of water users’ organizations performed at their request; 2 special audits; 2 audits of power and multipurpose operations of project units; and 3 special reports.
Members of the Comptroller's staff took an active part in effectuating compliance by the Bureau of Reclamation with Public Law 841, 80th Congress.
This legislation directed that expenditures for the Boulder Canyon project be segregated as between project and nonproject items.
This work required the cooperative effort of the Washington, regional, and project offices.
It has been completed and the provisions of the law have been fully complied with.
In connection with the segregation of nonproject investment of the Boulder Canyon project, members of the Comptroller's staff also prepared an overall reconciliation of costs to funds.
Fiscal year 1956, with its new project authorizations, brought about a need for increased attention to the conservation and effective utilization of the skills and experience possessed by career Bureau employees.
This led to the initiation of action in several areas, all designed to aid in the effective accomplishment of Bureau objectives in natural resources development.
Bureau employment increased from 9,607 full-time employees at the beginning of the year to 10,018 at the end, with almost all of the increase coming in the final month.
Programs for student and beginning engineer training were reformulated.
Through these programs, and with increased attention given to college recruitment, the Bureau hopes to recruit, develop, and retain the professional and administrative engineering talent needed for accomplishing future Bureau programs.
A total of 58 beginning engineers were hired during the year and 342 students in engineering were appointed for summer work.
An inventory was made of the development needs of all Bureau employees in grades GS-12 through GS-14.
A summary sheet was obtained on each employee showing previous training and experience and listing kinds of further assignments that would ready him for more responsible positions.
This information has been used to work out several exchange assignments which will permit employees to acquire broader experience.
Further actions along these lines will be taken as circumstances permit.
This will contribute to a more flexible, versatile, and effective work force.
Initial steps were taken leading to the establishment, early in fiscal year 1957, of an employee roster covering all employees in grades GS-9 through GS-14.
This will provide for matching employee skills and position vacancies on a bureauwide basis.
It will help to assure employees of continuity of employment and improve the manner in which they are considered and selected for filling vacancies.
In fiscal year 1956, the Bureau of Reclamation continued its program of technical assistance at the request of the International Cooperation Administration which took over the work formerly administered by FOA, TCA, and Mutual Security Agency.
The Bureau program includes three broad phases, (1) the training and development of foreign nationals in the techniques, processes, and practices of the Bureau of Reclamation, (2) the undertaking of laboratory studies, design review and other technical advice to agencies of foreign government, and (3) the selection of Bureau employees to act as technical advisers and to be part of actual work teams engaged in the training of foreign nationals and advising Government bureaus in planning and construction of irrigation and power projects in other lands.