THE DYNAMIC -ECONOMIC STRENGTH of modern-day America depends upon the full and creative development of our country's natural resource base—our mineral wealth, our vast plains, our timber-laden forests, and our flowing rivers and streams.
In peace and war, these resources have met the needs of our Nation and have provided the sinews for the most highly developed industrial machine the world has known.
Our resources, however, are far from inexhaustible, and as our national output rises, corresponding depletions are made in the storehouse of nature's bounty.
Predictions are being made, in fact, that by the middle of the 21st century, the world's population will have inereased 4 or 5 times.
In this world of tomorrow, the predictions continue, people will face a grim struggle for existence, with their food and water in short supply and their reserves of many minerals exhausted.
No one really knows, of course, whether such predictions will ever come true.
Human resourcefulness, ingenuity and invention should be able to prevent such a calamity.
Our Nation, however, must work creatively to provide for the realistic development of its natural resource base in order to meet the growing demands of today's citizens and to pass along our resource heritage to generations of unborn Americans.
This is the task of the Department of the Interior, which has centered its activities on helping meet constructively both the immediate and long-range requirements of our expanding economy.
Although directed toward harnessing natural resources for the peaceful pursuits of our people, the contribution of the Department's efforts to our national security in a troubled world cannot be overestimated.
Our economy is changing while it expands at an accelerating pace.
Science and technology, together with a rising standard of living, are creating new demands for goods and serviees which were unknown just a decade ago.
As a result, the total drain on our natural resources will continue to increase in the years ahead.
In 1975, our population will need about 450 billion gallons of water per day—about twice as much as is consumed today.
Electric power capacity will have to be increased from 123 million kilowatts in 1956 to 321 million kilowatts by 1975.
This task of developing our natural resources to meet future requirements is gigantic, and the possibilities of irretrievable losses are ever present in man's effort to utilize nature's gifts.
Moreover, major decisions relating to the development of our natural resources have implications for the distant future.
For example, investments in a multipurpose dam may yield returns over many decades.
Likewise, the failure to initiate a watershed or fishery-protection program may place a region at a permanent disadvantage.
Sound planning is essential if we are to derive full benefit from our natural resources.
The alternative is waste, inefficieney, and shortages.
Resource development projects have become larger and more complex in recent years.
For example, construetion and operation of a multiple-purpose dam may involve decisions on the use of water for irrigation, for industrial and household use, for electric power, for commercial and sports fisheries, and for boating, swimming, and hunting.
These decisions coneerning the competing uses for water cannot, and should not, be made by the Department of the Interior or the Federal Government alone.
They require the closest cooperation among all groups and individuals, both private and publie, if we are to achieve the maximum development and optimum use of this most vital natural resource.
Similar problems arise from the competing demands for the use of publie land resources.
While in many instances it is possible to provide for multiple uses of the same land, certain cases may arise in which the proposed uses are in such sharp confliet that a specifie choice must be made.
The most serious problems facing our natural resources industries arise, paradoxically, as a result of the high level of economie activity which we have been enjoying.
The unprecedented output of our farms, factories, and mines is causing tremendous drains on some of our basie resources.
Some of the conventional sources of electric power are becoming less abundant and more costly, and most of the nation's low-cost hydroelectric power sites have been developed.
The Federal Power Commission has estimated that in the next 20 years, falling water can provide only 81½ percent of our new electric generating capacity, except at a substantially higher cost.
We must continue our unremitting search for new sources of low-cost energy if we are to meet our growing needs.
Our inereasing consumption of minerals is causing heavy depletion of our highest grade low-cost ores.
Unless we can find ways of using economically our low-grade ores and making greater use of those minerals which are still abundant, we will eneounter sharply rising costs for our minerals and fuels.
The economic forces which are exerting an upward pressure on the costs of producing electric power and minerals are also making themselves felt in the development and use of our water resources.
If we do not conserve and use our water supply more effectively, some regions of our country face the prospect of paying an excessively high price for water.
While many activities of the Department of the Interior deal with material things, we know that achievement of the good life for all citizens involves more than goods and services.
There are countless opportunities for growth and fulfillment which are offered by our great outdoor recreational areas, our historic shrines, and our fish and wildlife resources.
Our rapid economie growth is having a profound impact not only on our energy, water, and mineral resources but also on our scenie, wilderness, and historie areas, as well as on our fish and wildlife habitats.
With rising incomes, more spare time, and better transportation, increasing millions of people are visiting our national parks, other recreational areas, and hunting and fishing grounds.
To accommodate this rapidly growing throng of American families seeking pleasure in their country's vast outdoors, the facilities of our National Park Service must be improved and increased impetus must be placed on the development of our fish and wildlife resources.
The sections of this report which follow describe the programs of the Department of the Interior for the development of our Nation's natural resource base to meet those challenges of the future which have been briefly described in the preceding pages.
An expanding minerals resource base continues to be essential to the military security and economic health of our Nation, both today and in the future.
Maintaining these resources becomes more complex and more important as our better-grade sources of metals and liquid fuels become depleted.
In this area, the Department of the Interior bears heavy responsibilities.
The Department conducts many programs to discharge its duties in the development and expansion of the Nation's mineral resource base.
It gathers and interprets facts on our domestic mineral position, conducts scientific and technological research and investigation, and provides financial aid for private exploration for new sources of critical and strategic minerals and metals.
In addition, the Department acts as minerals adviser to other Federal agencies and conduets programs to promote health and safety standards in mineral industries.
The diversity of our current industrial requirements for metals and fuels, as well as conservation responsibilities for the needs of future generations, complicate the Department's duties in the realm of mineral resources.
In presenting its long-range minerals program to Congress in 1957, for example, the Department listed 75 mineral-commodity groups, each presenting special technological and economic problems.
Although the overall task of developing adequate mineral supplies remains constant, there also are many immediate problems which arise because of rapidly changing conditions.
The United States at one time, for instance, was considered deficient in rare-earth minerals, but large reserves have now been discovered.
Demands for special fuels and new minerals and alloys have been created as air-defense emphasis shifts.
New advances in the field of medicine have established additional markets for high-purity metals, and the peaceful application of nuclear energy requires the development of many different minerals and mineral products.
For Government and industry, the Department collects and interprets facts on mineral reserves, production, and future requirements both in the United States and abroad.
Many decisions affecting our economic well-being and military preparedness are based on such data provided to policy planners.
Factual information on our country's present and future mineral position also must be accompanied by recommendations to effect remedies for existing and predicted deficiencies.
Our Nation's ability to maintain adequate supplies requires technological programs, long-range in nature, for the discovery of new deposits and for new ways of developing our existing supplies most efficiently.
In this field, many programs involve resurveys of submarginal deposit areas, as well as new methods of processing complex and low-grade materials.
Thus, the Department is engaged in a never-ending study of all metallic and nonmetallic minerals, rich and poor in quality, to ascertain whether these products can be converted for economic industrial use.
Initial production by private industry at the San Manuel copper mine in Arizona in 1956 climaxed a Department of the Interior effort to develop a new source of supply of this important metal.
This giant copper deposit—over a half billion tons of low-grade ore, as well as deposits of molybdenum, gold and silver—was discovered and delineated by Department geologists and engineers in an extensive investigation.
A similar Department investigation resulted in the development of the Nation's only cobalt mine.
Through the work of the Department of the Interior, many submarginal deposits may become commercial mines in the future.
Years often pass between discovery of deposits and initial production; so an adequate appraisal of potential resources must be a constant part of our effort to broaden our natural resource base.
The Department of the Interior has long recognized the importance of developing additional sources of minerals to meet our ever-growing needs, and since 1951 it has promoted the development of critical and strategic minerals through loans to private industry designed to encourage exploration for new sources of supply.
Under this program, an orderly search continues to develop new reserves of raw materials needed to replace supplies which are being rapidly exhausted.
The Department, upon approval by its geologists and engineers, supplies a share of the cost of new exploratory work.
Repayment of these loans is provided by royalties which are based on the net value of production derived from the newly discovered properties.
While this program was developed during the Korean emergency, the Department recognizes its importance and is recommending new legislation so cooperation between industry and Government can be maintained in the continuing development of essential mineral sources.
Since 1879, the Department of the Interior has had responsibility for providing geologic data necessary for the discovery and orderly development of our mineral and mineral fuels resources.
Geologic mapping, basic to all geologic investigations, is being done at a rate of 40,000 square miles per year, but the need for such data outstrips even this rate of progress.
Other geologie researeh programs in the Department contributing to the development of mineral resources include (1) appraisal of known and potential deposits in mineral-bearing districts; (2) investigation of areas geologically favorable to the occurrence of useful deposits; (3) coordinated long-term field and laboratory researeh on geologic processes related to the concentration of mineral deposits; (4) researeh in mineralogy, petrology, geophysics and geochemistry, and the practical application of these skills in seeking new resourees; (5) upon occasion, physical exploration to test geologie concepts developed during research investigations and to gather useful data on occurrence, form and size of some types of mineral deposits.
Fundamental mining studies concerning metals and solid fuels also contribute to the broadening of our resources base.
Such studies involve the inseparable factors of safety, economy, and efficiency.
A decade ago, for example, the Department of the Interior began the promotion of roof-bolting as a safety measure to curb roof-fall accidents.
Since then, it has become evident that this method of roof support also euts mining costs and increases recovery efficieney.
In bituminous-coal fields, the Department is studying the use of a modified long-wall mining method which, under some conditions, has significantly increased productivity and recovery.
Current anthracite-mining research may result in the development of a continuous mining machine which can be used effectively.
Additional emphasis also is being placed on the hydraulic mining, transporting, and hoisting of coal, the completion of a roof-control system for mechanized longwall operations, and the development of a rock planer which will be suitable for mining coal and other minerals.
The Department of the Interior has provided the major leadership in many fields of metallurgical research.
Most recently, the Department developed a process for upgrading high-iron bauxite—as part of the continuing program to utilize lowgrade ores—which has been ineorporated into a commercial production plant now under construction.
Private production of titanium and zirconium now is underway in the United States, using processes developed by the Department's Bureau of Mines.
An extensive search is underway for commercially feasible methods of treating our extensive deposits of low-grade manganese ores.
The Department is now engaged also in a quest for synthetie minerals.
In this new venture, progress would strengthen the Nation's resource base and simultaneously lessen our dependence upon sources beyond our shores.
Experiments in producing synthetic minerals, although spurred by immediate defense requirements, have long-range economic significance.
The Department's efforts to produce synthetic mica and asbestos, for example, could lead to a secure abundant supply of these materials.
In solid fuels, the Department of the Interior conducts a broad research program to strengthen the Nation's fuel resources.
This research embraces the whole range of fuels from anthracite through bituminous and lignite, for chemical production as well as energy utilization.
Technoeconomic studies also are conducted to facilitate the expansion of the coal industry to meet rising future requirements.
Many of the Department's scientific studies have resulted in new solid-fuels tchniques such as development of more efficient coalpreparation methods, making it possible to obtain a satisfactory produet from raw coal which is laden with impurities.
Particularly significant also is progress to which the Department has contributed in making formerly unsuitable coals and blends usable for cokemaking.
To broaden our resource base further, the Department is developing techniques for upgrading and utilizing subbituminous coal and lignites of the West.
Gasification of anthracite is also being emphasized to increase the usefulness of this product.
Petroleum and natural gas are indispensible to our economy and will remain a vital energy source for many decades to come.
Development of these fuels has been of continuing concern to the Department of the Interior.
The Department estimates that about 300 billion barrels of oil and a correspondingly large volume of natural gas will ultimately be produced in the United States.
In line with past history, new discoveries of reserves and new techniques for more efficient recovery will prompt upward revisions.
As a landlord, the Department controls wide areas of the public domain on which deposits of gas and oil have been and will continue to be discovered.
On the outer Continental Shelf, the Department also holds stewardship over vast reserves of gas and oil.
Through the years, policies to effectuate the leasing and development of oil on public lands have been in force, and more recently, the Department has moved into the field of leasing offshore drilling rights.
It is the continuing interest of the Department of the Interior to encourage efficient recovery methods and conservation practices of these energy reserves within the public domain.
The Department is also the custodian of vast deposits of oil shale.
The tremendous resources of liquid fuels locked in oil shale far exceed the total potential of liquid petroleum reserves.
Much of the pioneering work involved in the recovery of oil from oil shale has been done by the scientists, geologists, engineers, and technicians of the Department.
The Department's oil and gas activities have stimulated exploration and development of oil and gas.
Through the promotion of efficient production methods and effective utilization techniques, significant contributions have been made in broadening the liquid-fuels resource base of our expanding economy.
Developing a long-range helium program is one of the most important responsibilities of the Department of the Interior.
Demand for this inert, lightweight gas—of which the Department is the sole large-scale producer—has risen 500 percent over the past 10 years to a record peak of 300 million cubie feet annually.
Federal agencies use about 75 percent of all helium produced.
The remainder is utilized by private industry under Government contracts, with the exception of small but important quantities used for medical research.
Increased requirements have seriously depleted Government-owned helium reserves which, before World War II, seemed adequate for more than a century.
The reserves have shrunk to about a decade's supply at present rates of consumption.
Helium-bearing natural gas is being produced in greater quantities, but the helium is being lost because the gas is burned without having passed through a helium-processing plant.
With other Federal agencies, the Department of the Interior is giving serious attention to developing a long-range program for the conservation of our helium resources.
In 1957, the first step toward improving the Nation's helium position was accomplished when the Department's Bureau of Mines initiated recovery of helium from privately owned natural gas at its Exell, Tex., plant.
Continuing efforts should enable both Government and industry to enjoy the fullest possible technical advantages obtainable from our helium resources.
Topographic maps are important basic tools in resources development, and completing and maintaining the national topographic map series is a major activity of the Department of the Interior.
Sueh fundamental mapping not only meets needs of the military services but supports civil requirements as well, including resources development.
It provides the accurate terrain information so essential to an inventory and evaluation of both mineral and water resources.
It also serves in the development of these resources through mining and the construction of water-supply, irrigation, and hydroelectric projects and for the development of other resources such as soils and forests.
Developing safeguards against the hazards, natural and manmade, which beset workmen in mineral industries has been a major responsibility of the Bureau of Mines of the Department of the Interior for many years.
Federal and State inspections, protective devices, proper clothing, and mandatory safety requirements help to promote safety in mineral industries.
The Department, in addition, has promoted accident-prevention training as a most potent weapon against occupational hazards in the minerals industry.
Our Nation's resource base is a composite of human and physical elements, and no civilization—regardless of nature's endowments— can progress without healthy skilled manpower.
While the safeguarding of manpower is basically humanitarian, tangible returns in the form of increased effieieney and better health add to the more effective utilization and development of our natural resources.
Water, like the air we breathe, is essential to the survival of all life.
Without adequate supplies of water, our factories would grind to a halt, and our fertile fields would turn into barren Saharas.
Our civilization depends upon water, and modern-day uses of water touch almost every phase of human activity.
The Department of the Interior has vital responsibilities for the development and conservation of the Nation's water resources, and it administers many programs in an effort to guarantee an adequate supply of water for present and future generations.
Three basic factors in our expanding national economy emphasize the need for increased water resources development in future years.
Greater use by home and farm and industry is increasing water consumption from an approximate 250 billion gallons daily to an estimated 450 billion gallons per day in 1975.
Population projections show that the country will arrive at a population level of 220 million as early as 1975.
If the present rate continues, we may expect that the population will double again in the second half of the century as it did in the first half.
The increased demand for water by such an expanding population is selfevident.
Despite present erop surpluses, increased water demand for irrigation use is certain in the near future.
Nearly 11/ million acres of good farmland are lost each year to such things as housing developments, airports, factories, highways, and shopping centers.
By 1975 more than 20 million acres of present farmland will be out of agricultural production, and during the same period, our population will have been increased by nearly 60 million people.
Long-range planning for an orderly process of resource development is necessary, not only to maintain, but to increase the food supply from our dwindling farm acreage.
Cooperation and coordination at Federal, State, and local levels in planning the development of our natural resources is of tremendous importance to the Nation.
Greatly increased water demands for municipal, industrial, domestie and agricultural purposes is a matter of immediate concern.
Continued rapid growth in population in the United States presages even greater water resources development to supply future economie demands.
This is particularly true in the West, where population and industry are expanding more rapidly than elsewhere in the Nation, despite the additional problems posed by an average precipitation which is considerably lower than elsewhere in the United States.
These and other factors in present-day multipurpose water resources development are opening a new era in national economies.
To meet this coming challenge, our river water must be utilized to the fullest possible extent before it is permitted to flow into the sea.
This objective can be best attained by cooperative arrangements between Federal, State, and local governments, private industry, associations, and individual citizens in the planning, construction, and operation of water-use facilities.
In 1847 the Mormons undertook the first irrigation of land in the United States.
From that beginning, irrigation spread throughout the Western States, and by 1900 about 71/ million acres of land had been placed under irrigation, largely by private initiative and financing.
By that time, the most simple low-cost systems of water diversion and distribution had been built.
The growing need of fnaneial and technical aid for further developments in the West culminated in the enactment by Congress and approval by President Theodore Roosevelt of the Reclamation Act of 1902 under which, as amended and supplemented, the water resources development program of the Department of the Interior operates today.
Today, more than 27 million acres of land are under irrigated cultivation in the Western States, and approximately 7 million acres, about one-fourth of the total irrigated area, receive water from facilities constructed by the Department's Bureau of Reclamation.
A most significant evolution in the growth and development of the West has been the transition from the simple, single-purpose irrigation project to the planned multiple-use projects now used to fully develop available water resources.
Hoover Dam on the Colorado River not only assured a water supply for the great metropolitan area of southern California; it also provided power, irrigation and recreation facilities.
The Salt Lake Metropolitan District has contracted for a large share of the water from the multipurpose Provo River project in Utah, and several municipalities in California and in the Great Plains States are receiving many direct benefits from the storage provided in reclamation reservoirs.
These municipal and industrial water users repay the Government in full, plus interest, for the Federal investment in their behalf.
Where irrigation was once the only consideration, today's multipurpose natural resourees developments also provide outstanding benefits in flood control, power, recreation, industrial, and domestic consumption.
Reclamation reservoirs are used to impound spring snowmelt and rain runoff which would otherwise go unused and cause millions of dollars worth of life and property damage.
Hydroelectrie power development at multipurpose dams contributes to the energy supply of growing areas.
More than 10 million pleasure seekers annually visit the water playgrounds provided by reclamation reservoirs in the West.
In many instances, fish and wildlife values are inereased by reservoir development.
In 1956, when great areas of the West were suffering from an unusually severe drought, the stabilizing influence of irrigation was plainly evident.
Irrigated farms constituted the backbone of produetion even though their own water deliveries were sharply restricted.
The Rio Grande project, for example, delivered less than 1 acrefoot of water per acre, whereas the normal requirement is nearly 3 acre-feet.
This small amount, however, was enough to stave off total disaster.
Irrigation also made a major contribution to the efforts to save basic breeding herds by sustaining nearly one million head of cattle and a quarter-million head of sheep.
To encourage planning for development of additional reclamation projects, in step with the future economic needs of the Nation, is one of the most important tasks confronting the Department of the Interior.
Projected construction schedules provide for a multiple-purpose water development program which will impound 58,000,000 acre-feet of our unused water resources—enough to supply the irrigation requirements of more than 11½2 million acres of land.
The Colorado River storage project, upon which construction has already begun, is a $760 million development, the largest single reclamation project ever to be approved by the Congress.
Preliminary studies are nearly complete for the development of the Garrison diversion unit of the Missouri River Basin project.
This plan contemplates a 60-year construction schedule for conveying water from existing Garrison Reservoir on the Missouri River to more than 1 million acres of land in North and South Dakota.
Completion of construetion work on the Trinity division of the Central Valley project in California will make available an additional 1,190,000 acre-feet of water for presently irrigated lands.
A comprehensive analysis of the Texas water needs and a broad program to meet them is two-thirds complete.
Based on this study, fully coordinated water-supply and flood-control projects will be developed.
As administrator of the Small Reclamation Projects Act of 1956, the Department of the Interior processes loans and grants to irrigation distriets, publie agencies, and the States for the construction of projects similar to those of the regular Federal reelamation program.
Experiments are being conducted to develop a practical and economical “chemical shield" to reduce evaporation from lakes and reservoirs.
Western reservoirs lose between 3 and 8 feet of surface water each year through evaporation, and laboratory studies indicate it may be possible to save up to 65 percent of evaporated water with a chemical surface coating without harmfully affecting aquatic life.
Considering the hundreds of thousands of acres of water surface area in this country, the water savings could be tremendous since the successful use of such a film could have the same result as doubling reservoir capacity.
Salt cedars and other water-using serub vegetation, which cost the American irrigation farmer an estimated $251/2 million loss each year, also are subjects of special weed control and eradication studies.
Loss of water through seepage is another problem currently under attack by experiments for the development of low-cost canal linings.
Private business concerns, donating time, equipment, and materials, have rendered valuable cooperation in this research program.
Thus far, the research has resulted in several million dollars in water savings on Federal reclamation projects alone.
In the last analysis, wise development of America's water resources will require planning, teamwork, and continued progress in the field of conservation and reclamation to assure adequate supplies of this important commodity to the ultimate consumers—the farmers, industries, and cities—who are dependent upon its supply.
One answer to the growing problem of adequate water supplies is the development of new sources.
A practically inexhaustible new source exists in the waters of the oceans.
Additional great supplies could be provided by the saline waters of inland areas.
The problem is to extract fresh water from the salt water sources at a cost low enough to make possible large-scale use.
Processes are now under development which appear economically promising.
These include: Multiple-effect evaporation, vaporcompression distillation, flash distillation, solar distillation, separation by freezing, and several membrane processes.
Process development is carried out by both private and governmental organizations having interest in saline water conversion.
The Department is working with the Atomie Energy Commission to determine possible ways in which improved conversion processes can be combined with the generation of atomic energy to offer an overall economic advantage.
As the cost of converting saline water is reduced through research and development, the demand for and the use of converted saline waters will inerease rapidly.
In the United States, the initial use of additional converted sea water will probably be industrial, and as the costs are reduced, some municipal uses and selected agricultural uses should occur, especially as a supplement to existing supplies.
The Southwestern Power Administration operates an extensive high-voltage electric power transmission system which interconnects Federal hydroelectric powerplants and provides for the integration of Federal and non-Federal power systems in the area.
It markets electrie power from the Federal transmission system and also through transmission capacity of non-Federal agencies whieh is made available under contractual arrangements.
Power generated at floodcontrol projects of the Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army, is thereby integrated with power from non-Federal systems to secure an economical and reliable source of electric energy for customers of the Government throughout States in the central Southwest.
In the interest of conservation of our natural resources, comprehensive planning is performed in connection with hydroelectric generation and other purposes for proper coordination in use of water stored in the several Federal reservoirs.
Southeastern Power Administration contributes to comprehensive water resource development programs in the 10 Southeastern States primarily through the marketing of hydroelectric power and energy produced at projects operated by the Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army.
Southeastern Power Administration's power marketing program provides for the generation and integration of power produced from flood-control projects of the Corps of Engineers through contractual arrangements which best meet the needs in the area and provide the most economical power supply.
Full consideration is given to the characteristies and location of all power-generating facilities in the area and the regional power requirements.
The Federal projects generally are operated to produce peaking power.
Energy is made available on the basis of long-range and dayto-day operational studies showing the most efficient use of available water, and power is dispatched on this basis in accordance with the needs of the pewer systems into which such power is delivered.
In furtherance of the optimum use of all resources, the Administration contributes to the planning and operational phases of river basin developments with particular regard to power and its coordination with other uses.
The primary function of the Bonneville Power Administration is to market the electric power and energy produced at hydroelectrie projects operated by the Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army, and the Bureau of Reclamation.
The Pacifie Northwest is a region dependent upon hydroelectric power to a greater degree than any other area in the United States of comparable size.
Because of the inadequacy of the fuel supplies and the availability of a tremendous hydroelectric potential, the Pacific Northwest has developed and utilized hydroelectric power as an energy base.
This area possesses approximately 35 percent of the hydroelectric potential of the United States and approximately 90 percent of the electric energy produced there comes from falling water.
Not only does the Northwest depend upon water for most of its electric energy but it utilizes a far greater proportion of electric power in its energy base than any other part of the United States.
In the Northwest electric power supplies almost 30 percent of the total energy used in manufacturing compared to slightly less than 5 percent for the entire Nation.
The Bonneville Power Administration provides the means of marketing the electric energy developed at Federal hydroelectric projects in the Columbia River Basin.
The Bonneville transmission grid with approximately 7,500 cireuit miles of line forms the main high-voltage transmission system for the Northwest region.
This transmission system distributes the power generated at Federal hydroelectric projects to industries, cooperatives, public utility districts, and private utilities.
Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia, covering an area of approximately 700,000 square miles.
The Northwest Power Pool integrates these 11 utilities to make the most effective use of the water resources available.
One of the most important contributions of the Northwest Power Pool to resource development is the conservation of water, made possible by the pool interconnections.
With the interconnected pool, water in excess of the loads and reservoir capacity of one utility can be used to generate power to be delivered to other utilities which may store water in their own reservoirs for later use.
The ability of the transmission grid to supply electric energy to widely scattered parts of the Northwest makes it unnecessary to build standby steam-generating facilities in those areas where streamflow conditions make hydroelectric generation inadequate for certain periods each year.
This results in a reduetion in the investment required for generating facilities as well as a saving of nonreplaceable energy sources such as coal, oil, and natural gas.
In line with the Report of the Presidential Advisory Committee on Water Resources Policy, which stresses the need for more water resources data and for accelerated programs in research and interpretation, the Department's Geological Survey scientists and engineers have inereased the amount and tempo of work under way to fill these needs.
Following efforts to determine the tremendous water evaporation losses, studies are now being made on the value of monomolecular films on reservoir surfaces to act as an evaporation suppressant.
Other research teams are investigating the effect on water supplies of worthless upland vegetal cover in arid regions.
Survey investigations into recharging underground aquifers— adding water which would otherwise be wasted to subsurface storage where it can be held without evaporation loss until again brought to the surface—hold much promise for water conservation.
At several points in continental United States and Alaska, researchers also are watching glacier growth (or recession) to develop techniques of interpreting the significance of glaciers in relation to available water supplies and long range trends in precipitation.
As steward of the public domain, the Department of the Interior, through its Bureau of Land Management, is responsible for managing and developing nearly 477 million acres of unreserved and unappropriated federally owned lands which lie principally in Alaska and the 11 Far Western States.
The land itself, the minerals it harbors, and the grasses, wildlife, forests, and water it supports, constitute a large portion of our Nation's natural resources.
The pressures of increasing population, rapid advances in technology, and modern living impose an ever-growing demand upon our natural stores of raw materials, and upon the land for agricultural, industrial, recreational and urban uses.
Our public lands are playing an increasingly significant part in satisfying this demand and in contributing to the continued prosperity of our Nation.
Prudent disposal and progressive development of the public lands and their inherent natural wealth, for the greatest benefit to present and future generations, is the fundamental principle which guides the Department in its stewardship of our public lands resource.
The various functional programs which are designed to achieve these objectives are as diverse and technical as,are the demands on the land and its resources made by our society and our economy.
These programs of comprehensive balanced resource use, development, administration, and disposal are flexible enough to permit orderly expansion or contraction as the demand for program intensity fluctuates.
It is essential that development of this great landwealth be a cooperative undertaking and the Department encourages development of the public domain and its resources by State and local governments, by individuals, and by groups of citizens.
Where certain resources, sueh as minerals, are essential to the Nation's welfare, the Department retains regulatory control over their development and use to guard against waste and depletion.
Where other Federal programs can more economically develop the greatest potential of these lands in the best national interest, they are withdrawn and reserved for management by other bureaus of the Department of the Interior and the Federal Government.
While the public lands remain under the control of the Bureau of Land Management, a comprehensive program of conservation, protection, development, and management operates to increase their productivity and enhance their economic value.
Aceurate identification of land areas by location and delimiting boundaries is essential to the orderly and effective management of land and the development of associated natural resources.
Cadastral survey operations of the Bureau of Land Management create, reestablish, and identify the public land boundaries, dividing the land into manageable economic units.
Surveys have been extended over large areas of the public domain to permit orderly exploration, location and development of oil, gas, uranium, gold, silver, lead and other mineral resources.
Work on leasing maps and the identification of coast lines to facilitate the development of petroleum reserves which underlie the submerged outer Continental Shelf lands of the United States also has assumed a prominent role in the cadastral survey program.
The location of the boundaries of the Federal rangelands, a major portion of the public domain in the United States, also is essential to the development of their forage, water, and soils.
Through a system of field investigation, Federal lands and their natural resources are examined and evaluated to determine their use potential, and public-land laws and mining and mineral leasing laws provide the framework through which the Department identifies the highest use potential of the public domain.
Classification standards determine whether the public lands will be opened to disposal under the nonmineral public land laws.
Laws authorizing land disposal are designed to encourage development of the land and its resources by states or by private ownership.
The authority to classify lands for retention in Federal ownership forms the primary basis under which the Government develops the material wealth of lands to be retained, insures their use for the benefit of the national economy, and prevents deterioration and waste in the interest of future generations.
The maintenance of records which accurately reflect the history, status, and use of lands and resources is requisite to the orderly development of the public domain.
The Department maintains the basic land records, which date to the origin of the United States and are the legal title source for more than 1,800,000,000 acres of private and publicly owned lands.
Deterioration from age and increased use have required the revision of records and recording techniques to meet present-day requirements and to insure their permanent preservation.
Techniques and practices to develop the forage-producing capacity of the public rangelands include brush removal, reseeding, moistureretaining soil treatment and conservative grazing use.
A 20-year conservation program is now being carried out to reduce soil erosion and prevent the unnecessary loss of moisture from the public lands, thereby increasing the carrying capacity of some 170 million acres of western rangeland for livestock grazing and also to support substantial wildlife.
By 1975, depleted vegetation should be restored, and soil and water losses from flood and erosion should be greatly reduced.
Progress is being made in the development of basic livestock operation records and in reappraising the qualifications of range users for grazing privileges.
Several new range resource surveys have been activated, in the areas of greatest urgency, to develop basie management planning data.
A program of range condition, trend, and utilization studies has been established in each State and is being emphasized in all grazing districts.
Such studies provide an evaluation of the range resource and form a guide to proper range use.
The primary objective of the Department of the Interior with respect to the public-domain forests is to assure their development and use for maximum benefit to the Nation.
The forest areas of unreserved public domain in the United States under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management aggregate nearly 34 million acres; 4 million of these carry commercialvalue classification.
The remaining 30 million, elassed as woodlands, provide a local supply of fuel wood, posts, poles, and other products, and constitute a large reserve of wood source for potential commercial development.
Forest lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management fall into three categories: the revested Oregon and California Railroad Grant Lands and other lands in western Oregon, generally identified as the O. and C. lands; the public domain commercial forest and woodlands in the continental United States; and the publie domain forests and woodlands of Alaska.
The O. and C. lands of western Oregon are destined by law for permanent Federal development and management.
They comprise nearly 2 million acres which are now producing or capable of producing a large volume of high-value timber.
Their development and perpetual management for the production of trees and wood and fiber, for the greatest economic and social good to the Nation, is the primary objective of the Bureau in its program for these lands.
Forty million acres of commercial and 85 million acres of noncommercial forest under the Department's administration in Alaska constitute an enormous forest reservoir of potential pulp and paper supply.
Present efforts of the Department are devoted largely to protection of these forests from fire.
The initial steps of a plan for forest inventory have been completed, and data supplied by the inventory will furnish the basis for plans designed to manage these forests, to develop their economic potential, and to supplement domestic wood supplies.
The Department of the Interior administers Federal mining and mineral leasing laws on approximately 800 million acres of land— more than one-third of the total land area of the United States and Alaska.
As agent for the Department, the Bureau of Land Management encourages development and production of the various minerals from the public domain by private enterprise.
The primary program objectives are to promote expeditious exploration of the land for the discovery of mineral deposits and to insure their sound development and wise use, thus conserving and extending the supply of mineral resources.
America's fish and wildlife resources, unlike its mineral resources, are living and renewable.
They must be continually developed to provide for regulated annual harvesting by hunters, trappers, and sports and commercial fishermen.
The Federal Government has definite responsibilities for sustaining and augmenting these resources, and the Department of the Interior, through the U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service, is planning a comprehensive development program with the realistic objective of adequately meeting the demands which a growing America will place upon fish and wildlife.
The great interest of the people of this country in hunting and fishing was underlined by a recent nationwide survey which showed that 25 million people 12 years of age and over hunted or fished in 1955.
The future of waterfowl on the North American Continent is a matter of concern to thoughtful conservationists, as the needs of waterfowl are in ever-growing competition with a rapidly expanding human population.
Natural marshes of the gulf coast and the Pacific Flyway are being seriously damaged for waterfowl use.
Waterfowl face a preearious future.
Major reliance for their survival will have to be on the lands developed for their needs, whether in the ownership of the Federal Government, the States, or private eitizens.
Since the Nation’s fast-diminishing wetlands are especially vital to waterfowl, special attention was given during the past year to wetland development.
Progress was made in retarding drainage and other activities destructive of wetlands, but inereased effort is necessary if satisfactory wetlands are to be preserved.
An inereasing number of hunters are making greater demands on wildlife resourees and, to meet the growing demand, the Department of the Interior is developing, through research, methods of utilizing marginal or nonproductive areas and inereasing the productivity of existing marshes.
Attention also is being given to the development of wildlife management techniques which can be incorporated into farming operations for maximum wildlife production.
Timber-stand improvement projects and other forest-management activities are being carefully evaluated to determine their effects on wildlife.
Increased study is being devoted to the rapidly growing use of pesticides which, because of their harmful effects on fish and animals, pose a grave problem in the field of fish and wildlife management.
Through cooperative wildlife management activities, large areas of privately owned timberland and State-managed refuges are being made available for public hunting grounds.
Other continuing Department activities include access-road development, habitat improvement, and fire control.
There also has been increased cooperation among the States in restocking game birds and animals and in managing the wildlife of boundary forests.
Waterfowl studies, dove migration surveys, and regionwide disease investigations are being cooperatively developed.
A nationwide program of tree, shrub, and herbaceous crop planting is restoring wildlife in areas of low produetion.
More than 5,000 acres of marsh and 6,000 acres of new fishing water in 37 lakes have been developed, and over a quarter million acres of land have been made available for wildlife and fish restoration activities.
These programs are providing needed additional wildlife habitat and recreational opportunities.
Exploratory fishing has succeeded during the past year in extending commercial fishing boundaries into deeper waters beyond the Continental Shelf.
Development and practical application of newer types of fishing gear and modern electronic instrumentation have made wider utilization of fishery resources practical.
For example, the first commercial landings of shrimp on the coast of Washington followed the successful search by the Department for new sources of supply.
In many instances, success in developing our commercial fishery resources requires the cooperation of foreign governments.
The international fishery commissions, to which the United States belongs, employ exhaustive research and regulatory measures and seek to determine and bring into existence the conditions which will make possible the maximum sustainable yield from the fish resources with which they are concerned.
These efforts have resulted in increasing catches in the Pacific halibut, Frázer River sockeye salmon, and New England trawl fisheries; an understanding of the basic dynamics of the tuna resources of the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean and substantial progress toward a determination of the potential maximum yield from these resources; significant discoveries regarding the migration and distribution of the North Pacific salmon ; and major advances in the control of the predatory lamprey in the Great Lakes.
Responsibility for the maintenance of the inland fisheries rests with the States and the Department of the Interior, which restocks waters and manages the game-fish resources on Federal areas or on wateruse projects in cooperation with the States.
Assistance to the States is rendered wherever possible in research, management of waters, and fish rearing.
In a long-range plan for wise development of fish and wildlife resources, existing Federal fish hatcheries will be modernized and rearing facilities expanded to build up fish stocks on federally controlled areas and to supplement State programs.
Several new Federal hatcheries will be built in areas where large water-use projects are developing fish requirements in excess of the production potential of State units.
In 1954, after two decades of substantial decline in the annual yield of the salmon fisheries in Alaska, the Department of the Interior inaugurated an aggressive development program which drastically reduced fishing effort and vigorously enforced fishery laws and regulations.
This action was supplemented by a sixfold increase in fishery research in Alaska.
The results of the program are encouraging.
Spawning streams were well seeded in most areas in 1956, and the salmon pack increased more than 25 percent over 1955 levels.
A system of fishing gear registration was instituted in 1956 to reduce fishing intensity, while other regulations were issued to prohibit salmon fishing, other than trolling, on the high seas in waters contiguous to Alaska under the authority of the North Pacific Fisheries Act of 1954.
This action prevented the establishment of a high seas fishery which would have jeopardized the Department's program for Alaska proper.
Many new devices are being developed to protect our fisheries.
Some of these new tools for resource research and management are designed to control the movements of fish to guide them into safe passage at dams and diversions, to control predatory fish, and to control or eliminate the invasion of unwanted or undesirable species into reservoirs or water systems.
As research progresses, the large-scale salt water pond cultivation of shrimp, oysters, and clams—all valuable and nutritious food—approaches practicability.
The immediate future holds some challenging opportunities for broadening the base of knowledge upon which our fishery resources may be further developed to meet the growing needs of our people.
The Department of the Interior functions as trustee over Indian lands and resources, which are essentially private property, owned either by individual Indians or tribal organizations.
In the development and management of these resources, the interests of the Indian owners, long-range as well as immediate, are given first priority over any other consideration.
During the past 3 years, the Department, through the Bureau of Indian Affairs, has placed increasing emphasis on resource development as an important and effective way of improving the economic status of the Indian people.
This program has encouraged a broadening Indian participation in the formulation and execution of resource development programs on the individual reservations.
The most dramatie financial result of Indian resource-development programs in recent years has been in the leasing of Indian lands for oil and gas recovery.
Over the 5-year span from fiscal 1952 through fiscal 1957, the combined area of Indian lands under oil and gas leases increased from 2,021,822 acres to 5,835,856 acres, and the Indian income from these leases soared to $19,181,053 to $72,616,644.
Many tribes in various parts of the country are now benefiting from oil-exploration operations.
In 1949, the first well on the Uintah and Ouray Reservation in Utah was brought in.
Discovery of oil in 1951 in the Williston Basin covering considerable Indian land in Montana and the Dakotas set off another large development program.
Recent discovery of gas and oil in the “four corners" area of Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah is steadily inereasing the incomes of tribes in that area.
Construction of additional pipelines to California has resulted in oil and gas development on the Navaho, Jiearilla, Southern Ute, and Ute Mountain Reservations.
Discovery of new pay formations in partially developed areas, shallow drilling depth to production, and water-flood projects have brought favorable results on the Osage Reservation in Oklahoma.
In 1956, for example, the Osage Tribe received a total bonus of almost $10 million, compared to less than $7 million for the 5 previous years combined.
The development of other mineral resources on Indian lands has been steadily progressing.
From 1952 through 1956, the area under lease for such development increased from 50,385 acres to 197,673.
Indian income under these programs has risen from $1,671,797 to $2,881,533.
Although there is less uranium exploration than in previous years, this activity is still outstanding in economic importance.
Asbestos, coal, iron, sand and gravel, phosphate, lead, and zine are also being developed.
Developing the forest resource base on Indian lands includes three principal activities.
First, more complete information on timber resources is being obtained through new inventories and a redetermination of growth potential.
Secondly, closer utilization and reduction of waste are being accomplished by changes in timber-sale methods.
Finally, improved methods of protection against fire, insects, and disease are being developed.
The awakening public interest in resource development is reflected in increased appropriations for management of all forests under Federal supervision, including Indian lands.
Some tribes also have increased the amount of tribal funds earmarked for forest management and protection.
One result is an increasing number of reservations for which urgently needed forest inventories have been obtained.
With these inventories, the allowable annual cut under sustained-yield management is anticipated, and efforts are being made to bring the annual harvest up to the allowable maximum.
Since the 1880's, more than 170 irrigation systems have been developed on Indian reservations in the western states, irrigating 870,- 000 acres of land.
These projects vary in size from a few acres to more than 120,000 acres.
Three electric power generating distribution projects have been authorized and constructed in connection with irrigation projects on Indian lands.
Water storage reservoirs now have a capacity of 2 million acre-feet, and in addition, supplemental water is provided by storage in reclamation reservoirs for about 200,- 000 acres of Indian lands.
Through soil and moisture conservation programs, guidance and assistance are provide for the Indians in development of land according to its needs, its uses, and its capabilities.
Indian-owned rangelands support approximately 975,000 cattle units of livestock with an annual value of over $6 million.
Substantial income also is produced on these lands in the wildlife, scenie, and recreational areas.
A good portion of the income provided by these sources is being reinvested in water conservation, reseeding, and other resource development projects.
The Department has trust responsibility for more than 39 million acres of tribal lands and 14 million acres of allotted Indian lands.
While these Indian assets are held in trust, it is the aim of the Department to assist the Indians in obtaining maximum return from the use and development of their resources consistent with good management and conservation concepts; to preserve the renewable resources in a perpetually productive state; and to renew the productivity of those resources which have deteriorated.
Although management of these lands is still a Federal responsibility, the Department encourages the Indians to prepare for eventual assumption of full responsibility and authority.
The Department of the Interior is responsible for the development of the natural resources of the 3,160,000 people who reside in Alaska, Hawaii, the Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, and the trust territory of the Pacific Islands.
To promote the effective and prudent development of the natural resource base of America's Territories and trust possessions, the Department, through the Office of Territories, fosters a climate of self-government which is essential to the current welfare and future prosperity of territorial populations.
The Territories, particularly Alaska, constitute a major portion of the undeveloped natural resources of our Nation, and the efforts of the Department in developing these new resources fall into many categories.
The jurisdiction over the development, use, and conservation of territorial natural resources is not confined to a single office of the Department, and many bureaus are concerned with broadening the resource base of the Territories.
The Bureau of Land Management is responsible for the administration and development of nearly 500 million acres of land, about three-quarters of which lies in Alaska.
The Bureau of Mines conducts research and development programs important to the development of Territorial mineral resources, and the Bureau of Reclamation is concerned with hydroelectric generating potential and water conservation practices in the various territories.
The Fish and Wildlife Service is responsible for the development and administration of fishing regulations, fishery research programs, and wildlife conservation in the territories.
The Geological Survey devotes a substantial portion of its activities to the mineral, fuel, and water resources of Alaska and the other Territories.
Mineral geology and water resources in Guam are receiving attention, and the water well sites on American Samoa are being located by the Survey.
Hawaii possesses great wealth in lush agricultural land, in scenery, and in elimate.
For the most part, these natural resources have been developed wisely, and further plans call for continued broadening of the Hawaiian resource base through such activities as the Waimea and Molokai irrigation projects.
In the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, the Department of the Interior is responsible for the development of the air and water transportation systems which are absolutely vital to the advancement of the islands' economic life, but are not as yet attractive to private enterprise.
Furthermore, the land resources of these areas, of Guam, and of American Samoa are so meager that the Federal Government has a special responsibility to protect and develop them.
The story of the development of the natural resources of the Territories inevitably centers on the vast land and water areas of Alaska.
It is many times larger than the rest of the territorial areas of the United States; moreover, Alaska contains great reserves of undeveloped natural resources.
In Alaska only the commercial fisheries and certain mineral operations, such as gold mining, have been extensively developed.
The vast coastal forests are in the initial stages of utilization, and the search for oil and gas is still in the exploratory and discovery stage.
Currently, the development of many important resources in Alaska is not yet economically feasible because of poor transportation or market location.
In Alaska’s resource development, exclusive emphasis is no longer placed on the standbys of fur, fish, and certain minerals.
Other sources of natural wealth are being developed to give more stability, diversity, and permanency to Alaska's economic base.
An important beginning has been made in this direction by the large-scale utilization of the forest and agricultural resources of the Matanuska, Kenai, and Tanana Valleys.
Increased oil exploration and the initial development of some of the Territory's immense hydroelectric resources also are contributing to the rapid growth of a prosperous Alaska.
While favorable petroleum structures have been located in various parts of Alaska, drilling has not yet brought in fields of major importance.
Vast areas are under lease, however, and extensive exploration is being conducted.
The U. S. Navy has discovered large reserves in northern Alaska, and the Department has received many requests that these lands be opened for mineral and mining exploration and development.
The first large-scale development of Alaskan timber resources began in 1954 with the opening of a $50 million pulp mill near Ketchikan.
Plans have now been initiated for the development of additional pulp mills at Sitka, Juneau, and Wrangell.
Sitka mill, sponsored by Japanese interests, is supported also by American capital.
There has been inereased interest in mineral development during the past year in the Klukwan iron-ore deposits, north of Haines, and the Department is sponsoring legislation which will make possible the leasing of these lands for development.
The congressional mandate, which established the National Park Service as a constituent bureau of the Department of the Interior 41 years ago, directed the Department “to conserve the scenery and the natural and historieal objects and wildlife therein and to provide for the enjoyment of the same in such manner and by such means as will leave them unimpaired for the enjoyment of future generations.
The spectacular rise in visits to the national park areas demonstrates the enjoyment the American people derive from this priceless heritage.
Park visitors in calendar year 1956 totaled nearly 55 million, up 10 percent over the preceding year and more than 150 percent above the 1946 figures.
In the first 6 months of 1957, park visitors totaled 23,302,520, as against a total of 21,338,076 for the same period in 1956, indicating that attendance for the full year will approach the 60 million mark.
Unlike resources which yield material things, the parks provide such precious cultural and inspirational intangibles as knowledge of nature, spiritual refreshment, and wholesome recreational opportunity.
Intelligently managed and used, these resources can be drawn upon almost endlessly without depletion, but if destroyed by misuse they are lost forever.
The past fiseal year provided tangible evidence of the benefits in store for this and future generations under the Mission 66 program of park development which was inaugurated on July 1, 1956.
Mission 66 is designed to develop the irreplaceable natural, scientifie, and historic resources entrusted to the care of the Department of the Interior for the enjoyment and inspiration of millions of Americans.
At the same time, the accumulated inadequacies and abuses of past years will be eliminated.
In its first year, Mission 66 has made dramatic progress toward providing the facilities and services required to cope with the rising tide of visitors.
More than 650 park improvement projects had been programed and 113 completed by the end of the fiscal year.
When its goals are reached in 1966—the golden anniversary of the establishment of the National Park Service—Mission 66 will provide the American people with a national park system properly developed and adequately staffed to keep abreast of the increasing interest of our people in the great outdoors and in our historic and prehistoric past.
Among the facilities placed in operation in the past year were: seven new visitor centers and major addition to four others; 83 new wayside interpretive installations to provide better understanding of the parks; new and improved campsites with facilities for some 8,000 additional campers daily; 56 new comfort stations; parking facilities for an additional 7,500 automobiles; and 51 new or improved water systems.
Some 185 miles of run-down park roads are undergoing reconstruction and improvement and 39 miles of new roads were completed.
In addition, private enterprise invested some $7,200,000 during the year to expand overnight accommodations, restaurants, stores and other publie service installations in the parks, resulting in accommodations for an additional 2,500 visitors.
The supply of open spaces suitable for recreational development is rapidly vanishing.
How rapidly was demonstrated in the National Park Service report, Our Vanishing Shoreline, issued in July 1956.
Almost every attractive seashore area on our Atlantic and gulf coasts has been preempted for commercial or private development.
Only a fraction of our long seacoast is left for public use and much of this small portion is rapidly disappearing before our eyes.
As the fiscal year ended, a similar survey was in progress along our Great Lakes and Pacific shoreline, and more detailed followup studies were under way along the Atlantic and gulf coasts.
The great scenic areas of the national park system are augmented by the cultural contributions of the historic areas which encompass the whole range of our prehistorie, colonial, and national history.
In the first 6 months of 1957, visitation to the historic areas was running 16 percent higher than last year.
On December 1, 1956, the Virgin Islands National Park on the beautiful island of St. John in the United States Virgin Islands was formally opened and dedicated as our 29th national park, and the Booker T. Washington National Monument was established near Rocky Mount, Va., on June 18, 1957.
Two new national historie sites were established during the year— the Golden Spike National Historic Site at Promontory, Utah, and Chimney Rock National Historic Site near Bayard, Nebr.
Some 52,000 acres of private holdings within the boundaries of the national parks were acquired during the year by purchase, donation, or exchange and, as the year ended, the National Park Service administered 182 areas embracing 25,100,000 acres, of which 24,421,000 were federally owned.
As the American people in the years ahead draw ever-increasing dividends of healthful recreation and patriotic inspiration from the great resources of our park system, the Department of the Interior's program of sound development will help provide the safeguards to assure that these resources will be passed along unspoiled and undiminished for the enjoyment of future generations.
The Department also has general jurisdiction over the Governments of nearly three million persons in the Territories and Island Possessions of the United States, and in the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.
OFFICE OF MINERALS MOBILIZATION Defense minerals and solid fuels programing and readiness projects.
Administrative Services: Reproduction; office space; communication facilities; warehousing; shipping; library; dispensary; and Office of Secretary administrative services.
Budget and Finance: Coordinates the development, preparation and execution of the Departmental budget; develops and reviews operation of financial programs.
Inspection: Special inspections; investigations; development and enforcement of inspection.
Management Research: Management advice and improvement; organizational review; incentive awards; Secretarial directives system.
Personnel Management: Position classification; labor relations; wage administration; recruitment; placement; examining; training; employee relations; and health and safety.
Property Management: Procurement, utilization and disposition of real and personal property; construction contracting; radio communications; and records.
Security: Personnel security; security of documents and materials; physical security of facilities and equipment; coordination of civil defense activities.
THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY for Water and Power Development discharges the duties of the Secretary with respect to the Department's programs in the field of water and power development.
The Assistant Secretary exercises secretarial direction and supervision over the Bureau of Reclamation, Bonneville Power Administration, Southeastern Power Administration, and Southwestern Power Administration.
The principal function of the latter three agencies is to market surplus power generated in their respective areas at Federal projects.
The Bureau of Reclamation constructs water-use projects whose primary purpose is the reclamation of arid and semiarid lands in the West, and also markets surplus power produced at Federal projects in the West outside the boundaries of the Bonneville Power Administration and Southwestern Power Administration and at Faleon Dam on the Rio Grande River, an international project.
The Assistant Secretary for Water and Power Development is also responsible for carrying out the defense functions of the Secretary with respect to electric power and for supervising and directing the Office of Saline Water.
The activities of the water and power agencies of the Department and the Office of Saline Water are more fully described in sections of this report covering each of the Department's bureaus and offices.
The table on the next page, prepared on a consolidated basis for fiscal year 1957, shows the installed capacity of plants whose power is marketed by Interior Department agencies, net energy generation, energy marketed, and gross revenues.
Capacity in Corps of Engineers projects.
Negotiations were completed and contracts were signed with two generating and transmission cooperatives for them to meet electrie powerload growth through independent expansion of the cooperatives' produetion and transmission facilities.
Major changes in other generating and transmission contracts were negotiated to comply with the directive of Congress that power should be delivered, insofar as practicable, at a uniform rate in the Southwest.
In the Southeast, negotiations were conducted to market the output of Buford, Allatoona, and Clark Hill projects under a single contract similar to the Clark Hill arrangement, which was placed in operation on June 20, 1956.
Arrangements for the marketing of the output of the Jim Woodruff project power in the northern Florida area are nearing completion through a wheeling and firming arrangement involving publie and private utilities in the area.
The Assistant Secretary for Water and Power Development directed the preparation of an average rate and repayment study to determine the requirement for rates for the sale of electric power in the Southwest area.
Existing rate schedules that were initially approved in 1947 have been found to be deficient and will not produce repayment of Federal investment on a 50-year basis.
Therefore, new proposed rate schedules were developed to produce sufficient revenue to repay costs within 50 years.
On November 16, 1956, the Assistant Secretary requested the Federal Power Commission to approve and confirm these proposed rate schedules.
The Commission approved and confirmed the rates on August 9, 1957.
The Assistant Secretary also directed the preparation for submission to the Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs of a statement on the Missouri River Basin project, relating to the physical plan of development, water and power rates, basis of project payout, cost allocations, reservoir operation, and power marketing.
Progress has been made on an important power cooperation program initiated last year.
Approval was given the Bonneville Power Administration to enter into long-term contracts with non-Federal generating utilities for transmission of power over the Federal transmission grid in the Northwest.
This program is intended to produce more complete regional integration and secure the most economical use of resources.
Bonneville Power Administration will construct feasible additional transmission facilities as needed, and reimbursement to the Government will be on a use-of-facilities basis.
During the fiscal vear, the Department through the Assistant Secretary for Water and Power Development reviewed 31 reports of the Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army, primarily for flood control and navigation improvements; 38 Federal Power Commission applications for permits and licenses for hydroelectric developments; one report of the Public Health Service, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, for water pollution control; and one proposal of the International Boundary and Water Commission for construction of control dams in the channel of the lower Rio Grande River.
The Assistant Secretary for Water and Power Development participated in the interagency study of western drought problems centering on the President's tour of the distressed area.
The Assistant Secretary served as departmental representative on the Interagency Committee on Water Resources and participated in the joint field conference of interagency committees for the Missouri and Arkansas-White-Red Basins.
He also served on the President's Advisory Committee on Public Works.
The Assistant Secretary conducted field conferences on power marketing, land limitation in the Columbia Basin, and irrigation development.
Staff of the office served as departmental representatives on interagency committees concerned with radio frequency allocation, turbine procurement, international water developments, public works planning, coordination of water resources projects, cost allocations, financial practices for water and power projects, economic analyses, atomic energy, and allied technical subjects.
Other significant activities of the Assistant Secretary and his staff included testimony before congressional committees on the Fryingpan-Arkansas, Trinity, Missouri River Basin, other reclamation projects, land acquisition at reservoirs, and standards for water development projects; a special study of drainage problems at the Yuma project; further discussions of potential Canadian storage reservoirs; and reappraisal of irrigation benefits and price levels with the cooperation of the Department of Agriculture.
THE BUREAU OF RECLAMATION in 1957 fiscal year made important contributions to the Nation's resource base by teamwork with other Federal agencies and State and local government units, private industry, and citizens in the development of the water and land resources in the Western United States.
About $130 million were converted into wealth-creating reclamation facilities available to serve the West and the Nation.
Purchases from these expenditures were reflected in the flow of business in each of the 48 States.
Construction completed during the year added more than 160,000 acre-feet of storage space in new Reclamation project reservoirs, 57,000 kilowatts of hydroelectric generating capacity, 117 miles of canals, aqueducts, and related water conveyance and distribution structures, and 526 miles of large electrical transmission lines.
A notable event was the start of construction on the Colorado River Storage Project.
On October 15, 1956, President Eisenhower pressed a gold key at the White House to signal the explosion of simultaneous initial blasts in the construction of Glen Canyon Dam in Arizona and Flaming Gorge Dam in Utah.
These are key structures in the project which will make possible the development of the vast Upper Colorado River Basin's irrigable lands and abundant resources of fuel, oil, minerals, and timber.
Urgently needed water will also be supplied to municipalities and other benefits will be obtained from recreation, fish and wildlife conservation in the Upper Basin, and from sediment retention and river regulation for power production and flood control in the Lower Basin.
The Bureau is responsible for overall supervision of the care, operation and maintenance and replacement of facilities capable of delivering irrigation water to more than 71½2 million acres of land—more than one-fourth of the total irrigated land area of the Western United States.
Most of the facilities are operated by local water users organizations which have contracted with the Government for repayment of a share of the construction costs.
This is in accordance with a longstanding policy and the Bureau of Reclamation has been diligent to transfer the responsibility for operation and maintenance of irrigation projects to the water users.
With a few exceptions, the Bureau actually operates and maintains only the reserved works of multipurpose projects, while the balance of the facilities are operated and maintained by the various irrigation districts.
During fiscal year 1957, the irrigation distribution facilities serving approximately 85 percent of the total irrigable acreage included in Federal Reclamation projects were operated and maintained by the water users.
Because of its investment in these projects, however, the Federal Government, through the Bureau of Reclamation, is responsible for inspection and for general supervision of operation of all of the project facilities.
The total harvest from all Reclamation projects in calendar year 1956 was valued at more than $951.6 million, an average of $148.69 per irrigated acre.
Irrigable lands for service totaled 7,658,800 acres, of which 6,400,140 acres were actually irrigated.
As compared to 1955, this represents an increase in irrigation of 138,380 acres.
Half of the area of the Reclamation West lay in the clutch of severe drought in calendar year 1956.
Arizona and New Mexico, suffering from drought since 1942, experienced continued shrinking of reservoir supplies, runoff, and ground water levels.
From Nebraska southward, the “grey belt" of irrigation which traditionally changes from subhumid to semiarid turned completely arid.
Parts of Utah and Colorado likewise withered under almost unprecedented drought conditions.
So acute and widespread was the plight of thousands of farmers and hundreds of cities and towns that the President, accompanied by the Secretaries of Interior and Agriculture, made a special tour of the drought-stricken area in mid-January 1957.
Bureau of Reclamation planning efforts were intensified following his visit and have already resulted in one project, San Angelo, Tex., being authorized by the Congress.
The stabilizing influences of irrigation have been evident throughout the drought-stricken areas.
Large proportions of the immediate feed shipments into the drought areas of Texas and New Mexico originated on irrigated farms.
The scattered irrigated farms constituted the backbone of production in the West although water supplies were severely restricted.
The Rio Grande Project in Texas, for example, delivered less than 1 acre-foot of water per acre, whereas the normal irrigation requirement is nearly 3 acre-feet.
Nevertheless, handicapped as they were by drought, irrigation facilities in Reclamation Region Five, embracing the States of Texas, New Mexico, and Oklahoma, contributed substantially to the saving of the basic breeding herds of cattle on adjacent ranges, where irrigated farms sustained nearly one million head of cattle and more than a quarter of a million head of sheep.
In addition, these farms provided sufficient feed to produce 371 million pounds of beef.
Other irrigated areas in nearby States supplied grain and forage to sustain livestock herds and to carry on the regular cattle and sheep fattening enterprises.
The publie acclaim and recognition of the bolstering effects which irrigation is able to produce during periods of extreme drought was manifested in the increased private ventures into well irrigation and by continued requests for Bureau assistance in solving major water supply problems in the West.
The snow pack in the Columbia River Basin this year was near normal; however, sustained high temperatures in April and May resulted in unusually high rates of flow in some areas.
Operation of Bureau reservoirs in Region One—Washington, Oregon, Idaho, and western Montana—resulted in substantial reductions in downstream flows particularly on Upper Snake River and on the Boise, Payette, Owyhee, Malheur, and Flathead Rivers in Idaho.
Except for Hungry Horse Reservoir in Montana and Lake Roosevelt in Washington, the Bureau's reservoirs were operated to reduce flooding in the local areas of the reservoirs.
Storage in these reservoirs did, however, reduce the peak flow on the Lower Columbia River by more than 100,000 cubic feet per second and reduced the river stage at The Dalles, Oreg.
Estimates indicate that in 1956, more than 12 million persons enjoyed the use of recreational facilities on the 140 principal Federal Reclamation reservoir areas in the 17 Western States.
These water playgrounds are made available for publie use through cooperative administration arrangements among the Bureau, the National Park Service, the United States Forest Service and State and local governmental agencies.
Guided tours were provided at Hoover Dam, and Powerplant on the Boulder Canyon project in Arizona and Nevada; Shasta Dam and powerplant on the Central Valley project in California; Hungry Horse Dam and powerplant on the Hungry Horse project in Montana; Grand Coulee Dam and Powerplant on the Columbia Basin project in Washington; and Granby Pumping Plant on the Colorado Big-Thompson project in Colorado.
Self-guided tours were initiated at Davis Dam and Parker Dam on the Colorado River between Arizona and Nevada and Arizona-California, respectively.
A folder “Reclamation's Recreational Opportunities," prepared in 1956 at the request of the House Interior and Insular Affairs Committee, has proved such a “best seller” that a second reprinting was necessary and is now available for sale through the Superintendent of Documents, United States Government Printing Office.
The 77 Reclamation irrigation projects, located throughout the 17 Western States, are divided into seven regions for administrative purposes.
Region 2—California, except southern portion; Sacramento, Calif.
Region 3.—Arizona, southern California, and southern Nevada; Boulder City, Nev.
Region 4.—Nevada, Utah, western Colorado and southwestern Wyoming; Salt Lake City, Utah.
1 Additional revenues from Federal and commercial agencies.
Region 6.—Eastern Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, and northern Wyoming; Billings, Mont.
Region 7.—Eastern Colorado, Nebraska, northern Kansas, and southeastern Wyoming; Denver, Colo.
During fiscal year 1957, the Bureau of Reclamation was responsible for overall supervision of the care, operation, maintenance, and replacement of facilities capable of delivering irrigation water to more than seven and one-half million acres of land—more than onefourth of the total irrigated land area of the Western United States.
The total harvest from all Reclamation projects in calendar year 1956 was valued at over $951.6 million, an average of $148.69 per irrigated acre.
Irrigable lands for service totaled 7,658,800 acres, of which 6,400,140 acres were actually irrigated.
As compared to 1955, this represents an increase in irrigation of 138,380 acres.
Forage crops were produced on 46.9 percent of the net area irrigated on all Reclamation projects, and 24.3 percent of the irrigated lands were utilized in producing cereals.
The crops within these two groups, totaling more than 15.4 million tons, are utilized principally as livestock feeds, generally in the local areas of production.
Over 5.9 million tons of fresh vegetables, fruits, and nuts were produced from 739,780 acres of irrigated lands.
Dry miscellaneous food crops such as dry beans, sugar beets, mint, hops, ete.
The volume of agricultural production totaled nearly 28.4 million tons in 1956, an increase of 1.4 million tons over 1955.
Increases were noted for all crop groups except fruits, which decreased about 61,000 tons.
The production of cotton was up 99,000 bales, sugar beets increased 544,000 tons, and dry beans fell off about 23,000 tons.
Average per acre crop yields were slightly higher than in 1955 for the principal crops produced on most Federal irrigation projects.
In all, 1956 was a good crop year.
Average unit prices received by irrigation farmers for their products were generally somewhat higher than in 1955.
This was true for all the principal erops except alfalfa hay and canning tomatoes, which decreased 5 and 6 percent, respectively, in 1956.
The most significant crops produced on irrigated project lands in terms of value were cotton, alfalfa, potatoes, sugar beets, grapes, wheat, lettuce, apples, pasture, barley, beans, oranges, corn, tomatoes, silage, cantaloupes, pears, peaches, and hops.
Together, these crops account for 84 percent of the total crop value on Reclamation projects.
Region 1, with 2,265,209 acres of irrigated lands, the largest in irrigated area of the seven Bureau Regions, produced crops valued at $269 million.
This Region contains 35 percent of the irrigated lands and accounted for 28 percent of the total value of crops produced on all Reclamation projects in 1956.
Region 3, with less than half as much irrigated land as Region 1, produced crops valued at $233 million, or 24 percent of the total production from all Federal projects during the same year.
Each of the 17 Western States participated in the Reclamation harvest for 1956.
Idaho had a larger acreage of irrigated Federal project lands than any of the other States, followed by California, Colorado, Washington, Oregon, Arizona, Nebraska, Utah, and Montana.
The gross value of crops produced on Federal projects located in California was higher than for the other Western States; however, the average gross crop value per acre was highest for Arizona, followed by Texas, California, Washington, New Mexico, Oklahoma, etc.
During fiscal year 1957, contracts were executed with a number of districts for the repayment of the cost of new project works.
The distribution system loan repavment contract with the Solano Irrigation District, Solano project, California, was the first loan repayment contract to be executed under the new loan program authorized by Public Law 130 of the 84th Congress (69 Stat. 244).
After this contract has been validated in the courts of California, the United States will advance funds on an approved schedule basis to the Solano Irrigation District over a period of years to permit the District to finance construction of distribution system works.
The Solano Irrigation Distriet is one of several member units that have contracted with the Solano County Flood Control and Water Conservation District for water service from the Solano project.
All of these member unit contracts have been validated in the courts of California.
Negotiations were well advanced with several districts of the Central Valley project for similar distribution system loans.
Amendment in June of 1957 of the Small Reclamation Project Act, as requested by the President, and approval by the Secretary of the Interior on July 5, 1957, of a small project loan request by the Cameron County Water Improvement District No. 1, located in the lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas, cleared the way for initiation of repayment contract negotiations for the first small project loan.
Valley Irrigation District in Nebraska, H. and R. W. Irrigation District in Nebraska, and the Webster Irrigation District in Kansas.
During the fiscal year, negotiations were carried to completion for execution of a repayment contract (actually executed shortly after close of fiscal year, on July 23, 1957) with the Fort Cobb Master Conservancy District, Fort Cobb Division, Washita project, Oklahoma.
The contractual arrangements are unique in that first stage construction involves municipal water, with irrigation scheduled for second stage construction.
In the event irrigation does not develop within 10 vears of the time when municipal water becomes available, then the authorization of the irrigation features expires.
If irrigation fails to develop, municipal water payments will continue until all of the reimbursable costs of the project, including those allocated to irrigation, are fully repaid.
Municipal water costs are to be repaid with interest on the unamortized balance at a rate certified by the Secretary of the Treasury of 2.591 percent.
Considerable progress was made in the negotiation of water service contracts for the Sacramento Canals Unit of the Central Valley project, California.
The first contract to be executed for this service area was with the Corning Water District.
At the close of the fiscal year negotiations had been completed with the Westside Water District, Dunnigan Water Distriet, Colusa County Water District, Kanawha Water District, and the Proberta Water District.
Contract negotiations in California, however, have been affected by the action of the California Supreme Court in the Ivanhoe case, wherein the court held water users organizations in California were not empowered to execute contracts containing excess land provisions.
Pending a review of the matter by the United States Supreme Court, which has been requested, the Government is continuing to make water deliveries in compliance with existing contract requirements.
The contract executed with the Yuma County Water Users Association, Valley Division, Yuma project, Arizona, as authorized by the act of June 29, 1956 (70 Stat. 409), provided for final repayment of the remaining reimbursable costs of the Valley Division.
A number of contracts also were executed involving rehabilitation and betterment of project works and providing for temporary or interim water supplies.
Table 4 shows that the total value of repayment contracts on June 30, 1957, amounted to $824,451,095.
Of this amount, a total of $129,826,748 had been repaid, and delinquencies were insignificant.
In addition, over $100 million will be returned to the Government in water service payments under contracts now in force.
The Bureau conducted five land openings on three Reclamation projects, making available for settlement 290 farm units embracing 33,482 irrigable acres of new land.
The greatest number were on the North Side pumping unit of the Minidoka project in Idaho where 145 units were opened for settlement under the provisions of reclamation and homestead laws.
Six farm units were offered for homestead entry on the Hanover-Bluff unit, Bighorn Basin Division, Missouri River Basin project.
The remaining 139 units were offered for sale through three separate openings on the Columbia Basin project in Washington, under the provisions of the Columbia Basin Project Act.
Since the close of World War II, 57 land openings have been held on 14 Reclamation projects.
A total of 2,684 new farm units encompassing approximately 235,000 irrigable acres of public land have thus been made available for selection by qualified applicants.
The availability of additional new farm units is anticipated during fiscal year 1958 on the Columbia Basin project in Washington, the Minidoka project in Idaho, and on the Gila and Yuma projects in Arizona.
Additional privately owned lands in the Central Valley, Columbia Basin, and Missouri Basin projects will be supplied with irrigation water.
A considerable amount of this privately owned land may be available for sale by the owners.
A vital part of the settlement program on areas being newly developed for irrigation is the development farm program, started in 1947.
These farms are conducted in cooperation with various agricultural agencies and State agricultural colleges.
Field scale operations are conducted to demonstrate to the inexperienced irrigation farmers the lavout of most practical farm irrigation systems, the best methods of irrigation, the crops best adapted to the area, and the most effective cultural practices.
The research conducted by the cooperating agricultural agencies, on the 10 to 20 percent of each farm set aside for this purpose, furnishes valuable information to the new settlers.
Field days, tours, and other educational media are used to disseminate the information obtained from the research and to explain the demonstrations to the farmers.
The farm sites are chosen in cooperation with other interested agencies in areas best representing the soils and other conditions common to the project.
They are established 2 to 5 years in advance of settlement in order to have the desired information by the time the new settlers arrive.
During fiscal year 1957 there were 15 development farms in operation on the Columbia Basin, Gila, and Missouri River Basin projects, with several new farms proposed for the latter project.
The Bureau of Reclamation continued to make progress in protecting the land and facilities under its jurisdiction.
Protection of land from wind and water erosion, reduction of moisture losses from land and water areas, and the protection of Reclamation-built structures from the adverse effects of soil erosion was continued by the Bureau during the year.
The work included structural installations, reseeding, and other means of erosion control and stabilization.
The planning, financing, and performance of the work are accomplished in cooperation with other Federal agencies and State and local agencies, including water users' organizations.
The weed control program conducted by the Bureau on irrigation systems has reduced the problems caused by undesirable vegetation and also cut operation and maintenance costs.
It also aided materially in reducing water losses resulting from transpiration, evaporation, and seepage due to weed growths.
More efficient and economical methods of controlling weeds infesting banks and channels of irrigation systems were developed and put into practice through the research program condueted by the Agricultural Research Service, Department of Agriculture, in cooperation with the Bureau of Reclamation.
This work has been accomplished at field stations at Phoenix, Ariz.
Prosser, Wash.
Bozeman, Mont.
Under the provisions of the Halogeton Glomeratus Act (Public Law 529, July 14, 1952), the Bureau is cooperating in the control of the poisonous weed halogeton on Bureau lands in Utah, Nevada, Colorado, Wyoming, Montana, and Idaho.
Certain of the Bureau's activities in planning, developing, and operating its irrigation projects are accomplished or facilitated through cooperation with other agencies, when the employment of their special skills, experience, and equipment will be beneficial to the Government.
These cooperative undertakings are carried out by means of agreements between the Bureau and the other agencies involved which include, principally, units of the Department of Agriculture and the State colleges and extension services, but often involve other Federal, State, and local agencies.
During fiscal year 1957 there were nearly 200 such cooperative agreements in effect.
They pertain to studies and investigations conducted on development farms, conservation and efficient use of soil and water, crop and cropping problems, assistance to county agricultural agents, and weed control studies.
They cover also.the development and management of reservoir recreational areas, financial aid to new settlers, and assistance in solving many other problems pertaining to the development of irrigation projects.
In order to utilize to the greatest extent, the water storage at multipurpose reservoirs, the Bureau of Reclamation has constructed 36 powerplants with an installed nameplate capacity of 5,031,550 kilowatts.
In addition, the Bureau is responsible for marketing the power generated at five powerplants constructed by the Corps of Engineers and the International Boundary and Water Commission, with a total nameplate capacity of 776,500 kilowatts.
Sale of electric power by the Bureau during the year aggregated 25,654,251,471 kilowatt-hours, with revenues from sales totaling $60,153,473.83, as shown on table 6.
During the fiscal year ending June 30, 1957, the installed nameplate capacity of hydroelectric powerplants at Bureau of Reclamation multipurpose projects and at projects for which the Bureau is responsible for marketing the power, increased 237,000 kilowatts over 1956.
At the end of fiscal year 1957, the Bureau of Reclamation had under construction 10 powerplants, which will have an ultimate installed nameplate capacity of 1,119,150 kilowatts.
The United States Army Corps of Engineers is proceeding with the construction of its plants in the Missouri River Basin project.
The ultimate nameplate capacity of Oahe Powerplant in South Dakota will be 595,000 kilowatts.
The Bureau of Reclamation will be the marketing agent for energy generated from this plant as is the case for other plants constructed by the Corps on the Missouri River Basin project.
The hydroelectric powerplants constructed and operated, under construction and authorized to be constructed by the Bureau of Reclamation and powerplants for which the Bureau is the marketing agent are listed in table 5.
To furnish the electrical energy for the Bureau's projects and to market the power which is surplus to the Bureau's needs, a transmission system including powerplant substations, switehyards, and transmission lines, has been constructed.
During the fiscal year ending June 30, 1957, nearly 460 circuit miles of transmission lines were completed to increase the total system to 9,855 circuit miles of line.
As of June 30, 1957, the installed transformer capacity of the individual substations operated by the Bureau was approximately 10,000 kilovolt-amperes.
The transmission lines completed in fiscal year 1957 are shown in table 7.
During fiscal year 1957, there were 133 contracts executed for the delivery of electric power supply.
19 with private utilities.
54 with REA cooperatives.
38 with municipalities.
5 with other Federal agencies.
3 with public power distriets.
9 with State authorities.
2 with irrigation district.
3 miscellaneous type contracts.
A number of contracts executed were renewals of operating contracts or revisions of existing contracts resulting from changed operating conditions.
The Bureau continued its policy of contracting whenever possible with private utilities, public bodies and cooperatives for wheeling power and energy over existing facilities.
The Bureau also entered into several interchange agreements with its customers.
A summary by classification of customers served by Reclamation during fiscal year 1957 is shown in table 8.
The Bureau at the end of fiscal year 1957 had 98 contracts under active negotiation.
In this number are included 28 contracts with municipalities, 34 with REA cooperatives, 17 with private utilities, 1 with public power district, 8 with other Federal agencies, 5 with State authorities, 3 with irrigation districts and 2 miscellaneous type contracts.
A number of these are to renew the existing contracts, or to revise contracts in existence due to changes in operating conditions.
In carrying out its construction activities for fiscal year 1957, the Bureau of Reclamation continued its program of developing water and land resources in the western United States and made important contributions to the expansion of the Nation's resource base.
About $130 million were converted into Reclamation works, an investment in dams, powerplants, irrigation canals, pumping plants, electric transmission lines, and other wealth-creating facilities available to serve the West and the Nation.
Construction completed during the year added more than 160,000 acre-feet of storage in new Reclamation project reservoirs, 57,000 kilowatts of hydroelectric generating capacity, 317 miles of canals, aqueducts, and related water conveyance and distribution structures, and 526 miles of large electrical transmission lines.
The total value of all contracts awarded in the fiscal year 1957 amounted to about $299 million comprising the face value of more than 734 separate contracts for construction, materials, equipment, and supplies.
Of this total amount, construction contracts accounted for about $289 million or about 97 percent.
The 193 construction contracts in force at the end of the year had a total value of about $397 million.
The fiscal year will be remembered for the start of construction in April 1957 of the Glen Canyon Dam and powerplant, major features of the Colorado River Storage project.
The year was highlighted by several other notable construction events.
On the Central Valley project in California, construction began on the Trinity Dam, a principal feature in the transbasin diversion of water from the Trinity River watershed to the adjacent Central Valley Basin.
On the Solano project, also in California, Monticello Dam was essentially completed and storage began in Lake Berryessa, the new reservoir at the dam.
In Utah, Wanship Dam and 22 miles of the Davis and Weber aqueducts were completed on the Weber Basin project.
The Palisades Dam and Powerplant on the Palisades project in Idaho were substantially completed and two of the powerplant's four generators were placed in operation.
Missouri River Basin project construction was marked by completion of Pactola Dam in South Dakota and start of Anchor Dam in Wyoming.
FiguRE 5.—Second highest dam in United States.
Glen Canyon Dam, a wall of concrete shaped in an arch standing 700 feet above bedrock will fill this canyon on the Colorado River at the Arizona-Utah border when completed as a major structure in the Colorado River Storage project.
Work on the project begun in 1957 will make possible the development of the vast Upper Colorado River Basin's irrigable lands and abundant resources of fuel, oil, minerals, and timber in Colorado, New Mexico, Utah, and Wyoming.
Bureau of Reclamation photo.
River Basin project, Oregon; and the Colorado River Bridge on the Colorado River Storage project, Arizona.
Table 8 lists the major construction contracts (more than $1 million) awarded by the Bureau of Reclamation in fiscal year 1957.
The outstanding award for the fiscal year was for construction of the Glen Canyon Dam and powerplant, principal features of the Colorado River Storage project in Arizona.
The contract is by far the largest contract awarded by the Bureau of Reclamation.
Other features for which contracts were awarded were Trinity Dam and Clear Creek tunnel on the Central Valley project in California, the Fremont Canyon Powerplant and Power Čonduit and Anchor Dam on the Missouri River Basin project in Wyoming, Casitas Dam on the Ventura River Basin project in California, the Wahluke Siphon, canal, and wasteway on the Columbia Basin project in Washington, and the Colorado River Bridge on the Colorado River Storage project in Arizona.
Listed in table 10 are the principal features completed on Bureau of Reclamation projects in fiscal year 1957.
The table includes 2 storage dams, 35 pumping plants, 295 miles of canals, laterals, wasteways, and drains, 22 miles of aqueducts, and 526 miles of transmission lines.
A significant event was start of construction in April 1957 of the second highest dam in the United States, the 700-foot high Glen Canyon Dam on the Glen Canyon Unit of the Colorado River Storage project in northcentral Arizona.
The 5,063,000-cubic yard, concretearch structure and the 900,000-kilowatt Glen Canyon powerplant are being built on the Colorado River.
Glen Canyon reservoir will have a capacity of 28,040,000 acre-feet.
During the fiscal vear about 25 miles of highway were placed under construction to provide access to the remote dam site.
Construction was also begun on the Colorado River Bridge which will span the Colorado River near the downstream toe of the dam.
The steel arch bridge will be the highest and second longest of its type in the United States.
Work on the new Government community of Page, Ariz., near the dam site was begun; contracts were awarded for water and sewerage systems and streets for the community.
On the Flaming Gorge unit of the Colorado River Storage project in Utah, preliminary work comprised construction of access roads, community facilities near the dam site, and a timber bridge spanning the Green River.
Construction of the concrete-arch dam is planned to begin during fiscal year 1958.
1957, bringing to a total 301,000 acres available for irrigation.
Completed were 168 miles of canals, laterals, wasteways, and drains, and 20 pumping plants.
Construction began on the 15-foot diameter, 3-mile long Wahluke siphon, and construction advanced on the Burbank pumping plants No. 2 and 3, and on the Evergreen, Frenchman Springs, and White Bluffs pumping plants.
In Idaho, construction of the 270-foot high, 13,000,000-cubic yard, earthfill Palisades Dam on the Palisades project was essentially completed.
The spillway, intake, and powerplant structures were completed and the outlet works were nearing completion at the end of the fiscal year.
Two of the 28,500-kilowatt generators in the 114,000- kilowatt Palisades powerplant were placed in operation, and work continued on the installation of the remaining two generators, which are to "go on the line" during fiscal year 1958.
Also in Idaho, construction of the American Falls pumping plant on the Michaud Flats project was about three-fourths completed by the end of the fiscal year, and work on the rehabilitation of the face of Black Canyon Dam on the Boise project was completed.
Construction progress in Oregon was noted by the advance to twothirds completion of the Haystack Dam on the Deschutes project, and initiation of construction of the Howard Prairie Dam and Howard Prairie delivery canal, both on the Rogue River Basin project.
Also on the Rogue River Basin project, a contract was awarded for construction of the Green Springs powerplant, which will be the Bureau's highest head powerplant.
The 16,000-kilowatt plant will operate under an 1,800-foot head, some 600 feet higher than any existing Reclamation powerplant.
Work continued on the rehabilitation and improvement of the existing structures of the Medford Irrigation District, including reconstruction of siphons, canals, and wasteways.
The 11,250-kilowatt Roza powerplant on the Yakima project in Washington was brought to 90 percent of completion at the end of the year.
On the same project, alterations to the Prosser Diversion Dam were completed; several sections of the Kennewick main canal and laterals were also completed.
A major Bureau of Reclamation construction undertaking during the year was start of construction of the Trinity Dam on the Trinity River Division of the Central Valley project in California.
The 510- foot high, 29,000,000-cubic yard dam will be one of the world's highest earthfill dams.
The dam and other Division structures will ultimately make possible the average annual transbasin diversion of 865,000 acre-feet of surplus waters from the Trinity River watershed to the Central Valley Basin.
Also placed under construction during the year was another major Division feature, the Clear Creek tunnel.
The 10.8-mile long, 17.5-foot diameter tunnel will be the second longest tunnel constructed on a Reclamation project.
Other construction activities on the Central Valley project included completion of excavation of the 33-foot diameter diversion tunnel at Trinity Dam; completion of 6 miles of concrete pipe laterals for the Shafter-Wasco Irrigation District on the Friant-Kern Canal Distribution System; completion of a 6-mile section of the Corning Canal; and completion of the novel fish-collecting facilities at the intake to the Delta-Mendota Canal.
Construction began on 108 miles of concrete pipe laterals for the Shafter-Waseo Irrigation Distriet.
Dam construction was notable on three other projects in California.
On the Solano project, the 304-foot high, concrete-arch Monticello Dam was essentially completed at year's end, and reservoir storage behind the dam was begun.
Putah Diversion Dam on the same project was about 80 percent completed at the end of the year.
The 285-foot high, 9,000,000-cubic-yard, earthfill Casitas Dam on the Ventura River project was placed under construction during the year.
On the Santa Maria project, construction of the Vaquero Dam neared the midway point of completion; the dam is an earthfill structure having a height of 241 feet and a volume of about 5,830,000 cubie yards.
Good progress was made on construction of the Palo Verde Diversion Dam on the Colorado River between California and Arizona.
This Palo Verde Diversion Project feature was about 75 percent completed by the end of the fiscal year.
Work on the Gila project in Arizona was noted for completion of the irrigation distribution systems for the Texas Hill and Ralph's Mill areas of the Wellton-Mohawk Division.
In Utah, the earthfill Wanship Dam on the Weber Basin project was completed and the Slaterville Diversion Dam was essentially completed by year's end.
The 5-mile long Weber aqueduet and the first 17-mile long section of the Davis aqueduct were completed.
All structures and embankment for enlargement of the Pineview Dam were completed and installation of gates and equipment were essentially completed.
Construction was started in April 1957 on the 1,400-kilowatt Wanship powerplant and the 4,000-kilowatt Gateway powerplant.
On the Provo River project in Utah, construction of the 5,000- kilowatt Deer Creek powerplant was brought to 60 percent completion.
In New Mexico, channelization of 17 miles of the Rio Grande River on the Middle Rio Grande project was completed during the year and an additional 15-mile reach of channelization was substantially completed.
Also completed on the project were 10 miles of the Atrisco feeder canal, rehabilitation of the San Acacia diversion dam, and rehabilitation of the Belen unit 1 irrigation system and units 1 and 2 of the Socorro irrigation system.
Construction progress on the Missouri River Basin project was noted by completion of the 230-foot high Pactola Dam, an earthfill structure in South Dakota.
In Wyoming, construction began on the 200-foot high, concrete-arch Anchor Dam.
Work was also begun on the earthfill Helena Valley Dam and Helena Valley pumping plant in Montana.
Construction of the 3-mile-long Helena Valley tunnel was about 30 percent completed by the end of the fiscal year.
Work on the Transmission Division of the Missouri River Basin project in North and South Dakota included completion of the 80-mile Fargo-Grand Forks 115-kv.
Big Bend-Granite Falls transmission line.
Contracts were awarded for start of construction of the 165-mile, 230-kv.
Fargo-Granite Falls transmission line and the 67-mile, 230-kv.
Utica Junction-Sioux Falls line.
In Wyoming and Nebraska, the 201-mile, 115-kv.
Alcova-Gering transmission line was completed.
In Wyoming the placing of the embankment for the earthfill Glendo Dam was 94 percent completed by the end of the fiscal year and will be completed early in fiscal year 1958.
Construction continued on the 24,000-kilowatt Glendo powerplant.
Work was started on the 48,000-kilowatt Fremont Canyon powerplant and power conduit.
In the same State the Hanover and Bluff pumping plants and associated lateral systems were completed and placed in service.
In the Nebraska and Kansas areas of the Missouri River Basin project, work was continued on development of the project's irrigation facilities.
Lovewell Dam on the Bostwick Division in Kansas neared completion and will be finished early in the next fiscal year.
An 8-mile reach of the Courtland Canal, adjoining the outlet works of Lovewell Dam, was completed.
Construction began on the 10-mile Courtland West Canal and lateral system.
On the Frenchman-Cambridge Division the first 10-mile section of the Upper Meeker Canal connecting with the outlet works of Trenton Dam was essentially completed, and the 7½/2-mile second section of the canal and associated laterals and drains were about 50 percent completed.
Completed on the Sargent unit was a 9-mile section of the Sargent Canal; work on the last 19-mile section of the Sargeant Canal and lateral system was brought to about 50 percent of completion.
The 13-mile Kirwin Main Canal on the Kirwin unit was completed, and work continued on the 16-mile Kirwin South Canal.
Construetion began in June 1957 on the 4,500-kilowatt Big Thompson powerplant on the Colorado-Big Thompson project in Colorado.
The powerplant will bring the planned development of the project to completion.
Greater use of subprofessional staff members in routine design assignments, improved design techniques and greater utilization of automatic computing devices in design work resulted in design schedules being efficiently and promptly met despite difficulties imposed by a shortage of trained design engineers.
Design specifications for 116 construction contracts and 91 major supply contracts were completed.
The average cost for these engineering services as related to the overall Bureau of Reclamation construction and rehabilitation program for the 1957 fiscal year was 5.3 percent.
Use of an electronic digital computer greatly speededup calculations of earthwork quantities in canal design.
Excavation and compacted embankment quantities for a total of 122 miles of two canals were computed from original field data at a rate of up to 600 cross sections an hour.
The calculations, which ineluded a total of 4,000 cross sections and represented 6.4 million cubic yards of excavation and 1.6 million cubic yards of compacted embankments, were completed in 9 hours.
Under conventional methods, the same computations would have required 4 man-months of design work.
Automatic machine methods for computation were similarly used in dams designed to effect considerable economy.
For one phase of analysis of the stresses in Glen Canyon Dam, computations were completed on an automatic computer in less than 2 hours.
The same analysis would have required about 40 man-days by conventional methods.
Designs for modifications and additions to the headworks and siphon spillway of the Chandler power and pumping plant on the Yakima project in Washington, included electroconductive rubber heating blankets to be installed in the plant's siphon spillway.
The blankets have flexible rubber facings which hermetically seal a waterproof heating element.
This was the Bureau's first use of the blankets to prevent adherence of ice to critical surfaces of powerplant appurtenances.
Use was made during the year of a new geophysical field technique at the Glen Canyon and Flaming Gorge dam sites.
By detonating a small explosive charge on the rock at the dam sites, the subsequent vibrations in the rock, analyzed by geophysical seismic equipment, provided a means of measuring the elasticity and strength of the foundation and abutment rock under the influence of the loads imposed by the dams and the impounded water.
Three Bureau inventions were patented during the fiscal year.
One invention permits precipitation measurements to be automatically transmitted by radio from unattended precipitation recording stations.
Also patented was a device for detecting small amounts of water in insulating oils for electrical equipment, and an invention which utilizes magnetie tape for power system oscillographic recording, rather than photographic film.
Considerable progress was made in investigating the possibilities of controlling evaporation from open reservoirs by the use of a monomolecular film—a floating invisible shield between air and water.
A method was developed to detect the presence of monomolecular layers on reservoirs.
An investigation of methods of applying hexadecanol was begun at Rattlesnake Reservoir on the Colorado-Big Thompson project in Colorado, preliminary to full-scale monomolecular layer experiments planned for Lake Hefner at Oklahoma City.
Preliminary studies indicated that the toxicity of hexadecanol (cetyl alcohol) to specific elements of aquatic life, such as plants, fish, and waterfowl, would be insignificant.
In a joint program conducted on a small lake in Oklahoma City, a 2-month trial of hexadecanol indicated no significant change in water quality or undesirable effects on lake biology.
In concrete research, a long-term study of the resistance of concrete to destructive sulfate attack confirmed that low tricalcium aluminate content in cement is the major factor contributing to sulfate resistance.
The study also indicated that sulfate resistance for all cement types is increased by a corresponding decrease in the watercement ratio.
Research into the effect of vibration of air-entrained concrete disclosed that proper air content and thorough compaction are essential to optimum freezing and thawing resistance of the concrete.
Initial work was completed to find practicable methods of improving conerete by modifying the particle shape of the sand to be used in concrete.
Treatment of a sand in the laboratory processing machines resulted in as much as 15 percent reduction in water requirement and a corresponding reduction in cement.
Hydraulic laboratory model studies of the Glen Canyon Dam spillways indicated that the preliminary design of the approach channels at the canyon edge could be reduced in width by 210 feet, which in turn will reduce the rock excavation by 440,000 cubic yards.
Hydraulic studies for Trinity Dam showed that the lengths of the hollowjet valve stilling basin and the center training wall could be considerably reduced and would result in better performance at reduced cost.
Research into a high pressure, closed conduit indicated that cavitation damage to the conduit downstream from a partly opened gate valve could be virtually eliminated by increasing the diameter of the conduit downstream from the valve to 1.75 times the diameter of the valve.
As part of the Bureau's lower-cost canal lining program, laboratory studies and field trials were continued on sediment, soil-cement, earth, asphalt, plastic, and other types of linings for irrigation canals.
It was found that the addition of only 2 to 4 percent of cement to a sandy loess soil greatly increased erosion resistance, freezing and thawing durability, and unconfined compressive strengths.
New specifications were prepared for sediment lining and prefabricated asphaltic liners.
Installations were made for field permeability tests to determine the effects of climatic conditions on compacted earth linings, and electrical methods for locating subsurface seepage paths from a canal were studied.
A chemical test was developed for the rapid determination of the cement content of soil-cement mixture for canal lining; the test is to be used as a control during mixing operations.
In soils research, studies on stabilizing clay canal slopes indicated that a pronounced reduction in expansiveness is achieved by mixing 4 percent of hydrated lime or portland cement into the clay.
Experimental stabilization of the slopes of an unlined reach of the Friant-Kern Canal, where expansive clay has caused sloughing, was begun by employing electrochemical techniques.
Research completed on the in-place measurement of the sediment density at Angostura Reservoir with an atomic radiation device showed the method to be feasible.
The device was developed and tested for the Sedimentation Subcommittee of the Interagency Committee on Water Resources as a possible supplement to conventional sediment survey methods that involve removal and laboratory testing of sediment samples.
The measurements were made using gamma rays which radiated into the sediment from a piece of radioactive material in a probe that was lowered into the reservoir.
The amount of scattering of the rays caused by the sediment was then recorded, giving a measure of the sediment density.
In weed control research, several samples of emulsifying agents were evaluated for suitability in producing stability in emulsions of aromatic solvent water weed killers.
Further development was made in the test method devised for the evaluation of emulsifying agents.
Equipment and procedures were developed to evaluate the efficacy of weed-killing chemicals under flowing water conditions.
Specifications for purchasing aromatie solvent water weed killers were revised and improved.
During the year 116 laboratory reports were issued covering the subjects of research and testing of concrete materials, hydraulic laboratory studies, earth materials investigations, research in bituminous materials, structural studies, and protective coatings investigations.
Construction costs on Bureau of Reclamation projects increased about 6.5 percent during fiscal year 1957.
This inerease was somewhat less than in fiseal year 1956, when construction costs on Reclamation projects increased about 8.5 percent.
Bidding interest in all types of reclamation construction work showed a slight increase over the preceding year, rising from an average of 5.4 bids per construction schedule in fiscal year 1956, to about 5.8 bids in fiscal year 1957.
The following table shows cost indexes for Bureau of Reclamation construction work based on the combined costs of materials and labor supplied by contractors and materials and labor supplied by the Government.
Twenty-six contracts, principally for electrical equipment, were awarded to companies offering equipment manufactured outside the United States.
These contracts, which totaled $1,387,693, included 11 English, 8 Italian, 3 Swiss, 1 West Germany, and 3 Austrian firms.
A differential of 6 percent was added to all foreign bids before comparison was made with domestic bids, in accordance with departmental regulations applying to determinations under the"Buy American Act."
An additional 6 percent differential was added if the low domestic bidder indicated that equipment or materials would be produced in an area of substantial labor surplus, as determined by the Secretary of Labor.
Allotments made prior to Fallon, Nevada Conferenee on July 27, 1907, were canceled and summary allotments issued.
The 11th edition of the Bureau's Hydraulic and Excavation Tables comprising computational data for use in design and construction of hydraulic structures was published during the year.
Technical records on the design and construction of Anderson Ranch Dam and powerplant, Boysen Dam and powerplant, and volume I of the Colorado-Big Thompson project, covering planning, legislation, and general description of the project were also published.
The Materials Laboratory Procedures Manual was issued.
In response to 7,575 requests for the Bureau's publications and informational materials received from individuals in this country and in foreign countries, 21,000 copies of technical publications and informational pamphlets were sold or distributed.
Sales of Bureau publications totaled $24,000, more than one-half of this total being made to foreign countries.
Sales of publications sold for the Superintendent of Documents totaled $6,200.
The project development program involves preparation of comprehensive plans for development of river basin resources and the investigation and planning of potential projects for the conservation and utilization of the water resources of the West.
It also includes detailed preconstruction studies on newly authorized projects.
Comprehensive surveys were undertaken in 12 basins throughout the West.
Of these studies, an interim evaluation report was prepared on the Umpqua River Basin in Oregon, and a report on the Upper American River basin in California approached completion.
In addition, comprehensive studies were active in 14 subbasins of the Missouri River Basin project, with reports completed on the Kansas River Basin, the North Platte River Basin and the Powder Division.
Investigations continued on the permanently authorized investigations program of the Bureau in Alaska.
By the end of the fiscal year, feasibility reports had been submitted to Congress on the San Luis Unit of the Central Valley project in California, the Burns Creek Dam, Reservoir and powerplant of the Palisades project in Idaho, the Mercedes Division of the Lower Rio Grande rehabilitation project in Texas, and on the San Angelo project in Texas.
Reports submitted to the Bureau of the Budget inelude those on the Greater Wenatchee Division of the Chief Joseph Dam project in Washington and the Norman projeet in Oklahoma.
Reports being reviewed by States and Federal agencies prior to submission to the Bureau of the Budget include those on the Spokane Valley proiect in Washington, the Harlingen, El Jardin and La Feria Divisions of the Lower Rio Grande rehabilitation project in Texas, the Rio Grande and Weminuche Pass Divisions of the San Luis Valley project in Colorado, and the Garrison diversion unit of the Missouri River Basin project in North and South Dakota.
The Harlingen Division of the Lower Rio Grande rehabilitation project was subsequently considered by the loeal interests for construction under the Small Reclamation Projects Act of 1956.
Definite plans reports were completed and approved on the Webster unit of the Missouri River Basin project in Kansas, the Hayden Lake unit of the Rathdrum Prairie project in Idaho, the Foster Creek Division of the Chief Joseph Dam project in Washington, the Juniper Division of the Wapinitia project in Oregon, Little Wood River project in Idaho, East Bench unit of the Missouri River Basin projeet in Montana, and the Collbran project in Colorado.
The Small Reclamation Projects Act of 1956 was approved by the President on August 6, 1956.
The act contained provisions objectionable to the President which prevented the approval of projects for loans until amendments were made.
The necessary amendments were passed by the Congress and were approved by the President on June 5, 1957.
This act permits loans of up to $5 million for the development of irrigation projects which may cost up to $10 million.
It also permits nonreimbursable grants for certain public benefits, up to $5 million for both the loan and the grant.
Although projects could not be approved until the act was amended, the Bureau worked with various applicants in preparing their material.
Two applications were almost ready for Secretarial consideration by the end of the fiscal year and several others were well advanced.
Public Law 130, 83d Congress authorized loans for the construction of irrigation distribution systems on authorized projects in lieu of construction by the Bureau.
One loan for $12,302,000 to the Solano Irrigation District in California was approved.
The Bear River Compact, previously ratified by Idaho and Utah, was ratified by the State legislature of Wyoming and submitted to the Congress for approval.
The Klamath River Compact was ratified by the State legislatures of California and Oregon and submitted to the Congress for approval.
The Columbia River Compact, previously approved by the Columbia Interstate Compact Commission and submitted to several State legislatures for approval and ratified by the States of Idaho, Nevada, and Utah was subsequently modified on August 6, 1956, and resubmitted to the State legislatures of Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, Utah, and Nevada for ratification.
Bills were introduced in the Congress requesting consent to negotiate compacts between the ten Missouri River Basin States regarding the Missouri River and between Wyoming, Montana, and North Dakota, regarding the Little Missouri River.
The consent of the Congress to negotiate compacts had been previously obtained for compacts between Arkansas and Oklahoma and between Kansas and Oklahoma regarding the Arkansas River; between Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma and Texas regarding the Red River; between California and Nevada regarding the Truckee, Carson, and Walker Rivers, and Lake Tahoe; and between Wyoming and Nebraska regarding the Niobrara River.
Preparation of those compacts are awaiting compilation of necessary hydrologic data which is in progress.
General hydrologic problems which confront investigators on many proposed Reclamation projects were under study this past fiscal year.
These studies covered the fields of storm and flood hydrology, sedimentation and water conservation and utilization.
Procedures for the preparation of tailwater curves, whieh have been under development for the past several years, were formulated in a technical manual.
Investigation of evaporation along several lines has continued in collaboration with the Geological Survey.
High altitude studies at Granby Reservoir and Pikes Peak, both in Colorado, were continued to assist in evaluating reservoir evaporation in the higher and more remote areas of the Western States.
Studies were started in cooperation with the Soil Conservation Service and the Agriculture Research Service, to develop methods of procedure for the determination of the effects of watershed treatment measures upon downstream runoff.
The Souris-Red Rivers Engineering Board through interested Federal agencies continued the systematic collection and study of hydrologic data and related flood control, and irrigation investigations in the Souris and Red Rivers.
The Board also assisted the Commission on engineering matters in the consideration of an apportionment of the waters of the Souris River between the United States and Canada under the Souris-Red Rivers reference of January 12, 1948.
During the fiscal year the Waterton-Belly Rivers Engineering Board was inactive in connection with the Waterton-Belly Rivers reference of the same date.
Construction schedules and the estimates supporting these schedules were expanded to inelude the cost of appurtenant activities which, while not technically construction costs, are necessary in the process of bringing a project to condition for operation and maintenance.
This refinement resulted in a more realistic estimate of the total and annual funds required for construction projects.
Coordination of apportionments with contract award schedules was refined so that the amounts established for obligation by quarters more closely parallel requirements of the construction projects.
In finance and accounting operations a number of new procedures in cost accounting and reporting were instituted; a centralized finance organization was established for the Upper Colorado River Storage project; an accountant's trainee program was inaugurated; and a feasibility study of the use of electronic equipment in accounting operations was in process at the end of the fiscal year.
Statistical time series references designated as official source for frequently required administrative and management data on the Bureau's activities were maintained current.
In addition, manuscripts were prepared for new editions of the Bureau's publications titled "Project Feasibilities and Authorizations"; “Appropriation Acts and Allotments" (new supplement) and "Repayment Histories and Payout Schedules" each of which are regularly brought up-to-date every 5 years, the last editions being those of 1952.
Appropriations for all purposes made available to the Bureau of Reclamation for fiscal year 1957 totaled $193,864,500.
This amount included $12,750,000 in supplemental fumds appropriated primarily for loans to irrigation districts for the construction of distribution systems on Bureau projects.
Permanent appropriations or revolving funds are not included in this amount.
The appropriation for 1957 totaled $13,709,500 more than was appropriated for 1956.
With an unobligated balance of $31.9 million carried over from fiscal year 1956 for construction and investigations, plus one-year appropriations for O. & M. and G. A. E. funds advanced by water users, trust funds and a continuing fund for emergency expenses, Fort Peck project, the total amount available to Reclamation was $231.5 million.
Of this amount there remained unobligated at the elose of 1957 construction and investigation funds in the amount of $31.9 million which are available for fiscal year 1958.
Obligations for 1957 totaled $197.0 million or 92 percent of the obligations programed as compared to 83 percent of the program accomplished in 1956.
The appropriation act for 1957, as in recent years, prohibited initiating construction on transmission facilities in areas covered by power wheeling contracts unless the wheeling agencies were unable or unwilling to provide the service.
Also the limitation upon the amount of money that may be expended for work by Government forces (force account work) was repeated in the 1957 act.
This limitation provided that not to exceed 12 percent of the allotment for any one project or unit of the Missouri River Basin project, with a maximum of $225,000 for any such project or unit, was to be so used.
Total procurement by purchase orders and supply and service contracts for the 1957 fiscal year approximated $21,660,000, an increase in dollar value of about $4,280,000, and 25 percent over the preceding fiscal vear's business.
Orders placed with small-business firms increased about 32 percent from last year, some $2,300,000, or a total in 1957 of $9,122,000.
The number of procurement actions increased from 79,513 to 90,962, for the same period, or about 14 percent.
Real property with an acquisition cost of $2,665,066 was disposed of, eliminating cost of management and operation and maintenance of such property.
Personal property with an original cost of $705,566 was declared surplus.
Of this amount, $508,700 worth was ultimately sold with proceeds amounting to $147,706 or approximately 29 percent of the original cost.
In addition, personal property with an original cost of $146,668 was donated for educational or publie health purposes.
Personal property acquired from other agencies included property with an original cost of $217,889, for which reimbursement of $87,892 was required.
Property with an original cost of $374,694, for which reimbursement was not required, was acquired.
New operating guides and procedures were prepared and issued through the Reclamation instruction system to cover the development of cost estimates for construction and irrigation, the preparation of the annual crop census report on irrigation projects, the operation and maintenance of irrigation systems, the custody, maintenance, and disposition of Bureau property other than real estate, and administrative subjects of general interest.
The incentive awards activity increased by about 20 percent, a total of 1,103 suggestions for the improvement of Bureau activities and procedures being received during the year.
Of these, approximately 49 percent were adopted and the employees who proposed the improvements were awarded $20,685.
These suggestions resulted in an estimated gross annual saving of $1,202,965.
Over 200 employees were granted cash awards in recognition of superior performance.
A Bureau employee participated in a $12,000 award which was the highest cash award that had been granted in a civilian Federal agency.
During the fiscal year the Bureau received and created 11,640 cubic feet of records; disposed of 9,026 cubic feet; transferred to Federal records centers for custody and servicing 1,704 cubic feet; and, transferred to other Government agencies, water users' organizations, etc., 531 cubic feet.
These resulted in an increase in volume of records held by all Bureau offices from 112,000 to 112,300 cubic feet.
This increase was caused primarily by personnel turnovers in a number of field offices which created perceptible slowdowns in disposals and transfers pending training of new qualified personnel.
Approximate dollar savings in space and equipment costs as a result of destruction and transfers to low-cost space amounts to $95,040.00.
In response to 7,575 requests for the Bureau’s publications and information material received from individuals in this country and in foreign countries, more than 21,000 copies of technical publications and informational pamphlets were sold at Denver or distributed from there.
Sales of Bureau publications at Denver totaled $24,000, approximately one-half of this total being made to foreign countries.
Sales of publications sold by the Bureau as agent for the Superintendent of Documents totaled $6,200.
In response to 543 requests 8,941 copies of Bureau publications were distributed.
Of these requests, 109 were of congressional origin for 1,538 publications and 138 were from agencies of the executive branch of the Federal Government for 929 copies.
Two thousand and ninety-six prints were provided for reproduction in Bureau publications, non-Government textbooks and encyclopedias, various agricultural and engineering magazines and newspapers, and to supplement exhibits and lectures.
Requests by mail and in person for visual material were also received from congressional offices and from agencies of the executive branch of the Federal Government.
Seven hundred and twenty-six films were distributed to television stations, agricultural and engineering institutions, water users' associations, organizations of farmers, and to conventions in the United States and abroad.
Ninety-two audit assignments were completed during the year.
They comprised 84 comprehensive project audits; 2 audits of water users' organizations, performed at their request; 3 special audits; and 3 miscellaneous assignments which resulted in informal letter reports.
At the request of The Alaska Railroad a member of the Comptroller's staff was temporarily assigned to that ageney to assist in the solution of certain technical problems.
In order to overcome manpower shortages, increased attention was given to ways in which the skills and abilities of employees could be more effectively utilized.
A qualifications data roster was established facilitating the matching of employees’ skills and position vacancies on a Bureauwide basis covering all employees in grades GS–9 through GS-14.
A program for the advance scheduling and placement of surplus employees was initiated.
Placements for employees on projects nearing completion are scheduled as much as six months in advance; this provides employees with an optimum degree of employment stability.
Aggressive recruitment action was taken to meet continuing manpower shortages in engineering and other categories.
Recruitment for engineers was made on a nationwide basis with visits to 114 accredited engineering colleges and universities.
More than 150 engineering students and 125 new graduate engineers were brought into Bureau training programs during the year.
Programs for the recruitment and training of beginning accountants and administrative employees were developed and implemented to provide a modest but continuing intake of employees in these categories in support of the engineering organization.
There was continued emphasis on other employee development activities.
Extensive position classification review was performed throughout the Bureau and duty realignments accomplished to conform positions to program and organization changes.
Bureau personnel technicians participated in Interdepartmental Classification and Wage Conferences held in Denver, Portland, and Washington.
Wage board hearings and negotiations were conducted to adjust pay rates to conform to prevailing practices.
Annual negotiations also were held with unions and trades councils in areas under collective bargaining.
Bureau employment increased to 10,506 full-time employees at the end of the 1957 fiscal year from 10,018 at end of 1956.
Many requests were received from various public and private agencies for assistance to foreign governments in the development of their water resources.
However, due to the increased demands of our domestic program and the acute shortage of experienced engineers, Bureau of Reclamation participation in these various technical assistance programs was largely limited to the training of foreign nationals and the performance of specialized laboratory studies and design work in the office of the Assistant Commissioner and Chief Engineer in Denver.
During the year, 141 foreign engineers and other technical people from 21 countries spent periods of 6 months or longer in on-the-job training assignments with the Bureau of Reclamation, and 125 participants from 22 countries spent shorter periods of official observation with our various offices.
In addition, there were over 100 foreign accredited visitors and several hundred tourists, students and other foreign nationals who stopped at various Bureau of Reclamation installations.
Under Special Project Agreements with International Cooperative Administration, whereby the Bureau of Reclamation assumes the technical responsibility for certain projects, there were 15 people on overseas assignments during the year in Lebanon, Formosa, and Pakistan.
In addition there were 7 Reclamation engineers on extended details to ICA and 3 on short term details.
Five Bureau people were on extended assignments to Australia under a Publie Law 402 agreement.
The services of the design offices and laboratories in Denver were much in demand.
Power Commission, India.
This work included design, design review, laboratory studies, and the review of reports.
The fiscal year 1957 whieh ineluded the last 6 weeks of the 84th Congress and the first 6 months of the 85th, was a productive one legislatively.
The three outstanding long-range enactments of the period were Public Law 984, 84th Congress, which, with the amendment embodied in Publie Law 47, 85th Congress, sets the groundwork for the program of loans and grants for small reclamation projects toward which Western delegations have been working for many years; Public Law 643, 84th Congress, which should serve to remove objections to the so-called 9 (e) or utility-type contract which is widely used on the Central Valley and Missouri River Basin projects; and Publie Law 690, 84th Congress, which clarifies the answers to problems arising out of the acquisition of excess lands by descent, devise, foreclosure, or other process of law.
In addition to these, other principal achievements during the fiscal year were enactment of bills providing authority to construet the Washoe, Crooked River, and Little Wood River projects (Publie Law 858, Public Law 992, and Public Law 993, 84th Cong., respectively) ; reauthorizing the Farwell unit of the Missouri River Basin project (Public Law 952, 84th Cong.); providing for execution of a repayment contract with the Tule Lake Irrigation District, Klamath project (Public Law 877, 84th Cong.) ; transferring administration of the San Diego aqueduct from the Navy Department to the Interior Department (Public Law 38, 85th Cong.); and providing authority for Government purchase of equipment to be turned over to water users' organizations when they take over the care, operation, and maintenance of projects (Public Law 924, 84th Cong.).
1. Rank v. Krug, et al.
The history of this case appears in the 1956 Annual Report of the Secretary, page 62.
An amended and corrected judgment was filed June 21, 1957.
2. In the matter of the California Oregon Power Co. (FPC Project No. 2082; FPC Docket E-6390).
A history of these proceedings appear in the 1956 Annual Report of the Secretary, pages 62–63.
Appeals for the District of Columbia dismissed, for lack of a justiciable controversy, the petitions for review by COPCO of the orders of the Federai Power Commission insofar as they are based on findings that COPCO's existing projects and its proposed Big Bend No. 2 project would utilize surplus water from the Link River Dam on the Klamath project.
3. Citizens Utilities Co. v. United States and California-Pacific Utilities Co. v. United States, United States Court of Claims (Nos. 364–55. 381–55).
The first named action was filed in the Court of Claims September 30, 1955, for damages totaling $12,216,775 alleged to have been sustained as a result of the wrongful and unlawful failure and refusal of the United States to renew its contract for purchase of a portion of the Metropolitan Water District's unused Hoover Dam energy.
On October 12, 1955, California-Pacific Utilities Co., holder of a similar energy contract which also by express terms of limitation terminated December 31, 1954, also filed suit for damages totaling $4,579,807 alleged to have been sustained by reason of the wrongful and unlawful failure and refusal of the United States to renew its said contract.
Defendant filed answer in each case, and its motion that the two cases be consolidated was granted by the court on December 29, 1955.
Thereupon defendant filed its motion for leave to file motion for notice to third parties, namely, the city of Los Angeles and its Department of Water and Power, Southern California Edison Co., California Electric Power Co. and the Metropolitan Water Distriet of Southern California.
Defendant's motions were granted and the notices to said parties were issued by the clerk of the court on February 1, 1956.
Plaintiffs filed motions for summary judgment and briefs in support thereof and a similar motion and brief were filed by defendant.
On March 6, 1957, the Court of Claims rendered a unanimous opinion in favor of the plaintiffs.
Requests for rehearing were denied on June 5, 1957.
4. State of Arizona, Plaintiff v. State of California et al., No. 10, Original, Supreme Court of the United States.