TO CONSERVATIONISTS, indeed to all Americans, 1958 was a year of unique significance in the history of the management of our natural resources.
It was a year of two historic milestones.
One was the centennial of the birth of Theodore Roosevelt, father of modern conservation.
The other was the 50th anniversary of the first Governors' Conference on Natural Resources—called by Theodore Roosevelt when he was 26th President of the United States.
In 1958, while the achievements of the past were honored, continuing accomplishments were giving promise that the latter part of the 20th century would be a golden age in the already brilliant history of American conservation.
To both the achievements and the promise the United States Department of the Interior contributed much.
Nineteen fifty-eight was a great year in the conservation of wildlife.
Under the amendments to the Coordination Act of 1946—sponsored by the Administration—fish and wildlife take on far greater importance than ever before in the planning and construction of Federal dams, reservoirs, and canals.
The improvement of fish and wildlife is now a specific purpose of Federal water resource projects.
Another historic piece of legislation sponsored by the Administration, the Duck Stamp Act of 1958, earmarks all net proceeds from stamp sales for the acquisition of national wildlife lands, thereby ending the diversion of these funds for other purposes.
In effect, at least $60 million will be available for expansion of the refuge system in the next decade.
The Department of the Interior has also taken steps toward establishing the new Arctic Wildlife Range in Alaska—a nine-millionacre area, nearly twice the size of Massachusetts.
This addition will increase Federal wildlife lands to nearly 27 million acres, the largest total in history.
New stipulations governing oil and gas leasing on these lands have been issued which guarantee full protection of wildlife resources.
Leasing is now prohibited in all wildlife refuges in the continental United States except where drainage of oil exists through private drilling on adjacent lands.
On other wildlife lands, leasing will be permitted only where there will be no interference with wildlife conservation.
The Department's long-range minerals program was significantly advanced in 1958 when the Department received congressional approval of its long-range domestic minerals exploration plan.
The legislation, as approved by the President, establishes the Office of Minerals Exploration as a permanent bureau of the Department, replacing the Defense Minerals Exploration Administration.
The primary purpose of the new program is to share with private industry the risks involved in carrying out mineral exploration projects which are promising but which would normally not be undertaken with private capital.
A major.step forward has been taken in the development of a helium conservation program with the presentation of Departmentdrafted legislation which would result in the conservation of some three billion cubic feet of helium per year—a vital resource which is now being tragically wasted.
Underthe program there would be constructed 12 helium-extraction plants, developed by private industry, to extract helium from natural gas before use of the gas for fuel purposes.
Congressional approval of statehood for Alaska ranks as one of the most historic accomplishments of the past 50 years.
The Department of the Interior, long an advocate of Alaskan statehood, is proud of its contributions to this major endeavor.
Alaska—rich in resources of wildlife, timber, petroleum, and minerals—represents in many ways America's last frontier, a land of promise and opportunity.
Statehood should bring many dreams to fruition.
The Department, in furthering Alaskan statehood in 1958, opened 20 million acres of public lands for mineral resource development, provided for orderly leasing of oil and gas deposits, and promoted use of timber resources.
Continuing progress was recorded in 1958 in the gigantic, four-State Colorado River Storage Project through the award of the major construction contracts for the Flaming Gorge Dam in Utah and the Navajo Dam in New Mexico.
Flaming Gorge Dam, to be completed at a total cost of $66.5 million, is the second largest feature of the project, ranking next to the giant Glen Canyon Dam, now underway.
The Flaming Gorge Dam will create a reservoir of 3.9 million acre-feet of water, and will provide 108,000 kilowatts of hydroelectric generating capacity.
Navajo, an earth-filled dam, will cost $42.4 million, and will create a reservoir 34 miles long to provide irrigation water for 115,000 acres of Indian lands.
In its entirety the Colorado River Project, costing a total of $760 million, will ultimately supply irrigation water for 360,000 acres of land and generate one million kilowatts of hydroelectric power.
The project, when completed, will be the largest single unit in the system of the Bureau of Reclamation, which today provides irrigation water for 7.5 million acres of productive land in Western States.
The increasing water demands of America’s expanding population and industry make urgent the development of new sources of fresh water.
To provide at least part of the answer to this challenge of the future, the Office of Saline Water of the Department of the Interior, is working to bring down the cost of converting sea water and brackish water into fresh water, usable for industry, agriculture, and human consumption.
Work is now being completed on the plans for a new $10 million development program to construct demonstration plants to test saline water utilization processes.
At least five plants will be built to test commercially feasible methods of obtaining fresh water from the sea and other brackish sourees.
At the same time, the Department's Office of Saline Water continues to make progress in the search for the keys to converting sea water.
For example, pilot plant testing has contributed two entirely new distillation processes and initial studies have been completed in the utilization of atomic energy as a heat source for saline water conversion.
Within the National Park System of the United States are some of our most valuable resources—natural, historic, and cultural.
Recognizing this fact, the Department is moving forward under its 10-year Mission 66 program, designed to protect the parks and put them in shape for the millions upon inereasing millions of visitors who are coming every year.
With the third year of Mission 66 underway, the accomplishments already are tremendous.
Private capital has been encouraged to invest some $15 million in new and modernized lodges and accommodations.
More than 4,000 campsites have been built and improved.
There are 17 new visitor centers, and 18 more are being built.
Over 200 miles of new and improved roads have been completed or are under construction.
In total, some 1,450 new projects are underway in the parks.
There are other conservation programs soon to be started.
In cooperation with other Federal agencies, private conservation groups, and foreign governments, the Department of the Interior is planning for a Western Hemispheric Conference on Natural Resources by 1960, a meeting which will carry forward a great tradition begun by Theodore Roosevelt.
The National Outdoor Recreation Resources Commission, a first in conservation history, is beginning its work of reviewing the long-range recreational needs of our increasing number of people.
It will present recommendations on how best to meet the recreational needs of the Nation in the year 1976, the year 2000.
Bureaus and offices of the Department are also engaged in a survey of publie lands to determine which have greatest recreational significance and which are necessary for proper wildlife conservation purposes.
The Fish and Wildlife Service is putting the finishing touches on its long-range program for the wise use and protection of fish and wildlife resources—similar, in many ways, to Mission 66.
The pages which follow outline in detail some of the ways in which the Department of the Interior is working to promote the sound use of the resources of our section of this continent.
For more than a century and a half, the wise use of the public domain has contributed to the economic and social growth of the United States.
From the public domain lands, which once embraced more than 1,800,000,000 acres, the people of our Nation have carved farms, ranches, parks, forests, cities and towns.
Today, the public lands total more than 477 million acres.
The Department of the Interior, through the Bureau of Land Management, carries on a wide variety of conservation programs geared to the sound use of this important publie resource.
Through land classification, the Bureau of Land Management determines the best present and long-term use or uses for a specife tract.
Classification may lead to disposal of public lands for private development.
Or lands may be classified for retention in Federal ownership to meet future resource requirements on a multiple-use basis.
One of the most important programs for sound land use and management is the administration of the large body of the Nation's public land laws by the Department's Bureau of Land Management.
Under these laws, over a billion acres of public domain have been transferred to private ownership and local governments.
There are many different laws that apply to the public lands.
Some of these, such as the homestead laws and the desert laws, provide means for the transfer of agricultural publie lands to private citizens for farms and homes.
Other laws permit the public sale, generally by competitive bidding, of certain lands.
Another law authorizes the lease or sale of small tracts for residence, recreation, and business sites.
Authority also exists for the withdrawal or reservation of certain lands from all forms of publie entry and appropriation—for defense, wildlife conservation, and other purposes.
One of the most important parts of the Department's land management program is the maintenance of the official public land records.
These priceless documents record the claim of use and ownership of lands that are now or have been part of the public domain.
Cadastral surveys are the first step in promoting wise use of the public lands.
The public land surveys create and identify the boundaries of the public lands and also reestablish old boundaries and markers which have been destroyed or obilterated.
Surveys have been extended over large areas valuable for minerals, including gas and oil, and in the timber areas of the Western States as part of the program for harvesting the mature timber crop.
Extensive areas, particularly in California, have been surveyed and subdivided to meet the great expansion of the small tract program in that State.
The determination and location of the boundaries of the Federal range land are also a necessary part of the range management program.
The preparation of mineral leasing maps for submerged areas of the Outer Continental Shelf, the resurvey of public land boundaries where old markers and lines have been obliterated, the survey of areas for settlement (especially in Alaska), and the extension of the public land survey grid over millions of acres of unsurveyed Alaska wilderness and to facilitate mineral exploration and development are all important phases of this vital operation.
Grazing, range conservation, and range improvement programs conducted by the Bureau of Land Management have been planned to further the wise use of range land resources and to rebuild the Federal Range.
Proper inventory of these resources, the adjudication of grazing privileges, and the establishment of grazing allotments are the necessary forerunners to the efficient and sound use of the public range lands.
Conservation programs have been closely tied in with grazing land administration to insure perpetuation and improvement of renewable range land resources by providing fencing, water developments, seedlings, and other improvements necessary for proper management.
Range condition-and-trend studies, utilization checks, and rangeuse supervision all are part of the Department's efforts to promote sound range land use and conservation.
Establishment of game management units also has enhanced wildlife values and uses on the public domain.
In the soil and moisture conservation program major efforts have been directed toward the development of sound community watershed plans.
These plans are designed to improve vegetal cover, provide proteetion to the soil resources, provide water for wildlife and livestock, and utilize water for forage improvement.
Soil and moisture technicians, assigned to range distriets, participate in the planning and construction of retention dams and waterspreading systems to retard potentially destructive and wasteful water runoff and soil erosion.
Range revegetation through reseeding and waterspreading protects the soil, increases forage, and preserves important watershed values.
This important work is part of a 20-year program begun in 1955 by five Department of the Interior agencies.
In carrying out an active program of rehabilitating depleted range lands and promoting the most effective use of all the public range, range management personnel coordinate grazing activities on a complex pattern of intermixed Federal, State, and private lands.
Bureau of Land Management also conducts a range improvement program in cooperation with stockmen, including range reseeding, noxious weed control, and the construction of truck trails, corrals, fences, and watering facilities.
Fire prevention and suppression are also taking a major place in the Department's program for the conservation and management of the Nation's range lands.
Forest lands managed by the Department's Bureau of Land Management are almost equal in size to the State of Texas.
Since nearly one-third of the forested lands contain commercial timber, sound management practices are being emphasized in order to achieve the greatest forest use potential.
Forest management objectives of conservation through wise and orderly use are being developed on a sound technical basis.
Lands are inventoried in accordance with their forest assets, and by the measurement of representative samples of forest stands.
The data are used to determine the net increase of wood annually, thereby indicating the practical growth of forest resources and the volume of timber which can be removed each year without exhausting the supply.
This is the modern-day concept of sustained yield forest management, which treats timber as a perpetually harvestable crop.
Timber cutting is done by private industry, which purchases cutting rights on a competitive basis at public auctions.
Timber harvesting is planned and supervised by foresters according to the most suitable conditions.
Road locations and conservation practices are specified such as the removal of logging debris, reseeding, and protection of other resources.
While sustained yield timber production is the major use of the forests, there are others.
A wise management plan for forest lands must provide for multiple land and resource uses.
Thus, in addition to timber, management plans provide for recreation development, wildlife management, watershed protection, erosion control, and protection of the natural esthetic values of forest lands.
The mineral resources on our public lands—unlike timber, soil, water, and wildlife—are not replenishable.
Once used, they are gone forever.
Our public lands contain valuable deposits of oil, gas, phosphate, and other minerals, and the Department initiates, administers, and develops mineral programs on these lands to insure their sound utilization.
The Bureau of Land Management's minerals conservation and development program is designed to encourage mineral exploration and development by private industry through the various mining and leasing laws, such as the General Mining Laws of 1872, the Mineral Leasing Acts of 1920, and the Outer Continental Shelf Act of 1953.
Mineral and mining activity returns substantial royalties and bonuses to the taxpayers through a system of competitive and noncompetitive leasing.
The Bureau of Land Management, in conjunction with the Geological Survey, supervises lease activities and operations insuring that sound conservation will be practiced.
To meet the growing food and water requirements of the Nation, our rivers and streams must be utilized to the fullest possible extent before water is permitted to flow into the sea.
As President Eisenhower said in his State of the Union message in January 1958, “The whole matter of our making the best use of every drop of water from the moment it touches our soil until it reaches the oceans, for such purposes as irrigation, flood control, power production, and domestic and industrial uses clearly demands the closest kind of cooperation and partnership between municipalities, States, and the Federal Government.
Wise use of our Nation's water resources is not a simple matter of prudent protection and prevention of waste.
Rather, it is a complex problem involving the distribution and use of water for many purposes.
Two important facts emphasize the inevitability of an inereased use of water in the years ahead.
First, our population is increasing at the rate of about two million a year.
Census Bureau projections indicate that our country will have at least 220 million people as early as 1975, based on current trends.
Furthermore, our population may double again in the second half of the century as it did in the first.
A large share of this population increase is expected to occur in the States west of the Mississippi River, where wise use of water resources is essential to survival.
Wise use of irrigation water turns arid areas into commercially important erop land producing consumer foods in high demand.
Secondly, despite current erop surpluses, the total acreage of productive agricultural land is decreasing.
This trend is expected to continue.
Nearlyone and one-quarter million acres of good farm land are lost each year to housing, airports, factories, highways, shopping centers, and the like.
By 1975, more than 20 million aeres of today's farm land will be used for other purposes, and at the same time our population will have increased by nearly 60 million.
In 1847, the Mormon pioneers undertook the first modern irrigation in the United States.
From that beginning, irrigation practices spread throughout the Western States, and by 1902, when the Department's Bureau of Reclamation was formed, about 71/ million acres of land had been placed under irrigation, principally through private initiative and financing.
Today, more than 27 million acres of land are under irrigated cultivation.
Approximately 7 million acres receive water from irrigation facilities constructed by the Bureau of Reclamation.
The modern multipurpose reclamation project not only provides water for agriculture but also promotes outstanding benefits in flood control, power, recreation, and fish and wildlife enhancement.
Reclamation reservoirs are used to impound spring snowmelt and water runoff which would otherwise go unused and oftentimes cause tragic loss of life and property through flood damage.
Hydroelectric power development at multipurpose dams contributes to the energy supply of expanding areas which would otherwise remain statie through shortages of needed power.
The recreational use of reclamation reservoirs is another benefit which is often overlooked.
More than 12 million vacationists visit these water playgrounds annually.
In many instances, fish and wildlife values are increased by reclamation developments.
The progress, growth, and development of the Western United States has been made possible by the wise consumption of water and its planned multiple use.
For example, Hoover Dam, completed in 1936, assures a water supply for the great metropolitan area of Southern California, provides important power generation facilities, makes water available for commercially valuable crops, and increases the enjoyment of nature through beautiful Lake Mead.
The Salt Lake City Metropolitan District has contracted for a large share of the water resources being developed by the multi-use Provo River Project in Utah.
Other municipalities in Western States are better using scant water resources through storage provided in Reclamation reservoirs.
These municipal water users repay the Federal Government in full, plus interest, for the investments made in their behalf.
Construction of the vast four-State Colorado River Storage Project is under way, opening a new vista of opportunity in the West.
This multipurpose complex will create a productive area of 100,000 square miles from an underdeveloped land which is rich in natural resources.
Water and power will provide opportunity for industrial development and agriculture, contributing to the progress and growth of cities and towns in Colorado, New Mexico, Utah, and Wyoming.
In total, projected construction sehedules provide for multipurpose reservoirs which will impound 58 million acre feet of currently unused water—enough to supply irrigation needs for more than 11/ million acres.
Preliminary studies are nearly complete for the Garrison Diversion Unit on the Missouri River, which will carry water to more than 1 million acres in North and South Dakota.
Completion of the Trinity Division of the Central Valley Project in California will make available an additional 1,190,000 acre-feet of water for presently irrigated lands.
Finally, a comprehensive analysis of Texas water-use requirements has been outlined, and a broad program to meet these needs is being developed.
Development of better water-use practices is carried on in many additional ways.
For example, experiments are being conducted to develop a practical and economical "chemical shield" to reduce evaporation losses from lakes and reservoirs.
Today, Western reservoirs lose between three and eight feet of surface water each year through evaporation, and laboratory studies indicate that it may be economically feasible to save up to 30 percent of evaporated water without harmfully affecting human or aquatic life.
Other experiments such as weed control programs to eliminate salt cedars and other waterwasting vegetation, are being carried forward to increase use of existing water resources.
Hydroelectric generation of power is a valuable byproduct in the efficient multiple use of water resources.
In the Northwest, the Department's Bonneville Power Administration supplies well over half of the electric power requirements of the Columbia River Basin.
The BPA makes possible the electrical integration of both public and private power generating facilities through its high-voltage grid which forms the backbone of the voluntary Northwest Power Pool.
In other parts of the country, the Southwestern Power Administration and the Southeastern Power Administration further the sound use of water resources through power marketing, integration, exchange, and planning of power development, in accordance with the power needs and practices of each region.
One of the most inspiring scientific investigations underway today is that which will lead to the successful development of commercially feasible methods of desalting the oceans and seas.
Progress in the conversion of saline water will bring new benefits to this country and to underdeveloped areas throughout the world.
Successful desalting of water will, in many respects, fulfill the ancient dream of the flowering of the deserts of the world.
In this country, it also has become evident that many parts of the Nation will, in future years, turn to the oceans and other sources of brackish water to meet their growing water needs.
Therefore, the Department of the Interior, through the Office of Saline Water, conducts a research and development program to develop economically feasible methods of desalinization of water.
Since the initiation of the Saline Water Program in 1952, progress has resulted in a several-fold reduction in the cost of converting salt water to fresh water.
This progress has resulted from determined work and progressive reduetions in costs, rather than through socalled breakthroughs.
Continued progress is expected along the lines of past achievements, and many scientists believe that the development of successful methods of saline water conversion is principally a matter of time.
To promote the use of saline water resources, the Office of Saline Water has moved forward as rapidly as technology and congressional appropriations would allow.
Primarily, the effort has been made to coordinate and stimulate activities among interested publie and private groups rather than develop extensive Federal laboratory and testing facilities.
Federally financed grants and contracts have been entered into with industrial research organizations, universities, research institutes, and private firms.
The Department has also promoted studies by the Bureau of Reclamation and the Bureau of Standards, as well as other municipal and public bodies.
In addition, cooperative agreements for the exchange of information and participation in joint development work have been undertaken with private firms which are independently working on saline water conversion.
When the technical barriers are finally surmounted, sea water will be converted by many different kinds of apparatuses ranging from small household stills to large munieipal and industrial plants.
The people of the United States are now using about 1 gallon out of every 5 that is potentially available to them.
Water shortages stem more from poor distribution than from an inadequacy of the total amount of water which each year falls on the United States and runs off to their oceans.
The sound use of water resources requires, more and more, new and improved knowledge.
We need to know, for example, the details of what happens when intermediate and low-level radioactive liquid wastes are ponded on the surface, or injected into the ground.
Disposal of radioactive wastes by ponding in lagoons and injection in wells already has been practiced for several years.
How long will these methods be satisfactory?
We do not currently know enough about diffusion and dilution in ground water and surface streams to give a realistic answer.
The problem of stored high-level waste has even greater long-range importance.
Each reservoir of highly radioactive waste is a potential threat of serious and long-term contamination of the water resources of an area because the waste could be released at any time by leakage, accident, sabotage, military attack, or seismic damage.
Should any such waste be released, the immediate problems would be how to immobilize it, how to predict where it would go if it moved, how to trace its movement, and how to calculate interactions between the waste and the geologie environment.
To solve these problems, we need to know more about the fundamental principles involved in the motion of ground water, the behavior of water as it first enters the ground, the diffusion in surface streams, the movement of sediment in streams, and ion exchange.
Where wastes may be discharged or escape into the environment, we need to know in detail the geology, hydrology, and physical and organic chemistry of the area.
The rate of accumulation of radioactive wastes emphasizes the need for accelerated study to develop more knowledge and more thorough understanding of this problem and its solutions.
Coal, petroleum, metals, and nonmetallic minerals are deposited in the earth at rates so unbelievably slow that these resources are considered to be non-renewable.
At the same time, minerals are increasingly important to American industry and consequently to the national security and standard of living of the American people.
In the circumstances, it is essential that we do everything possible to further the development and efficient use of mineral resources, to assure that the greatest possible value is extracted from every ounce of our minerals and fuels.
During June of fiscal year 1957 the Department presented a longrange minerals program to the Congress.
The essentials of the program involved an acceleration of those activities, such as topographic and geologic mapping, which must precede and supplement private exploration; an expanded program of Government research and development work; the maintenance of a fiscal climate that encourages private initiative in minerals development; and the stimulation of an intensive search for new commercial deposits.
When no action was taken on its proposals, the Department developed and presented a revised program to the Congress in April, 1958.
During the preceding year, there had been sharp declines in the prices of several metals—notably copper, lead, zine, and some other metals—declines which hampered minerals production in this country.
In order to alleviate this situation, the Department requested the enactment of legislation which would authorize stabilization payments to producers within distressed segments of the mining industries.
In addition, the Department requested funds to permit immediate acceleration of research and development activities carried out by the Geological Survey and the Bureau of Mines.
The Department also placed new emphasis on the need for authority to continue a program of financial assistance to private industry in minerals exploration projects.
Again, the Congress failed to give adequate support on the Department's program.
There are many examples of efforts to extract maximum value from mineral resources.
In the early boom days of the petroleum industry, little thought was given to obtaining the maximum amount of crude oil from a field.
Eventually, this tremendous wasting of oil, as well as natural gas, was recognized to be serious squandering of a vital resource.
To cut such losses, many practices went into effect, including well-spacing, allocation of production, and secondary recovery methods.
Much remains to be done, however, if the maximum recovery of oil is to be achieved.
A subsurface trap, for example, may contain 100 barrels of crude oil per acre-foot, of which only 50 barrels can be produced by present methods.
The Department's Bureau of Mines, in cooperation with the oil industry, is conducting research on various new methods of increasing primary and secondary recovery.
One approach to the problem is the maintenance or restoration of mechanical energy in the form of gas under pressure in producing formations.
Research, moreover, is now being conducted on improvements in mining techniques which will make it possible to mine more ore from deposits.
Unsound use generally results not from carelessness, but from a lack of engineering knowledge.
The mining engineer of today needs better formulas and instruments to design mines adequately and to conduct mining operations which cut resource losses to a minimum.
The Bureau of Mines of the Department is now engaged in studies of the application of physics to mining—studies which are pointing the way to improved techniques.
Nonetheless, there are tough problems in developing methods which will increase the recovery of valuable ores whose extraction is now uneconomic.
Bureau of Mines research in efficient use of mineral resource often results in such equipment as this 10-story high, 1,450-ton electric shovel which is stripmining overburden in a Montana coal pit.
As an example of how a product of great value can be wasted, consider helium.
This lightweight, inert gas is vital to missile and atomic energy programs, as well as other Federal, industrial, medical, and research activities.
It possesses many qualities which cannot be duplicated.
The Nation's total supply of helium is produced by the Bureau of Mines at four plants located in Texas, New Mexico, and Kansas, where 340 million cubic feet were extracted last year.
This amount, however, contrasts sharply with the estimated 3 billion cubie feet of helium wasted last year when helium-bearing natural gas was used as fuel because helium extraction facilities are lacking.
To cut this waste, the Department of the Interior is seeking legislation which will make it possible to carry out an effective longrange helium conservation program in cooperation with private industry.
This new conservation effort entails the construction of 12 new helium processing plants, located on helium-bearing natural gas pipelines, to extract helium from the gas before it goes to market.
Success will mean an end to current wasteful practices.
Energy requirements of the Nation require that fuel resources, wherever found, be developed and utilized by a growing America.
The production of lesser known and hyper-pure metals well exemplifies the need for more intelligent mineral processing and the expansion of new uses for metals.
Zirconium ore, for example, contains a rare metal called hafnium which must be removed in order to process high-grade zirconium.
Finding uses for hafnium's unique properties is a subject of current research.
Gallium, another lesser known metal, must be separated in the processing of highly pure aluminum.
We are long on gallium supplies but extremely short on uses.
No one can predict, however, how long there will be such a slight demand.
Unusual programs, such as atomic energy or missile research, have in the past required unusual minerals with unique qualities.
And whenever such a new demand comes into existence, another substance is often saved from the waste pile.
The Department's responsibilities in the stimulation of minerals exploration include geologic mapping and studies in related theoretical and applied science by the Geological Survey.
Effective utilization of our mineral wealth requires the collection and interpretation of geologie data which will assist in the discovery and appraisal of untapped mineral resources.
In the face of expanding population and unprecedented defense needs, geologic mapping and related research in the earth sciences have greatly increased our knowledge of the Nation's mineral resources.
Rapid advances in new geologic technology and tools have been made in recent years.
Many of these advances—portable seismometers, geochemical and geobotanical exploration techniques, and modern applications of photogeology—were pioneered by Geological Survey scientists.
Because the intelligent use of resources involves a continuing relationship between men and the land, the National Topographical Map Series prepared by the Geological Survey is of particular value.
These maps, which are complete portrayals of the terrain and the works of man in any given area, provide valuable information on the accessibility of resources—information essential in resource exploration and development.
Without efficient mapping services, the sound use of water, minerals, forests, and soil, as well as the preservation of scenic areas and wildlife refuges, would be infinitely more difficult.
Because our Nation's mineral requirements are increasing at a rapid rate, an aggressive minerals exploration program becomes an increasing necessity.
The Department of the Interior, through the Defense Minerals Exploration Administration, has conducted since 1951 an exploration program for strategic and critical minerals needed for national defense.
Because strictly defense mineral goals have been achieved, the Department has obtained legislation to continue the minerals exploration program on a permanent basis.
The establishment of this permanent minerals exploration program in the Department as a cooperative venture with private industry will continue to provide an effective and efficient method of developing sources of mineral reserves, adding to the wise use of these resources for the benefit of present and future generations of Americans.
The Department's concern for the sound use of Indian natural resources is a direct outgrowth of its trust responsibilities, exercised through the Bureau of Indian Affairs, for thousands of Indians and 52,000,000 acres of Indian land, located principally west of the Mississippi River.
Approximately three-fourths of this land, although held in Federal trust, is classified as “tribal land" and is the private property of Indian tribes. The remaining quarter, called "allotted land," belongs to individual Indians. The pattern of ownership, in short, is extremely complicated, and this fact serves to heighten the problems which the Bureau of Indian Affairs must face in administering its trust responsibilities with respect to resource management and use. Roughly half of the allotted tracts are held either by the original allottees or other single individuals; the other half are in multiple ownership as a result of inheritance. While a majority of these "heirship" tracts are owned by two to five individuals, a substantial number are owned by six or more, and some are the joint property of literally dozens.
From the standpoint of use, by far the largest portion of the Indian lands—some 32,000,000 acres—is classified as open range and is used principally for the grazing of cattle or sheep.
While much of this land, particularly in the Southwest, is used by individual Indians or Indian livestock associations, a substantial portion has been organized into range units and is leased, under a permit system, to both Indians and non-Indians.
As trustee, the Bureau of Indian Affairs is responsible for administering these range units.
Its principal aim in range management is to develop and maintain a pattern of use which will (1) protect and conserve the basic forage resources, and (2) provide the maximum economic return to the Indian landowners consistent with the conservation objective.
The second largest category of Indian lands from the use standpoint is that of forest lands, which total some 16,000,000 acres.
Of these, between 5,000,000 and 6,000,000 acres are elassified as commercial woodlands.
These 'forests provide many things: timber for industry; forage for livestock; fish and wildlife habitat; recreation opportunities for the vacationer.
Within them are the fountainheads of many streams and rivers that supply water for farms and cities.
Sound use of the Indian forest, therefore, is multiple use, with the goal of returning the greatest possible benefit to the Indian owners and tribal communities.
For many years, the most important objectives of Indian forest management were to produce timber products to full sustained yield capacity and also to develop and use grazing values to full capacity.
There is no reason to believe that these will become subordinated to other uses.
Today, however, there is a steadily increasing emphasis on concurrent use—development of other values.
Increasing populations require increasing volumes of water—water available as needed.
Control of water starts at the headwaters of streams, in the forests; and forest management practices affect water flow.
Increasing populations also require more space for relaxation, and forest management practices affect recreational values.
Effective forest management begins with an inventory of forest resources and characteristics.
Rapid progress is being made in the field of forest inventory on Indian lands, and sound plans for multiple use are being put in operation.
In addition to the range and forest lands, about 3,800,000 acres of the Indian lands are currently being dry farmed either by Indians or by non-Indians under lease, while some 870,000 acres are under irrigation cultivation.
The wise use of the Indians' natural resources of soil and water is dependent upon a knowledge and understanding of modern agricultural practices.
Although management of these lands is still a Federal responsibility, the Department encourages the Indians to prepare for eventual assumption of full responsibility and authority; a properly balanced Indian program giving consideration to physical, social, and economic factors is a prerequisite to the optimum utilization of the Indian lands.
Through resource inventories started in 1957, the Department collects basic physical data for each reservation.
This information will show kinds and amounts of soil and plant resources.
Used in conjunction with available social and economic data, this information will contribute to the Department's planning for wise use of natural resources.
It will provide a foundation upon which an educational program, to develop Indian knowledge and understanding of these natural resources, can be built.
Such a program is an essential requirement for future resouree use and development programs based on the assumption of full responsibility and authority by Indian people.
Mineral production on Indian land is undertaken by private industry under prospecting permits of various types and standard leasing agreements.
Exploration of potentially mineral-laden areas is essential if the Indians are to receive full benefit from use of their natural resources.
Indian tribes and individual Indian landowners are therefore encouraged to lease their land for mineral development with a view to obtaining the maximum exploration, development, and income consistent with sound conservation.
Mining leases contain more stringent provisions than those common to the business world, to insure sound conservation practices and fulfillment of the Government's trust responsibility to the Indians.
Realizing the irreplaceability of their mineral resources, Indians as landowners are strongly interested in the joint efforts of the Government and industry to obtain efficient operation, eliminate wasteful practices, and protect the correlative rights of landowners and operators.
The Indian landowners' interest is primarily in nonwasteful production for use.
The Geological Survey joins with the Bureau of Indian Affairs in responsibility for royalty accounting, supervision of field operations, and application of rules to prevent waste and promote conservation.
For example,these two agencies strive to encourage the greatest ultimate recovery of oil and gas through unit operation of leases and application of the most advanced methods of secondary recovery.
The present well-organized system for production of oil and gas is regulated to assist in orderly, nonwasteful, and equitable production; this system results from long years of coordinated efforts by the petroleum industry, oil and gas-producing states, and the Federal Government.
Although State regulatory agencies generally do not have jurisdiction over production from Indian lands, the Department recognizes that the conservation of petroleum resources in Indian lands constitutes an integral part of the States' conservation problem, making cooperation and coordination with State authorities essential.
Sound use of other minerals is gained through supervision of field operations by the Geological Survey, unitization of leases, and suspension of operations based on market conditions.
American Indians are encouraged to develop and use their individual capacities either within their tribal organizations or as individuals living on or off the reservation.
According to their personal qualifications, they may hold any type of employment, private or governmental.
To help the Indian attain his highest potential, the Federal Government provides assistance to: (1) raise the Indians' educational standards through the provision of more and better schools; (2) improve their health through better medical and hospital services (through the United States Public Health Service); and (3) better their economic and social conditions through the stimulation of new job opportunities in agriculture and industry.
Over half the Bureau's annual appropriation each year goes for reservation schools for the Indians or for payments for their education at nearby State-supported schools.
The remainder goes for a dozen other services such as adult education, relocation services, land management, soil conservation, irrigation, forestry, roads, and welfare.
This is the Bureau's major responsibility—the fostering of conditions which will stimulate and encourage the Indian to develop his own human resources.
It is against this background that the systematic development and conservation of his natural resources—his land, livestock, and forests—proceed.
With the exception of our former territory and newest State of Alaska, this Nation's territorial possessions are island areas.
Some, like Hawaii, enjoy an advanced stage of economic development and efficient resource use as States of the Union.
Others, such as the Trust Territory of the Pacifie, are so meagerly supplied with natural resources that mere survival presents a problem to local populaces.
As a result, Federal assistance to our territorial areas, extends, in many cases, not only to conservation efforts but to the active promotion of the growth of free economic and political institutions.
Federal economic assistance has developed essentially in the fields of transportation and public works.
Alaskan Railroad and provides directly—or through private contractors—many of the transportation facilities in the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.
The territorial public works program, totaling $70 millions in fiscal 1958, is also financed by the Federal Government and has been planned to promote the effective use of local resources.
In stimulating business enterprise, the Department has taken effective steps to bring private industry into resource development.
In past vears, much of this activity has taken place in Alaska, and thus helped this area's advance to statehood.
A new and modern wood pulp industry has been brought to Southeastern Alaska, for example, through the establishment of a large and successful plant at Ketchikan.
The coastal forests of Alaska, stretching to the Kenai Peninsula, constitute one of the greatest virgin stands of timber in the world: for years these forests have been left undeveloped.
The Department has also encouraged the development of oil and gas resources in Alaska—on the Kenai Peninsula and in the northern reaches of Alaska beyond the Arctic Circle.
The proved deposits in Northern Alaska are substantial.
The oil strike on the Kenai Peninsula is encouraging, but the extent of the recoverable reserves has not yet been determined.
Even lacking such confirmation, exploration and development efforts have led to oil and gas leasing activities which now embrace millions of acres of Federal lands in many parts of Alaska.
The great hope of Alaskans today is that wise use of Alaskan mineral resources will insure the economic health of the Nation's newest State.
The Department of the Interior is proud of its role in actively improving the resource potentials of Alaska when it was a territory and of its part in effectively advancing Alaska to statehood.
While cooperative development and effective use of natural resources may seem less spectacular in other Territorial possessions, the efforts of the Department have been equally important and have provided a spark to progress.
In the Virgin Islands, the Virgin Islands Corporation's program in electric power, sugar and agriculture generally has, with tourist and recreation developments, bolstered the local economy.
Fresh water has always been a problem in the Virgin Islands.
The program of building water-catchment basins has continued.
Beyond this, the Virgin Islands can look forward soon to construction of a plant for the conversion of saline to fresh water which may solve one of the islands' most pressing resource problems.
In the Pacific, resource use programs extend from Hawaii and American Samoa through the Trust Territory to Guam.
The operation of a fish cannery under private auspices but with Federal and territorial encouragement has become a major Samoan enterprise.
In the Hawaiian Islands the Molokai irrigation project, after study by the Bureau of Reclamation, is under construction by the Territorial government.
In the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, coconut groves are being replanted and cacao plantations developed.
A project for subsistence fishing in these islands will not only add greatly to the importance of this food resource but may eventually develop into a small commercial fish cannery in the Palaus.
Over all these programs for resource utilization are the Department's broader and even more fundamental plans for encouraging the evolution of free political institutions.
In those Territories where statehood may not be the natural objective of political maturity, the Department's programs have brought, in increasing measure, the opportunities, the rights, and the duties of self-government.
Fish and wildlife—which mean both food and recreation—are often the first victims of faulty conservation practices.
Conversely, when conditions which adversely affect fish and wildlife values are corrected, other important resource-use programs are furthered.
For example, while the nonhunter may be disinterested in the abundance of game, the existence of wildlife generally means ground cover which protects a watershed.
A depleted trout stream often indicates faulty soil conservation and land management.
Lands stripped of timber and improper farm practices not only destroy trout spawning beds but also mean that fertile topsoil needed to maintain human life is being washed away and wasted.
Air pollution, harmful to fish, also limits the value of a stream for human consumption, industry, and recreation.
In many cases, it is a local sportsman's organization which sets in motion efforts to clean up rivers and streams.
Hunting pressures have many times brought about the reexamination of resources, and the quest for cottontail and quail has often clearly shown private landowners the importance of soil conservation.
The practical problem of oil and gas leasing on Federal wildlife refuges and lands, plus the possibility that the conservation of wildlife might forestall utilization of valuable mineral resources, has led to the establishment of clear-cut guidelines by the Department which will permit oil development and yet insure maximum protection for wildlife resources.
Conservation principles, however, apply to the high seas as well as to land, and to international as well as national conditions.
The plight of the Atlantic salmon fishery, for instance, is a story of a century of exploitation based on the belief that resources are unending.
Despite the fact that perpetuation of the species depends upon successful spawning, dams were constructed without considering this problem.
Finally, stream pollution completed the task of reducing this great resource to a pitiful fragment.
However, planners of the Columbia River Basin development, undertaken primarily for irrigation and power, recognized the importance of the fish and wildlife resources.
Therefore, extensive and continuing efforts were introduced to retain the fish and game potential which otherwise would be sacrificed.
Another example of conservation efforts directed toward wise use is seen in the Pacifie salmon study which involves three nations and half an ocean.
Painstaking research based upon serology and parasitology has developed ways of differentiating between American and Asian salmon stocks.
Equally difficult research based upon systematic tagging and recapturing of fish is under way in the areas of the ocean in which the western and eastern salmon strains spend the marine portion of their lives.
Studies of the areas of intermingling will form the basis for new rules of harvesting the resource so that each salmon strain can be managed to insure a maximum annual yield.
Conservation is also a laboratory product.
The “education of the mouse" technique, for example, developed by the Fish and Wildlife Service, makes seed-eating rodents ill without destroying them, thereby cutting many years off the time formerly needed to rebuild a forest.
It was in the laboratory that the selective poison which will kill destructive lamprey larvae but not injure fish was discovered after 5,000 trials, and it was laboratory experiments that developed the electrical units which trace the movements of fish, count them, and guide them past intake openings at hydroelectric facilities.
When research also determines the reason the populations of some food fishes fluctuate so violently, another milestone in conservation will have been reached.
There is a trend toward Federal, State, and local cooperation to complete more work and expend funds more efficiently in the common task of conserving fish and wildlife.
Cooperative studies have been undertaken on deer diseases by 11 Southeastern States.
Factual information on the harvest of deer and antelope has been collected by four Western States.
Common projects were organized on prairie chickens and coturnix quail by many Midwestern States.
The striped bass of eastern coastal streams were studied by a cooperative project among the Middle Atlantie States.
Researeh information on important salt water game fish was collected by six Northeastern States and pooled for mutual benefit.
Timber and grazing improvements on United States Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management lands were undertaken by the Western States for the benefit of game animals with the active help of the Federal agencies.
Cooperation in wise use of resources is evidenced again in the complex checkerboard pattern of public and private land in the West and under the more intensive agricultural practices in the East, where predators or rabid animals are controlled by the unifed efforts of officials, agriculturalists, and sportsmen—and where "to control" means to limit the numbers of a species but not eradicate it.
The Fish and Wildlife Service also cooperates with the Bureau of Reclamation, the National Park Service, the Agricultural conservation agencies, the Corps of Engineers, the Federal Power Commission, and with various organizations representing sport fishing, commercial fishing and wildlife.
Still another example of the teamwork pattern is the cooperative approach being taken by the Fish and Wildlife Service and the various State fish and game departments to solve migratory waterfowl problems.
By setting up Flyway Councils, coordinated management by the Federal and State agencies has been established to insure protection and restoration of waterfowl and at the same time provide for a sustained hunting of birds by the public.
As long as salmon run, there is evidence that not all the spawning beds have been gouged out by logging, silted over by mining, or covered by reservoir developments.
As long as our fishing vessels continue to operate successfully in coastal and inshore waters, there is evidence that the estuarine and river spawning and rearing areas have not been sacrificed to other uses.
As long as commercial fishing grounds continue to yield their harvests on a sustained basis, there is evidence that international conservation is still effective.
As long as fish jump in the river or dart to and fro in the pond, as long as the hunter can come home with a pheasant, woodeock, brace of ducks or a cottontail, as long as elk and deer are seen roped over the fenders of home-bound cars each fall, there is evidence that natural resources are being wisely used by our people.
Nearly every American would agree that people should have a chance to pause now and again and enjoy the superlative beauties of the earth and water of their native land; that they should be able to find pleasure and inspiration in the great outdoors, away from the pressures and worries of the everyday world; that they should have opportunities to view the great memorials of their historic past and to understand and to appreciate their national heritage.
So an important part of America's land—important because of outstanding scenic, scientific, and historic values—has been set aside, under the jurisdiction of the Department of the Interior's National Park Service, to be preserved for the benefit and use of the American people.
Since the first national park—Yellowstone—was established in 1872 “as a public park or pleasuring ground for the benefit and enjoyment of the people," the intervening decades have seen the establishment of others, similarly marked for public use.
Concurrently, other kinds of nationally significant areas have been brought into the National Park System—national monuments, historical reservations of various types, early battlefields, a national seashore recreational area, and national parkways.
Today, the Department administers 180 areas, including 29 superlatively scenic national parks, 83 national monuments of scenic, scientific, and historic importance, and other types of reservations.
These areas cover some 25 million acres.
Comprising less than 1 percent of the United States and its Territories, the importance of the acreage in the Park System lies not in its physical size but in its important place in the American scheme of things.
All of the reservations within the National Park System are part of the cultural and recreational heritage of the American people.
They not only conserve important natural resources for public use, but also constitute inspirational, historical, archeological, and educational resources for the benefit of present and future generations.
The Department's administration of the parks, through its National Park Service, is, therefore, governed by the two basic principles of conservation and sound use.
These principles were clearly defined in the Yellowstone Park Act of 1872; they were reemphasized when Congress established the Park Service in 1916: “To conserve the scenery and the natural and historie objects and the wildlife therein, and to provide for the enjoyment of the same in such manner and by such means as will leave them unimpaired for the enjoyment of future generations.
Though the parks were adequately preserved and developed to care for the 21 million visitors of 1941, for example, no one anticipated then the tremendous surge in park use since the end of World War II.
Nor were the problems inherent in attempting to conserve the priceless park resources, while making them available to the spiraling tens of millions of visitors, foreseen at that time.
The 21 million visitors in 1941 became 33 million in 1950, 46 million in 1953, more than 50 million in 1955, 55 million in 1956, and almost 60 million in 1957.
There are many reasons for this astounding increase, including the rapid economic growth of the Nation, and the expansion of its population to more than 175 million people—people with increased opportunities for leisure.
Our people increasingly have become a traveling, sightseeing people, intent on knowing and enjoying the scenic and historic places of their country.
How is the Department coping with these trends?
How can it protect the priceless park features, provide the necessary facilities for this rapidly growing park visitation, now expected to reach more than 80 million a year in the next 5 years?
How can it assure enjoyable and satisfying experiences in the scenic, wilderness, and historic areas of the National Park System to these visitors?
The answers lie in the plans and goals of an integrated program called Mission 66.
This dynamic, long-range program—aimed at full protection and adequate development of park resources by 1966, the 50th anniversary of the National Park Service—completed its second year of operation on June 30, 1958.
With this program essentially on schedule, accomplishments have been impressive and substantial.
Before the launching of Mission 66, in July of 1956, the Department was seriously concerned that the parks might become crowded and overused, and that their capacity had become impaired to provide the rest, relaxation, and inspiration for which they were established.
The problem, at that time, was that the parks were neither equipped nor staffed to protect their irreplaceable features, nor to take care of increasing millions of visitors.
Accommodations were inadequate, outmoded, and many of them in a state of disrepair.
Roads designed for another travel era were clogged with automobiles.
Park lands were becoming worn and abused because of the crowding of people beyond the capacity of lodges, campgrounds, roads, and trails to serve them.
Natural features were being vandalized, and worn away by impact.
Visitor enjoyment was impaired by too many people crowding to the same place at the same time.
Under Mission 66, the scene has been changing, and the future, pointing to the program's completion in 1966, looks bright.
As to accomplishments in the past two years, some 1,500 Mission 66 projects were completed or under construction in various park areas by the end of the 1958 fiscal year.
These represent a capital investment valued at more than $110 million.
Of that amount, some $37 million was spent on facilities that were completed and in use by visitors in the 1958 summer season.
Added impetus was given to the Mission 66 program in the last 3 months of the fiscal year when new contracts, amounting to almost $34 million, were let under the Administration's accelerated public works program.
During that period, some 20 major road contracts were let in 15 national parks and the National Capital Parks at a cost of almost $9 million.
Another $9.8 million was awarded for major work on four national parkways—Blue Ridge, Natchez Trace, George Washington Memorial, and Colonial.
For buildings, utilities, minor roads, and trails, more than $15 million in additional contracts was awarded.
Thus, construction of additional visitor centers, campgrounds, trailer courts, picnic sites, utility systems, improvements to park roads, and other work has been accelerated in addition to the dramatic results achieved in the first 2 years of Mission 66.
The "package" approach to park development, used for the first time under Mission 66, shows tangible evidences of better and more adequate visitor accommodations and services.
This new concept of development provides for concentrated construction of needed facilities in large units within park areas, then moving on to others.
For example, when a road is built, the lodges, campgrounds, publicuse buildings, utility systems, and other facilities to which the road leads are completed and ready for use at the same time.
Because construction is programed, financial savings accrue from purchase of materials and equipment in larger amounts, less disruption of visitor services results, and it becomes possible to provide usable facilities in a shorter time.
In such developments, particularly in and near the large, scenic national parks where overnight accommodations and other services are essential for full public enjoyment of those areas, private enterprise works in harmonious cooperation with the Federal Government by providing concessionaire-operated facilities.
Under Mission 66, private enterprise has so far invested more than $15 million in sorely needed new accommodations such as lodges, motels, and cabins, and has completed other new and improved park-use facilities, including cafeterias, stores, service stations, and curio shops.
Among the completed “package" projects, the development at the new Canyon Village site in Yellowstone National Park is one of the most impressive.
There a new lodge, cabins, campgrounds, trailer court.
Completion of that project will make it possible to raze the old lodges and cabins from the rim of the Grand Canvon of the Yellowstone and to start restoration and preservation of the scenic lands for the esthetic enjoyment of the visiting public.
Though all of the improved facilities, new developments, and larger staffs are important and necessary components of the Mission 66 program, there are other parts of it, together with the buildings, and improved roads—measureable items in themselves—which make this program a practical, forward-looking conservation effort.
In the final analysis, the true measure of Mission 66, is the improved benefits accruing to the millions of citizens who visit and treasure our park system.
As an example of the former, park visitors will find the natural scene and the historic features of the park system more meaningful than ever before through new visitor centers, roadside exhibits and markers, and self-guiding interpretive devices.
Of equal importance are the improved information, guide, and talk programs offered on a larger scale than ever before by a trained and adequate staff.
As a result of those improvements, interpretive services to visitors are being more widely used.
Millions of visitors are flocking to museums, participating in conducted trips, using self-guiding devices, attending campfire sessions or amphitheater gatherings where park naturalists and park historians interpret the rich resources of the parks.
In all of these ways, visitors are gaining a clearer and deeper understanding of what they see in the parks and of the natural and human history of their country.
Other phases of Mission 66 are contributing to increase the visitor use and enjoyment.
For example, special attention is being given to the acquisition of privately owned lands within park boundaries.
When Mission 66 started, there were nearly 700,000 acres of such lands, obstructing adequate development and interfering with visitoruse and enjoyment.
In the first 2 years of the program, almost 78,000 acres of those inholdings have been acquired by purchase, donation, or exchange.
Other work is also moving forward: on a long-range national park system plan to help chart the way for selecting outstanding scenic, scientific, and historic areas to fulfill the Nation's future park needs; on historie American buildings and historie site surveys; on recreation resource planning—in cooperation with other Federal agencies, States, and local governments—to meet the people's recreational needs at all levels of Government; on the Pacific Coast seashore and Great Lakes surveys to locate and report on available areas of significance for possible preservation and public use.
Mission 66 represents a new era in the sound use of national parks and monuments.
Achievement of its goal will give America a park system adequately expanded, preserved, developed, and staffed to meet the requirements of the future.
In years to come, with population growth continuing, increasing numbers of Americans will seek healthful recreation and inspiration in the great outdoors.
The Department looks ahead to those years confident that the treasured areas of scenic beauty and historic interest, which are the people's heritage, will continue to be appreciated, appropriately used, and handed down "unimpaired for the enjoyment of future generations."
THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY for Water and Power Development discharges the duties of the Secretary with respect to the Department's programs in the field of water and power development.
The Assistant Secretary exercises secretarial direction and supervision over the Bureau of Reclamation, Bonneville Power Administration, Southeastern Power Administration, and Southwestern Power Administration.
The principal function of the latter three agencies is to market surplus power generated in their respective areas at Federal projects.
The Bureau of Reclamation constructs water-use projects whose primary purpose is the reclamation of arid and semiarid lands in the West, and also markets surplus power produced at Federal projects in the West outside the boundaries of the Bonneville Power Administration and Southwestern Power Administration and at Falcon Dam on the Rio Grande River, an international project.
The Assistant Secretary for Water and Power Development is also responsible for carrying out the defense functions of the Secretary with respect.to electric power and for supervising and directing the Office of Saline Water.
The activities of the water and power agencies of the Department and the Office of Saline Water are more fully described in sections of this report covering each of the Department's bureaus and offices.
The table on the next page, prepared on a consolidated basis for fiscal vear 1958, shows the installed capacity of plants whose power is marketed by Department of the Interior agencies, net energy generation, energy marketed, and gross revenues.
In the Southwest major changes in generating and transmission contracts were completed to comply with the directive of Congress that power should be delivered, insofar as practicable, at a uniform rate in the Southwest.
In the Southeast the sale of power to preference customers is implemented by wheeling and firming contracts.
Such a contract of May 16, 1956, with a private utility for the sale, firming and delivery of one-half of the Clark Hill project output in Georgia was renegotiated to include Buford and Allatoona projects under the same basic arrangement.
The new contract expanded the marketing area to include the southern part of Georgia which has recently been added to the system of the private utility that performs the firming and wheeling services through an acquisition of power facilities of another company by this utility.
On July 19, 1957, a contract was signed with a private utility for the sale, wheeling and firming of Jim Woodruff project power in northern Florida within a radius of 150 miles of the project.
Several preference customers are being served in this area.
On June 28, 1957, a transmission service contract was signed with the same private utility that performs firming and wheeling services under the Clark Hill-Allatoona-Buford contract for the integration of these projects with the Jim Woodruff project.
On August 9, 1957, the Federal Power Commission approved and confirmed new rate schedules for the sale of power by the Southwestern Power Administration.
The Assistant Secretary for Water and Power Development participated in discussions with the Southwestern Power Administration about plans for· marketing new power that will be available from federally constructed multiple-purpose projects during the next several years.
This planning included an extensive network analyzer study participated in by most of the public and private utilities in the southwestern marketing area.
Progress has continued on an important power cooperative program in the Northwest where Bonneville Power Administration has now entered into 10-long-term contracts with non-Federal utilities that are constructing hydroelectric projects to have the power output transmitted to load centers over the Federal transmission grid in the Northwest.
This program has made the construction of non-Federal hydroelectric generating capacity more feasible.
It will result in more complete regional integration and the most economic development of hydroelectric resources.
The Federal Government will be fully reimbursed for the use of its transmission facilities.
During the fiscal year, the Department through the Assistant Secretary for Water and Power Development reviewed 26 reports of the Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army, primarily for flood control and navigation improvements; 39 Federal Power Commission applications for permits and licenses for hydroelectric developments; and 1 report of the Public Health Service, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, for water pollution control.
The Assistant Secretary for Water and Power Development served as departmental representative on the Inter-Agency Committee on Water Resources and on the President's Advisory Committee on Public Works Planning.
He participated in inter-agency conferences on the coordination of watershed, flood-control, and reclamation programs.
The Assistant Secretary.
He represented the Department also in a field conference on the agricultural and wildlife uses of lands in the lower Klamath-Tule Lake region in California and Oregon.
The Assistant Secretary conferred with the group of non-Federal advisers to the Secretary on progress and problems in saline water conversion.
The Assistant Secretary presented testimony before congressional committees on the Fryingpan-Arkansas and San Luis (California) reclamation projects and other reclamation matters; on the progress of research and development in saline water conversion; on authorization of construction of plants for the conversion of saline water; and on the establishment of Boulder City as a municipality under the laws of the State of Nevada.
Staff of the Office served as departmental representatives on interagency committees concerned with radio frequency allocation, procurement of heavy electrical equipment, international water developments, public works planning, coordination of water resources projects, cost allocation, financial practices for water and power projects, economic analyses, user charges on inland waterways, atomic energy, and allied technical subjects.
Other activities of the Assistant Secretary and his staff included continued studies of the joint Army-Interior policy on land acquisition for reservoirs and analysis of potential reservoir storage at Arrow Lakes and other sites in Canada to increase power production in the Columbia Basin.
THE BUREAU OF RECLAMATION made significant progress in development of projects for sound use of our water resources in the fiscal year ending June 30, 1958.
An investment of about $180 million in construction of irrigation, power, and related water and land utilization facilities, including concrete and earth dams, power and pumping plants, irrigation canals and their extensive lateral and sublateral systems, aqueducts and other works.
Completion of six storage dams, which added more than 4 million acre-feet of capacity in new Reclamation project reservoirs and 726 miles of canals, pipelines, laterals, sublaterals, and drains.
A total of 61,950 kilowatts of hydroelectric generating capacity was added to the Nation's power system as a part of multipurpose dam construction.
A total of 168.797 acres was added to the irrigation service area of Federal reclamation projects in 1957 (latest recorded year), bringing the total area subject to irrigation service to 7,827,598 acres.
The new acreage was principally in the Missouri River Basin including the following units: Hanover Bluff and Owl Creek in Wyoming, Sargent in Nebraska, and Kirwin in Kansas.
Irrigated land provided with irrigation service from Bureau of Reclamation facilities now totals 3,319,425 acres; supplemental water service extends to 3,188,597 irrigated acres, and 49,244 acres are furnished with temporary water service.
The area irrigated in the 1957 crop year was 6,557,266 acres, an increase of 157,123 acres over 1956.
The value of crop production on 77 Reclamation projects amounted to $928,156,918, and averaged $141.55 per acre.
The cumulative value of crops grown on Federal Reclamation projects since 1906 is $13,277,660,991.
Hydroelectric plants at multipurpose Reclamation projects on the Lower Colorado River supplied nearly 21 percent of the total kilowatt-hours of energy consumed in the Pacific Southwest.
Net generation at the Reclamation plants in this area of 7,224,840,026 kilowatt-hours exceeded that of 1957 and 1956 by 79 and 77 percent, respectively.
This resulted from a good water supply on the river.
Fiscal vear 1958 was highlighted by the award of contracts for construction of the Flaming Gorge Dam and powerplant in Utah and Navajo Dam in New Mexico.
These structures, together with the Glen Canvon Dam placed under construction in Arizona in 1957, are the principal elements in the 4-State Colorado River Storage project which will lead to the development of the land, water, and other resources of the Upper Colorado River Basin.
Navajo Dam on the San Juan River in New Mexico will be the Bureau of Reclamation's second largest earthfill dam, exceeded in size only by the Trinity Dam under construction in the Central Valley project in California.
The total value of all contracts awarded during the fiscal year amounted to about $135 million, comprising the face value of 561 separate contracts for construction, materials, and equipment.
Construction contracts totaled about $115 million or about 85 percent of this total contract aggregate.
The 158 construction contracts in force at the end of the fiscal year had a total face value of about $391 million.
Reclamation reservoirs, dams, and powerplants continued to be leading tourist attractions with more than 10,000,000 persons making visits to them.
During calendar year 1957, 460,994 persons took the Bureau's guided tour of Hoover Dam and powerplant to establish an all-time record for this installation.
The previous high was set in 1956 when 452,018 persons were conducted through the dam and powerplant by Bureau guides.
An estimated 18,000 persons took the self-guided tours at Davis and Parker Dams during 1958, which was the first year this service was offered to the public.
A record number, 1,179,100 people visited the three large developed reservoirs at Shasta, Friant, and Folsom Dams on the Central Valley project in California in 1957, with record crowds also visiting other reservoirs in the State during the year.
In the Missouri River Basin, Region 6 of the Bureau of Reclamation with headquarters in Billings, Mont., made 222,680 acres of reservoir areas available to the public for the first time for general recreation.
The areas, made up of 23 reservoirs or sump sites, provided lakes with a total of 670 miles of shoreline.
The grand total of land and water made available to the public for general recreation use far exceeds, probably by at least 20 times, the acreage purchased or otherwise made available to the public for the same uses during the period 1946–58.
It is estimated that 1,265,000 people will have visited the 23 reservoir areas in 1958.
The Bureau's administrative structure in Washington was changed in 1958 by the establishment of the position of Associate Commissioner and abolishment of one of two Assistant Commissionerships.
The 103 Reclamation projects, located throughout the 17 Western States, are divided into 7 regions for administrative purposes.
The Bureau also maintains a District Office at Juneau, Alaska.
Region 2—California, except southern portion.
Sacramento, Calif.
Region 3—Arizona, southern California, and southern Nevada.
Boulder City, Nev.
Region 4Nevada, Utah, western Colorado and southwestern Wyoming.
Salt Lake City, Utah.
Region 6—Eastern Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, and northern Wyoming.
Billings, Mont.
Region 7—Eastern Colorado, Nebraska, southern Kansas and southwestern Wyoming.
Denver, Colo.
The Bureau of Reclamation in calendar year 1957 provided full irrigation service for 3,319,425 acres of irrigated land.
Supplemental water service was provided to 3,188,597 irrigated acres, and temporary water service was furnished for 49,244 irrigated acres.
The total area irrigated in 1957 was 6,557,266 acres, an increase of 157,123 acres over 1956.
There were 126,890 irrigated farms on Federal Reclamation projects of which 80 percent were full-time operating units.
These full-time farms provided support for 392,239 farm people.
In addition there were 94,136 people on part-time farms served by the Bureau.
Four new units of the Missouri River Basin project and 168,797 acres were added to the irrigation service area of Federal Reclamation projects in 1957, bringing the total area subject to irrigation service to 7,827,598 acres.
The new units were Hanover Bluff and Owl Creek in Wyoming, Sargent in Nebraska, and Kirwin in Kansas.
Öther major additions to irrigated acreage occurred on the following projects: Boulder Canyon, Colorado-Big Thompson, Columbia Basin, Gila, Minidoka, and Rogue River Basin.
The upward revision of the Colorado-Big Thompson project acreage is based on results of a complete survey of irrigated land under the project.
States gaining 5,000 or more acres of irrigated area in Reclamation projects were California, Colorado, Idaho, Nebraska, Washington, and Wyoming.
More than 150 important crops were grown on Reclamation projects.
Specialty crops occupied only 16 percent of the acreage but produced 40 percent of the total crop value.
For example, the grape harvest totaled $42.3 million, lettuce $30 million, and fresh market tomatoes $15.1 million.
Melons added $18.7 million, carrots $10.4 million, and hops $15.9 million.
Seeds, mint, and nuts accounted for $29.1, $3.6, and $5.5 million, respectively.
Other specialty crops accounted for $201.1 million.
Irrigated lands on Reclamation projects did not contribute significantly to national crop surpluses.
Tobacco, corn, wheat, and cotton account for about 86 percent of the value of all commodities under loan and in inventory of the Commodity Credit Corporation.
None of the tobacco, less than one-third of 1 percent of the corn, 1.8 percent of wheat, and 2.4 percent of the cotton involved in the surplus program was grown on Reclamation projects.
Almost three-fourths of the irrigated acreage in Reclamation projects is devoted to the production of grain and forage, chiefly livestock feed crops.
The livestock enterprises of these farms are of great significance to the rapidly growing population of the Western States which heavily rely on thisprime beef and lamb production.
The center of the meatpacking industry has been moving constantly westward.
The hypothetical breaking point between eastbound and westbound livestock shipments is now near the eastern base of the Rocky Mountains.
The intensified demand from Pacific coastal population centers will move this breaking point further east as time goes on, adding emphasis to the need for finished meat production in the West.
The grain and forage production on the irrigated lands of the West complements·the grazing value of 700,000 acres of rangeland, making each more valuable to the cause of providing meat for the Nation's dinner tables.
The acreage and production of these crops were slightly greater than in 1956.
Their value amounted to $267,922,757 in 1957, approximately 29 percent of the value of all crop production.
Miscellaneous field crops rank third in acreage but first in value among the several classes of crops.
These crops include dry beans, cotton, sugar beets and other cash crops which are usually the pivotpoint of a farmer's cropping rotation.
Sugar beets are probably the most generally grown cash crop on western irrigation projects.
The average per-acre yield of sugar beets exceeded the 1956 figure by 6 percent and was greater than the previous 10-year average by 16 percent.
Since 1940 the per-acre yield on Reclamation projects has increased by 35 percent.
The projectwide average yield on the Columbia Basin project was 25.2 tons per acre.
Ten projects had sugar beet yields exceeding 20 tons per acre.
Total returns for the crop, including the value of beet tops which are valuable for livestock feed, was $91,312,122.
Sugar beets on the Colorado-Big Thompson project alone had a total value of nearly $25 million.
Some of the specialty type crops in this category had significant changes in 1957.
Castor bean acreage increased 10 times, broomcorn acreage increased 63 percent, and increases were also made in hops and mint acreage.
Extra-long staple cotton, grown only in the Southwest under irrigation, more than doubled its acreage due to market demands and relaxation of acreage controls for this scarce premium fiber crop.
Contracts were executed in fiscal vear 1958 with a considerable number of districts for the repayment of the cost of Reclamation projects.
The distribution system loan repayment contract with the Terra Bella Irrigation District, Central Valley project, was the second loan repayment contract to be executed under the new loan program authorized by Public Law 130 of the 84th Congress (69 Stat. 244).
This contract and the first loan repayment contract executed last year (Solano Irrigation District, Solano project, California) were both validated in the courts of California, and the United States began advancing funds on an approved schedule basis to the two districts to permit local construction of distribution system works.
The Secretary of the Interior, on March 24, 1958, executed for the Government the first small Reclamation project loan repayment contract authorized by the Small Reclamation Projects Act of 1956.
The contract which provides for repayment of $4,600,000 over a period of 35 years is with the Cameron County Water Improvement District No. 1, located in the Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas.
Repayment contracts covering rehabilitation and betterment programs were cleared for the Ogden River, Grand Valley, Salt River, Yakima (Sunnyside Division), North Platte (Goshen Irrigation District), and Sun River projects.
The contract with the Salt River Water Users’ Association for $8 million is the largest R&B repayment contract to be executed in the history of the Bureau of Reclamation.
Work covered by the contract will be carried out over a period of 8 years and will be repaid by the Association in 30 years.
An amendatory contract for the Paonia project was executed, thus clearing the way for continuation of construction of this project as a participating project of the Colorado River Storage project.
Late in the fiscal year, the Secretary approved the form of the proposed water service and repayment contract with the Uintah Water Conservancy District, Vernal Unit, Central Utah project, also a participating project of the Colorado River Storage project.
The contract with the Uintah District is the first contract to be cleared involving new construction for participating projects of the Colorado River Storage project.
Other payment contracts involving new construction which were cleared included the contracts for the East Bench Unit of the Missouri River Basin project; various contracts for the Rogue River, Crooked River and Little Wood River projects; and the contract for the Mercedes Division of the Lower Rio Grande Rehabilitation project.
The contract for the Mercedes Division provides for repayment of not to exceed $10,800,000 in 40 years, and was approved by the Secretary of the Interior less than 6 weeks after the project was authorized.
Table 3 shows that the total value of repayment contracts on June 30, 1958, amounted to $857,083,740.
Of this amount a total of $134,648,033 has been repaid and delinquencies were insignificant.
In addition over $125 million will be returned to the Government in water service payments under contracts now in force.
The Bureau conducted two land openings on two Reclamation projects, making available for settlement 51 farm units embracing 7,656 irrigable acres of new land.
On the North Side pumping division of the Minidoka project in Idaho, 35 units were opened for settlement under the provisions of the Reclamation and homestead laws.
The remaining 16 units were offered for sale on the Wellton-Mohawk division of the Gila project in Arizona.
Since the close of World War II, 59 land openings have been held on 14 Reclamation projects.
A total of 2,735 new farm units encompassing approximately 242,650 irrigable acres of public land have thus been made available for selection by qualified applicants.
The availability of additional new farm units is anticipated during fiscal year 1959 on the Columbia Basin project in Washington.
Additional privately owned lands in the Central Valley, Columbia Basin, and Missouri Basin projects will be supplied with irrigation water.
A considerable amount of this privately owned land may be available for sale by the owners as new irrigated farms.
Development farms are a very vital part of the settlement program in areas being newly developed for irrigation.
The work is carried on in cooperation with various agriculture agencies and State agricultural colleges.
This closeup view of an onion seed field on the Bureau of Reclamation Gila project in Arizona shows another type of crop raised on irrigated lands in the West.
The Reclamation harvest from 77 projects in 1957 was valued at more than $928 million.
During fiscal vear 1958, there were 12 development farms in operation on the Columbia Basin, Gila, and Missouri River Basin projects.
Several new farms are proposed for the latter project.
There were 2 development farms discontinued, bringing the total to 16 farms which have served their purpose since this program was started in 1947.
The ideal growing conditions created by irrigation also create one of the major problems in operating and maintaining an irrigation system, that of plants growing where they are not wanted.
Science is playing an important part in solving the weed control problem.
A comprehensive weed control research program is conducted by the Agricultural Research Service, Department of Agriculture, in cooperation with the Bureau.
This work has been accomplished at field stations at Phoenix, Ariz.
Prosser, Wash.
Bozeman, Mont.
The laboratory work has been expaņded to a team of four with two each from the Agricultural Research Service and the Bureau of Reclamation.
The more effective and economical weed control methods thus developed are put into practice as soon as they are thoroughly tested.
Many of these are proving very effective in reducing the problems caused by undesirable vegetation and in decreasing operation and maintenance costs.
Under the provisions of the Halogeton Glomeratus Control Act of July 14, 1952, the Bureau is cooperating in the control of the poisonous weed Halogeton on Bureau lands in Utah, Nevada, Colorado, Wyoming, Montana, and Idaho.
The Bureau of Reclamation has cooperated with other agencies so that their special skills, services, experience, and equipment may be utilized in Bureau operations.
Several of the Bureau's activities in planning, developing, and operating its irrigation projects have been accomplished or facilitated through this plan.
The work is accomplished by means of agreements between the Bureau and the other agencies involved.
These include, principally, units of the Department of Agriculture, State colleges, and extension services.
However, they often include other Federal, State, and local agencies.
During fiscal year 1958, there were over 200 such cooperative agreements in effect.
They include studies and investigations conducted on development farms, conservation and efficient use of soil and water, crop and cropping problems, assistance to county agricultural agents, and weed control studies.
They cover also the development and management of reservoir recreational areas, financial aid to new settlers, and assistance in solving many other problems pertaining to the development of irrigation projects.
Operations for the conservation of soil and moisture on lands under its jurisdiction have been continued during the past year by the Bureau of Reclamation.
Progress has been made in the protection of land from wind and water erosion, reduction of moisture losses from land and water areas, and the protection of Reclamation built structures from the adverse effects of soil erosion.
Some projects have been finished and new ones started.
The work included structural installations, revegetation, and other means of erosion control and stabilization.
The work is planned, financed, and carried out in cooperation with the Federal agencies and with State and local agencies including water users'organizations.
Fiscal year 1958 was highlighted by the award of contracts for construction of the Flaming Gorge Dam and powerplant in Utah and Navajo Dam in New Mexico, major features of the Colorado River storage project.
These structures together with the Glen Canyon Dam placed under construction in Arizona in 1957 are the principal elements in the 4-State project which will lead to the development of the land, water, and other resources of the Upper Colorado River Basin.
Electric power for industry and commerce and life-giving water for almost 400,000 acres of land in the Pacific Northwest are provided by the massive Bureau of Reclamation structure and powerplant on the Columbia River in Washington State.
The display of colored floodlights, shown in this night view, is a nationally famous tourist attraction.
Navajo Dam on the San Juan River in New Mexico will be the Bureau of Reclamation's second largest earthfill dam, exceeded in size only by the Trinity Dam under construcfion on the Central Valley project in California.
Palisades Dam on the Snake River in Idaho was completed and the final two generating units of the 114,000-kilowatt powerplant placed in service.
Glendo Dam in Wyoming, Lovewell Dam in Kansas, and Helena Valley Dam in Montana, were also completed as were more than 200 miles of canals and laterals and related water conveyance facilities in Kansas and Nebraska.
Monticello Dam was completed on the Solano project in California, and Haystack Dam on the Deschutes project in Oregon.
Other fiscal year events included start of construction of Vega Dam on the Collbran project, Colorado; Fort Cobb Dam on the Washita project, Oklahoma; Keene Creek Dam and Green Springs power conduit on the Rogue River Basin project, Oregon; and Robles Diversion Dam and a section of the Robles-Casitas Diversion Canal on the Ventura River project, California.
Major construction and supply contracts (more than $1,000,000) awarded by the Bureau of Reclamation in fiscal year 1958 are listed in table 4.
United States.
This compares with 26 contracts awarded to foreign manufacturers in 1957 and 41 contracts awarded in 1956.
The fiscal year 1958 contracts, which totaled $965,867, were awarded to 7 Italian, 7 West German, 3 English, 1 Swiss, 1 French, 1 Austrian, and 1 African firms.
Principal features completed on Bureau of Reclamation projects in fiscal year 1958 are shown in table 5.
The listing includes 7 storage dams, 3 diversion dams, 1 powerplant in full production, 25 pumping plants, and 726 miles of canals, pipelines, laterals, sublaterals, and drains.
Construction costs on Bureau of Reclamation projects decreased about 2 percent during fiscal year 1958.
Increased bidding interest and competition among bidders were responsible for the decrease in construction costs, although wage rates and most material and equipment prices continued to rise during this period.
Table 6 shows cost indexes for Bureau of Reclamation construetion work based on the combined costs of materials and labor supplied by the contractors and materials and labor supplied by the Government.
On the Columbia Basin project in Washington, irrigation facilities were completed to serve an additional 45,000 acres, bringing the total to 351.000 acres.
Completed were 301 miles of canals, laterals, wasteways, and drains, and 17 pumping plants, including the Evergreen, Frenchman Springs, and White Bluffs pumping plants.
Construetion of the 15-foot diameter, 3-mile long Wahluke siphon was essentially completed at year's end.
In Idaho, construction of the American Falls pumping plant on the Michaud Flats project was completed.
Construction of the Green Springs powerplant structure on the Talent Division of the Rogue River Basin project in Oregon was essentially completed.
The 16,000-kilowatt powerplant will be the Bureau's highest head powerplant, operating under a 1,800-foot head, about 600 feet higher than any existing Reclamation powerplant.
Work continued on other project features, including the first and second sections of the Howard Prairie Delivery Canal, Soda Creek Diversion Dam, and Little Beaver Creek Feeder Canal.
The structure of the 11,250-kilowatt Roza powerplant on the Yakima project in Washington was completed during the year, and installation of the generator and control equipment was well advanced.
The plant is expected to be placed in commercial operation early in fiscal year 1959.
On the Central Valley project in California, several major construction undertakings proceeded on the project's Trinity River Division which will ultimately make possible the average annual transbasin diversion of 865,000 acre-feet of surplus waters from the Trinity River watershed to the Central Valley Basin.
Principal features of the diversion are the 537-foot high earthfill Trinity Dam and the 10.8 mile long, 17.5 foot diameter Clear Creek Tunnel.
BOAT RACING ON THE PRAIRIES is an unusual and spectacular result of the construction of Bureau of Reclamation dams and reservoirs in the arid and semi-arid 17 Western States.
These boat races at the dedication of Lovewell Dam on the Missouri River Basin project in Kansas show one feature of recreational opportunities at Reclamation projects enjoyed by millions of people each year.
Placement of the 33 million-cubic yard embankment was scheduled to begin early in the next fiscal year.
Excellent progress was made on Clear Creek Tunnel, second longest tunnel on a Bureau of Reclamation project; the tunnel was about 50 percent excavated by the end of the year.
Other construction activities on the Central Valley project included completion of construction of 108 miles of pipeline laterals and sublaterals and 3 pumping plants for the Shafter-Wasco Irrigation District on the Friant-Kern Canal Distribution System, and start of construction of 12.5 miles of pipelines for the Unit 1 extension to the Southern San Joaquin Municipal Utility Distriet.
In Utah, the enlargement of Pineview Dam and the construction of Slaterville Diversion Dam on the Weber Basin project were completed, and construction of the 1,400-kilowatt Wanship powerplant was essentially completed.
Also completed were the last section of the 22-mile long Davis Aqueduct, and the East Bountiful and South Davis pumping plants.
Other project work continued on the West Farmington and Woods Cross trunklines, connected to the Davis Aqueduct, and on the 4,000-kilowatt Gateway powerplant.
Also in Utah, the 4,950-kilowatt Deer Creek powerplant on the Provo River project was completed and placed in commercial operation.
On the Middle Rio Grande in New Mexico, channelization of the Rio Grande was carried on under six separate contracts embracing 50 miles of channel.
Four of the contracts totaling 34 miles were completed, and the remaining two contracts for 16 miles of channel were about 50 percent completed at the end of the year.
Also completed was the rehabilitation of the Cochiti Diversion Dam, Angostura Diversion Works, and existing irrigation systems for the Belen Units 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, totaling 49 miles of laterals, wasteways, and acequias (irrigating ditches).
In Wyoming, construction advanced toward completion of the 24,000-kilowatt Glendo powerplant.
Work continued also on the 48,000-kilowatt Fremont Canyon powerplant and the 3-mile long, 18- foot diameter power conduit.
In the same State, construction continued on the 203-foot high, concrete arch Anchor Dam.
In Montana, the 7-foot diameter, 2.6-mile long Helena Valley project tunnel was holed through in January 1958, and placement of the concrete tunnel lining began the following month.
Construction of the Helena Valley pumping plant was advanced to about 65 percent of completion.
Work on the first 8-mile section of the Helena Valley Canal was about 90 percent completed by year's end, and the second 23-mile section of the canal was about 60 percent completed.
A construction milestone on the Missouri River Basin project was completion of the Sargent Unit in Nebraska.
All work on the final 19-mile section of the Sargent Canal and 37 miles of laterals, wasteways, and drains was completed.
The Sargent Unit was dedicated late in the year.
Work in progress during the year on the project's Frenchman-Cambridge Division, also in Nebraska, embraced approximately 102 miles of canals, laterals, wasteways, and drains.
Of this total, about 30 miles of structures have been completed, and the remaining 72 miles of canals and related structures were about 50 percent completed.
Bostwick Division work on the project in Kansas was noted by the completion of the fourth 8-mile section and fifth 6-mile section of the Courtland Canal.
The 10-mile long Courtland West Canal was about two-thirds completed.
Also in Kansas, on the Kirwin Unit, 32 miles of the Kirwin North and South Canals and 31 miles of their lateral systems, wasteways, and drains were completed.
Construction of the Woodston Diversion Dam was started.
Construction activities under the Transmission Division of the Missouri River Basin project included the start of work on the 310- mile long, 230-kv.
At year's end, the foundations were completed and the steel towers erected for the 67-mile, 230-kv.
Utica Junction-Sioux Falls Transmission Line in South Dakota; stringing of conductors was schedúled to begin early in fiscal year 1959.
Work was about 70 percent completed on the 165-mile, 230-kv.
Construction of the 4,500-kilowatt Big Thompson powerplant on the Colorado-Big Thompson project in Colorado was about threefourths completed by the end of the fiscal year.
The powerplant will bring to completion the planned development of the transmountain diversion project.
Increased use of automatic computing devices in design was made during the year.
Utilization of an electronic digital computer greatly facilitated design calculations of arch thicknesses at 10-foot horizontal and 7.5-foot vertical intervals for both the Glen Canyon and Flaming Gorge Dams; the resultant cost was approximately one-tenth of the cost of carrying out the calculations by conventional methods.
Similar machine processing of data in access highway design led to establishing proper grades and optimum balance between cut and fill quantities at one-fifth the expenditure of time required by the engineers’ usual methods of calculation.
Increased emphasis was given during the year toward electrical designs which will permit greater automatic control of powerplant control systems.
Economies in operation will be realized at the Big Thompson powerplant (Colorado-Big Thompson project, Colorado) and Green Springs powerplant (Rogue River Basin project, Oregon) which were designed to operate unattended through remote supervisory controls and which will have "pushbutton" starting and stopping controls.
Similarly, designs were completed for the Roza powerplant (Yakima project, Washington) and Deer Creek powerplant (Provo River project, Utah) to operate on an "on-call" basis.
Operation of the plants is automatie; operators living nearby serve only to start and stop the plants and periodically inspect equipment, and are available for emergencies.
Continued progress was made in investigating the feasibility of controlling evaporation from open reservoirs by the use of an invisible chemical laver, or monomolecular film.
During the year's investigations.
Arrangements were completed with the city of Oklahoma City to conduct full-scale evaporation control tests using hexadecanol early next fiscal year at the 2,500-acre Lake Hefner, part of the city's municipal water supply system.
If the Lake Hefner tests are successful, potentially millions of gallons of water lost annually by evaporation from reservoirs may be saved.
Laboratory investigations of materials and methods to reduce the costs of canal linings were continued during the year.
Included in the studies were sediment, soil-cement, concrete, asphalt, and prefabricated asphalt linings.
Representative specimens from approximately 60 samples of assorted plastic products submitted by manufacturers during the past 10 years were tested as possible materials adaptable to low cost prefabricated canal linings.
The tests indicated that the more common polyethylene and vinyl plastic films of 0.008 inch minimum thickness are potentially satisfactory materials for buried membrane canal linings.
During the year, 121 laboratory reports were issued covering research and testing of concrete and concrete materials, earth materials research, structural studies, hydraulic laboratory investigations, and research in bituminous construction and protective coatings.
Canyon Ferry Dam and powerplant, Jamestown Dam, Trenton Dam, Enders Dam, and Eklutna Dam, tunnel, and powerplant, and the remaining three volumes of the comprehensive four volume technical record of the Colorado-Big Thompson project, covering dams and reservoirs, waterways, and power and pumping plants.
An extensive revision of the Power System Safety Handbook, which provides standards and procedures on safety for employees of the Bureau of Reclamation engaged in the operation and maintenance of power systems, was also published.
In response to 5,980 requests for the Bureau's publications and informational materials received from individuals in this country and in foreign countries, more than 30,000 copies of technical publications and informational pamphlets were sold or distributed.
Sales of Bureau publications totaled $24,916, approximately one-half of this total being made to foreign countries.
Sales of publications sold for the Superintendent of Documents totaled $5,650.
In order to utilize to the greatest advantage the energy resources made available by multipurpose reservoirs, the Bureau of Reclamation has constructed and, as of June 30, 1958, operated 37 powerplants with an installed nameplate capacity of 5,093,500 kilowatts.
In addition, the Bureau is responsible for marketing the power generated at five powerplants constructed by the Corps of Engineers and the International Boundary and Water Commission, with a total installed nameplate capacity of 776,500 kilowatts.
Sale of electric power by the Bureau during the year aggregated 29,233,973,619 kilowatt-hours, with revenues from sales totaling $71,132,535.72, as shown on table 7.
During fiscal year ending June 30, 1958, the installed nameplate capacity of hydroelectric powerplants at Bureau of Reclamation multipurpose projects and at projects for which the Bureau is responsible for marketing the power, increased 61,950 kilowatts over the fiscal year 1957 figures.
At the end of fiscal year 1958, the Bureau of Reclamation had under construction 9 powerplants, which will have an ultimate installed nameplate capacity of 1,117,150 kilowatts.
The United States Army Corps of Engineers is proceeding with the construction of additional plants in the Missouri River Basin.
The ultimate installed nameplate capacity of Oahe powerplant in South Dakota will be 595,000 kilowatts.
The Bureau of Reclamation will be the marketing agent for energy generated from this plant as is the case for other plants constructed by the Corps on the Missouri Basin project.
The hydroelectric powerplants constructed and operated by the Bureau of Reclamation and powerplants for which the Bureau is the marketing agent are listed in table 8.
To provide the electrical energy for the Bureau's projects and to market the power which is surplus to the Bureau's needs, a transmission system including powerplant substations, switchyards, and transmission lines, has been constructed.
As of June 30, 1958, the installed transformer capacity of the individual substations operated by the Bureau was nearly 11 million kilovolt-amperes.
During fiscal year 1958 there were 121 contracts executed for the sale of power or for transmission service or other purposes.
A number of contracts executed were renewals of operating contracts or revisions of existing contracts resulting from changed operating conditions.
The Bureau continued its policy of contracting whenever possible with private utilities, public bodies, and cooperatives for wheeling power and energy over existing facilities.
The Bureau also entered into several interchange agreements with its customers.
A summary by classification of customers served by Reclamation during fiscal year 1958 is shown in table 9.
The Bureau at the end of fiscal year 1958 had 75 contracts under active negotiation.
In this number are included 29 contracts with municipalities, 18 with REA cooperatives, 16 with private utilities, 4 with public power districts, 5 with other Federal agencies, 2 with State authorities, and 1 miscellaneous type contract.
A number of these are to renew the existing contracts, or to revise contracts in existence due to changes in operating conditions.
The project development program involves preparation of comprehensive plans for development of river basin resources and the investigation and planning of individual potential projects and units of projects for the conservation and optimum utilization of the water resources of the West.
It also includes detailed preconstruction studies on newly authorized projects.
During 1958, the Bureau of Reclamation in cooperation with other agencies was engaged in comprehensive surveys in eight river basins throughout the West as well as in basinwide activities such as technical assistance in interstate river basin compact negotiations and operations in several other basins.
In addition, comprehensive studies were active in 13 subbasins of the Missouri River Basin project, including the Bad Division in North Dakota for which a final report was completed.
THE HIGHEST STEEL-ARCH HIGHWAY BRIDGE in the world spans the Colorado River at Page, Ariz., 700 feet above the site of Glen Canyon Dam, now under construction as a major storage feature on the Bureau of Reclamation Colorado River Storage project for the development of vast land and natural resources in the Four-State Upper Colorado River Basin.
Work continued on the permanently authorized investigations program in Alaska.
By the end of the fiscal year, feasibility reports had been submitted to Čongress on the Spokane Valley project and the Greater Wenatchee Division of the Chief Joseph Dam project in Washington; the El Jardin and the Mercedes Divisions of the Lower Rio Grande Rehabilitation project in Texas; and the Molokai project in Hawaii.
Reports submitted to the Bureau of the Budget included a coordinated report of the Bureau of Reclamation and the Bureau of Indian Affairs on the San Juan-Chama project and the Navajo Indian Irrigation project in Colorado and New Mexico; reports on the Garrison Diversion Unit, North Dakota and Red Willow Unit, Bostwick Division, Kansas, of the Missouri River Basin Project; and the La Feria Division, Lower Rio Grande Rehabilitation project, Texas.
The report on the La Feria Division was subsequently recalled for reexamination of the proposed plan of development at the request of the local interests.
Planning reports which were being reviewed or were transmitted for review by States and Federal agencies prior to submission to the Bureau of the Budget include those on the Vale project, Bully Creek Extension, Oregon; and the Cheney Division, Wichita project, Kansas.
During the fiscal year definite plans for authorized projects were completed and approved on the Almena Unit, Nebraska, of the Missouri River Basin project; Foss Dam and Reservoir of the Washita Basin project in Oklahoma; the Vernal Unit, Central Utah project in Utah; and the Paonia project in Colorado.
The last two are participating projects of the Colorado River Storage project.
Four applications for loans under the Small Reclamation Projects Act of 1956 totaling $9,437,000 were approved and sent to the Congress during the year.
The contract for one of these, that of the Cameron County Water Control and Improvement District No. 1 of Harlingen, Tex., was executed and has been validated during the fiscal year.
Three more applications totaling $5,262,000 were examined and were nearly ready for submission to the Congress by the end of the year.
Six others were under consideration and if approved these would provide loans totaling about $19,820,000.
A number of other organizations were actively preparing applications and the Bureau of Reclamation has been cooperating with them to assure better reports on their proposals.
A great deal of interest has developed in these loans and 59 organizations have formally indicated their intent to apply for loans totaling about $116,000,000.
A loan of $1,900,000 was made to the Terra Bella Irrigation District in the Central Valley project of California for the construction of an irrigation distribution system under the provisions of Public Law 130, 83d Congress.
The contract for this loan has been executed and validated by the court.
Three other applications for similar loans totaling $10,545,500 were under consideration during the year.
Funds were not available for these three loans so final approval has not been given and the contracts have not been executed.
The Bear River Compact was approved by the President on March 17, 1958.
The Klamath River Compact was approved by the President on August 30, 1957.
The Columbia River Compact was modified on August 6, 1956, and has been resubmitted to the State Legislatures of Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, Utah, and Nevada for ratification.
There was no further action during this fiscal year.
The Branch of Hydrology continued its study of hydrologic problems' associated with proposed Reclamation projects to assure that maximum use and conservation will be obtained from the water resources so developed.
In all multiple-purpose reservoirs, studies are made to develop operational criteria for the optimum benefit from the standpoint of irrigation, flood control, hydropower, recreation, fish and wildlife resources, and sediment control.
Cooperative work with various Federal, State, and local agencies is continuing on the development, study, and evaluation of water spreading devices and detention reservoirs on the Upper Cheyenne River with the purpose of prolonging the useful life of Angostura Reservoir.
Channelization investigations were conducted on the Provo, Middle Rio Grande, and Lower Colorado Rivers.
Water salvage is also a major aim of the Middle Rio Grande plans, while flood control is an objective in the Provo River studies.
This aerial view of young citrus groves in the Yuma Mesa Division of the Bureau of Reclamation Gila project in Arizona shows another type of irrigated land production.
The total area in the 17 Western States subject to irrigation service from the 77 Reclamation projects was 7,827,598 acres in 1957.
Development of a radioisotope instrument for measuring sediment densities has progressed to a stage that the instrument is now being used in resurveys of reservoirs.
Project data sheets were developed for inclusion in the fiscal year 1959 budget material submitted to the Bureau of the Budget and the Congress.
These data sheets present in concise, easy-to-read tabular form the historical and economic data which formerly were presented in rather lengthy narrative form.
Complete revision of the Reclamation Instructions relating to allotments and apportionments was necessitated by revised regulations of the Bureau of the Budget and the adoption of new apportionment forms.
Progress was made toward further correlation of 'program scheduling, reporting, and finance activities.
Regional committees were established to investigate applications of electronic data processing to some accounting and administrative operations.
In one region, the payroll operation was centralized and placed on electronic data machines under contract with a private service bureau; other machine applications in an advanced stage of development include (1) processing of power bills, (2) real property inventory records, and (3) completion of historical data on personal services.
Paralleling these developments, studies were continuing to refine and up-date the accounting procedural instruction series and to centralize in regional offices, certain field accounting operations.
Appropriations for all purposes made available to the Bureau of Reclamation for fiscal year 1958 totaled $199,974,223.
This amount included $10,000,000 in supplemental funds each for the Trinity River division of the Central Valley project and the Glen Canyon unit of the Colorado River storage project.
Permanent appropriations or revolving funds are not included.
The appropriation for 1958 exceeded the funds made available in 1957 by $5,962,518.
With an unobligated balance of $30.1 million carried over from fiscal year 1957 for construction, investigations and the loan program plus funds advanced by water users, trust funds, a continuing fund for emergency expenses, Fort Peck project and new appropriations the total amount available to Reclamation was $235.2 million.
Of this amount there remained unobligated at the close of 1958 from construction, investigations and the loan program funds an amount of $10.1 million.
These funds are available in fiscal year 1959.
Obligations for 1958 totaled $225.1 million or 96 percent of the obligations programed as compared to 92 percent of the program accomplished in 1957.
The Appropriation Act for 1958 again prohibited initiating construction on transmission facilities in areas covered by power wheeling contracts unless the wheeling agencies were unable or unwilling to provide the service.
The act also repeated the limitation upon the amount of money that may be expended for construction work by Government forces (force account work).
This limitation provided that not to exceed 12 percent of the allotment for any one project or Missouri River Basin unit, or $225,000 for any one project or unit, was to be used.
Continuing with the Bureau's established routine, centralized statistical services were provided by which official statistical data were maintained and furnished on (1) current and projected accomplishments on each of the Bureau's major activities, and (2) on historical and current legislative financial and personnel matters.
Data for (1) were made available through the regular Bureau's Monthly Report on Progress and Status of Funds, Forecast on Utilization of Funds, the Bureau's quarterly “Progress,” fiscal year 1958 Financial Plan and related interim reports and special studies.
Data for (2) were covered by the various compilations prepared for the Annual Statistical Appendix to the Commissioner's Annual Report and by publishing new 1957 editions of Reclamation Project Feasibilities and Authorizations, Reclamation Appropriation Acts and Allotments, Reclamation Repayments Federal Reclamation Laws, and other related interim reports and special studies.
All together these data show a profile of Reclamation's activities from project planning through project feasibilities, authorizations, appropriations, expenditures, cost, repayments, investments, facilities and features, irrigation development and erops, municipal and industrial water and power development and sales, and income and expense from operations.
31 ot ie pant Corol ood tot 73: war pant Mun iial Conss.
Reclamation purchase orders and supply contracts totaling $12,600,- 000 were placed with small business firms during fiscal year 1958 as compared with $9,100,000 during fiscal year 1957.
Total procurement by purchase orders and supply and service contracts increased from $21,700,000 to $31,100,000.
The number of procurement actions decreased 5 percent from a total of 90,962 to 86,353.
Continuing emphasis was placed on motor vehiele fleet utilization and reduced operation and maintenance costs.
The fleet was reduced from 3,430 vehicles in 1957 to 3,230 at the end of 1958, a reduction of 200.
Of this number, 76 were passenger-carrying vehicles.
The fleet operated 28,775,000 miles during 1957 at a cost (less depreciation) of $1,780,000, or an average cost of $0.0618 per mile; and in 1958, 27,671,- 000 miles at a cost of $1,530,000, or $0.0533 per mile.
Based on fiscal year 1957 mileage, operation, and costs, this represents a savings of $171,000.
Personal property with an acquisition cost of $1,139,000 was declared surplus, of which $1,079,000 was disposed of.
This is almost double the value of property declared surplus in 1957.
Real property with an acquisition cost of $1,854,000 was disposed of during 1958, eliminating the cost of management, operation, and maintenance of the property involved.
Of this amount $606,000 represents property returned to the tax rolls through sales as surplus to the public need.
Forty-five audit assignments were completed during the year.
They comprised 36 comprehensive project audits; 2 audits of water users organizations, performed at their request; 4 special audits; and 3 miscellaneous assignments which resulted in informal letter reports.
Additionally, members of the Comptroller's staff were utilized to a great extent in work undertaken by the Committee on Reevaluation of Procedures and Factors for Replacement Reserves, operating from the Denver Office.
During the fiscal year, the Bureau received and created 9,400 cubic feet of records; disposed of 9,453 cubic feet; transferred to Federal records centers and National Arehives for custody and servicing 2,895 cubie feet; and transferred to other Government agencies, water users' organizations, etc., 81 cubic feet.
These resulted in a decrease in volume of records held by all Bureau offices from 97,665 to 94,636 cubic feet.
Approximate dollar savings in space and equipment costs as a result of destruction and transfers to low-cost space amounts to $104,895.
In response to 5,980 requests for the Bureau’s publications and information material received from individuals in this country and in foreign countries, more than 30,000 copies of technical publications and informational pamphlets were distributed from Denver.
Sales of Bureau publications at Denver totaled $24,916, approximately one-half of this total being made to foreign countries.
Sales of publications sold by the Bureau as agent for the Superintendent of Documents totaled $5,650.
In response to 867 requests, 11,908 copies of Bureau publications were distributed.
Of these requests, 178 were of congressional origin for 720 publications and 178 were from agencies of the executive branch of the Federal Government for 1,420 copies.
Two thousand one hundred seventy-eight prints were provided for reproduction in Bureau publications, non-Government textbooks and encyclopedias, various agricultural and engineering magazines and newspapers, and to supplement exhibits and lectures.
Requests by mail and in person for visual material were also received from congressional offices and from agencies of the executive branch of the Federal Government.
Seven hundred and thirty-six films were distributed to television stations, agricultural and engineering institutions, water users' associations, organizations of farmers, and to conventions in the United States and abroad.
The following offices were established: Crooked River project office, Pineville, Oreg.
Wapinitia project office, Madras, Oreg.
The Deschutes project office, Culver, Oreg.
Incentive awards activity increased by about 28.5 percent, a total of 1,419 suggestions for the improvement of Bureau activities and procedures being received during the year.
Of these, approximately 34 percent were adopted and the employees who proposed the improvements were awarded $14,395.
These suggestions resulted in an estimated annual savings of $145,709, in addition to substantial intangible benefits.
Cash awards in recognition of superior performance were granted to 235 employees.
During fiscal year 1958, Bureau employment declined from 10,506 full time employees to 10,125.
The reduction generally was the result of completion of work in some areas without compensating work increases in others.
It was accomplished in an orderly manner and without use of reduction in force procedures.
By careful advance scheduling a maximum number of employees from areas with declining programs were shifted to other areas.
Staffing control was maintained through use of ceilings on employment of both permanent and seasonal employees.
Shortages of beginning engineers at the opening of the fiscal year required aggressive recruitment at colleges and universities.
During the 1956–57 school year, 96 beginning professional engineers and 167 engineer student trainees were recruited.
Direct recruitment costs amounted to less than $150 per employee.
College recruitment activities were curtailed in the spring of 1958 as requirements leveled off.
Work was commenced on a revision of Bureau promotion policies to bring them into line with the new Civil Service Commission merit promotion program.
The new plan covering competitive positions in the Bureau will be in operation by January 1, 1959.
Inereasing demands on the water resources of the world have caused continued requests for Bureau of Reclamation assistance to foreign governments in the development of these resources.
Through the several bilateral and multilateral technical assistance programs in which the U. S. Government participates, the facilities and personnel of the Bureau of Reclamation have been made available to fill this requirement to the fullest extent possible without interference with the domestic program.
All such assistance has been financed from sources outside the regular Reclamation appropriation.
Training of foreign nationals in the specialized fields of engineering and administration related to water resource development was provided by the Washington, Denver, and field offices.
During the year, 122 individuals spent from 6 to 12 months in on-the-job training assignments, and 123 participants spent shorter periods of official observation with these offices.
Representatives from 38 countries were included in this group.
In addition there were over 200 accredited visitors and several hundred tourists, students, and other foreign nationals who stopped at various Bureau of Reclamation installations.
Under the program of the International Cooperation Administration, International Educational Exchange Service, and the United Nations, highly qualified engineers have traveled abroad to provide on-site assistance in a variety of problems.
Fifteen people were on 2- year assignments to Australia, Ethiopia, Formosa, Lebanon, and Turkey.
Short details of from 1 to 6 months were performed by 19 engineers in 11 countries.
During fiscal year 1958, which included approximately the last 2 months of the first session and the first 6 months of the second session of the 85th Congress, several legislative proposals of importance to the program of the Bureau of Reclamation were enacted into law.
Public Law 85–433, which permits reimbursement of owners and tenants of lands for certain moving expenses, caused by land acquisitions for developments, ineluding reclamation developments, under the jurisdiction of the Department.
The Congress enacted legislation authorizing the construction, operation, and maintenance of four units of the Greater Wenatchee division of the Chief Joseph Dam project, Washington (Public Law 85–393), the San Angelo project, Texas (Public Law 85–152), and the Lower Rio Grande rehabilitation project, Texas, Mercedes division (Public Law 85-370).
Additional construction was authorized in the Pecos River Basin, New Mexico and Texas (Public Law 85–333) and along the Colorado River (Public Law 85–389).
Authorization was granted to execute the repayment contract negotiated with the Casper-Alcova Irrigation District (Public Law 85- 283), and congressional approval was granted amendatory repayment contracts with the Northport Irrigation District (Public Law 85–123) and the Mirage Flats Irrigation District (Public Law 85– 160).
Of special interest is the enactment of Public Law 85-240 which is designed to facilitate the early incorporation of the town of Coulee Dam under the laws of the State of Washington in order that the United States may withdraw from the administration of that community.
1. Rank v. Krug, et al.
The history of this case appears in the 1956 Annual Report of the Secretary, page 62.
Supplemental information appears in the 1957 Annual Report, page 88.
The United States and its codefendants (water user organizations beneficiary to the operations of the Central Valley project, particularly as to the operations at Friant Dam and Friant-Kern and Madera Canals) have appealed the case to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals.
The complete record on appeal has not yet reached the offices of the Court of Appeals.
2. State of California v. United States, United States District Court for the Northern District of California, No. 7264.—This action was filed July 5, 1955, for damages totaling $764,741.79, alleged to have been sustained by the State as a result of a sudden shutoff by the Bureau of Reclamation of releases down the Sacramento River from Shasta Reservoir.
The rapid drawdown is alleged to have caused the collapse of levees, the repair and replacement of which was a partial responsibility of the State.
The case is currently in the pretrial stage.
3. Citizens Utilities Company v. United States, and California-Pacific Utilities Company v. United States, United States Court of Claims (Nos. 364–55, 381–55).
The first named action was filed in the Court of Claims September 30, 1955, for damages totalling $12,216,775 alleged to have been sustained as a result of the wrongful and unlawful failure and refusal of the United States to renew its contract for purchase of a portion of the Metropolitan Water District's unused Hoover Dam energy, which contract by express terms of limitation expired December 31, 1954.
On October 12, 1955, California-Pacific Utilities Company, holder of a similar energy contract which also by express terms of limitation expired December 31, 1954, filed a similar suit for $4,579,807.
On March 6, 1957, the Court of Claims decided in favor of the plaintiffs.
Negotiations with California-Pacific Utilities Company for resumption of service culminated in the execution of a contract with the company on April 30, 1958, providing for the renewal to December 31, 1962, of the company's resale contract and for the future sale to the company of a quantity of power to be developed at powerplants of the Parker-Davis project.
The contract also contains an acquittance of all the company's claims against the United States arising out of the failure of the United States to renew the 1941 resale contraet, and provides that the company will file a dismissal with prejudice of the Court of Claims action.
Pursuant to the latter provision, the company filed its Motion for Dismissal With Prejudice of the said action.
Negotiations with Citizens Utilities Company for the resumption of delivery of Metropolitan Water District unused energy to the company were carried on after the denial of certiorari.
Agreement had not been reached on an arrangement whieh would dispose of all the issues between the company and the United States.
However, on May 23, 1958, the company was advised that the United States was willing to resume deliveries of such energy on June 1, 1958, with the understanding that the respective positions of the company and the United States would not be prejudiced thereby.
The company accepted the above offer and delivery to it was commenced on June 1,1958.
4. State of Arizona, Plaintiff v. State of California, et al., No. 10 Original, Supreme Court of the United States.
In this action the State of Arizona is seeking a determination of its rights in and to the use of the waters of the Colorado River, as against such rights claimed by the defendants, under the Colorado River Compact, the Boulder Canyon Project Act, and the California Limitation Act.
Trial of the case before Special Master Simon H. Rifkind continued, four sessions being held, in July 1957, in August 1957, in January 1958, and in May 1958.
5. George H. Pashley, et ux.
This action was filed in the Court of Claims in March 1955 for $200,000 in damages for the alleged flooding of a sodium sulphate deposit below the O'Sullivan Dam as a result of the construction and operation of that dam by the Bureau of Reclamation on the Columbia Basin project.
On December 4, 1957, the Court rendered its decision (156 F. Supp. 737) holding that the erection of the dam had caused the flooding, and awarded plaintiffs $2,500 damages.
6. J. W. Wħeeler Co. v. Jean Lee Knight Tripp, Defendant and Third Party Plaintiff, and United States, Third Party Defendant.
The Defendant's complaint against the additional defendant United States was filed in the United States District Court, Western District of Washington, Northern Division, Seattle, Wash., in .
May 1958 for the purpose of having a recordable contract on certain Columbia Basin project land owned by plaintiff declared a nullity because of the alleged failure of the United States to plat it as a farm unit and construet irrigation facilities to serve it under the recordable contract between the United States and the original landowner entered into in April 1946.
The issues between the defendant and the United States have not been joined.
7. United States y.
Crow Tribal Lands, et al., Civil No. 1825.—The case was filed in February 1956 in the United States District Court, District of Montana.
It is an action to condemn the Crow Indian tribal interests in the site of the Bureau of Reclamation's Yellowtail Dam and Reservoir.
In the opinion of January 8, 1957 (152 F. Supp. 861), the Court denied defendants' motion to dismiss, and affirmed the Government's right to condemn tribal lands.
A pretrial conference was held December 16, 1957.
In an opinion dated May 15, 1958, the Court reaffirmed the Government's right to condemn tribal lands, but held that under the Crow Allotment Act of 1920 the tribe was entitled to be compensated for water power values; that the question of compensation should be submitted to commissioners; and that the question of navigability is for decision by the Court without a jury.
The Court set the hearing on the navigability of the Big Horn River for August 11, 1958.
8. Merle H. Johnson, Administrator of the Estate of Stanley Matt Johnson, Deceased v. United States, Civil No. 49, and Merle H. Johnson v. United States, Civil No. 54.—These cases, arising under the Federal Tort Claims Act, were filed in the United States Distriet Court for the District of Montana in September of 1956 for $100,000 and $17,680, respectively, in damages occasioned by the electrocution of a 4-year-old boy who had climbed over a Bureau electrical substation fence.
In an opinion dated May 1, 1958, the Court denied plaintiff's claims, holding that the United States had exercised due care under the circumstances.
9. Ronald Miller et al. v. Robert W. Jennings, et al., United States Court of Appeals for the 5th Circuit (No. 16135).
The history of this ease appears in the 1957 Annual Report of the Secretary, page 89.
A petition for a writ of certiorari was denied by the United States Supreme Court on October 14, 1957.
10. Ivanhoe Irrigation District et al. v. McCracken et al.
Nos. 122, 123, 124, and 125, October term 1957, United States Supreme Court).
On June 23, 1958, Mr. Justice Clark delivered the opinion of the Supreme Court of the United States in the above designated cases, reversing the judgments of the Supreme Court of California therein (306 P. 2d 824 et. seq.).
The decision was unanimous, Justice Frankfurter not participating.
Involved was the validity of certain contracts entered into pursuant to the Federal reclamation laws between the United States and the Ivanhoe Irrigation District, the Madera Irrigation District, and the Santa Barbara County Water agency, severally.
The contracts in question were submitted by the districts and the agency to their respective county Superior Courts in California for statutory confirmation proceedings, commencing as early as October 31, 1949.
Appeals from the rulings of the several Superior Courts were consolidated in the California Supreme Court, and a 4 to 3 decision was rendered therein January 24, 1957.
The holding of the California Supreme Court was that certain provisions of each of the three contracts were invalid, namely: those limiting the right to the use of water to 160 acres of irrigable land in a single ownership, and those providing for the payment of an annual charge for water service pursuant to Section 9 of the Reclamation Project Act of 1939.
The grounds upon which the California Supreme Court based its decision are taken from the construction placed upon that decision by the United States Supreme Court.
The decision below held that Section 8 of the Reclamation Act of 1902 required the application of California law to the contracts, and found the above-mentioned provisions of the contracts contrary thereto.
The districts and the agency were joined by the State of California in an appeal to the United States Supreme Court, which court postponed the jurisdictional question ot consideration on the merits (355 U. S. 803 (1957)).
The Solicitor General of the United States appeared as amicus curiae before the Court.
In its decision, the United States Supreme Court determined that the decision complained of did not hold unconstitutional a Federal statute but rather misconstrued a provision of Federal law.
The Court also found it clear that the judgments did not rest on an adequate State ground.
The appeals were disallowed, but certiorari was granted for consideration on the merits.
The decision on the merits is that the contracts are controlled by Federal law and are valid against the objections made.
The United States Supreme Court made it clear that its decision did not involve the question of title to or vested rights in unappropriated water.
The Court decided that, among other things, the California court had misconstrued Section 8 of the 1902 Act as overriding the provisions concerning the 160 acre limitation contained in Section 5 of that Act.
On the constitutional question, the court pointed out that the project is a Federal subsidy and that the provisions under attack are entirely reasonable and do not deprive appellees of any rights to property or water.
As to the provisions for payment of charges for water service, the court found that particularly in view of the Act of July 2, 1956 (70 Stat. 483) the contracts were not objectionable on the ground that they infer that the water users are not entitled to water rights beyond the 40-year term of the contract.
The court also dismissed the objection that the contracts did not recite the total amount due for water supply facilities, particularly since no interest is charged.
Based upon the same considerations of subsidy and the absence of an interest charge, together with the extended periods of payment on account of costs of water supply facilities, the court found it “altogether reasonable" to defer the question of passage of title to the works “to another day."
INSTALLED GENERATING CAPACITY for the Columbia River power system increased by 632,000 kilowatts during the fiscal year.
This increase resulted from the installation and placing in service of five 64,000 kilowatt generating units at the Chief Joseph project and four 78,000 kilowatt units at The Dalles project.
The total installed capacity for the system at the end of the fiscal year 1958 was 5,334,000 kilowatts.
Gross revenues for 1958 for the Columbia River power system were $66,729,110, an increase of only $329,143, or over one-half of 1 percent over the previous vear.
Gross revenues for 1958 fell about $5,200,000 below the amount that had been estimated at the outset of the year.
The principal reasons for this were the failure of distributors' loads to reach estimates because of the economic recession and an unusually mild winter, and the curtailment of both interruptible and firm power consumption by the large industries, principally aluminum, served directly by the Federal power system.
After provisions for all costs of operation, including maintenance, interest and depreciation expenses and miscellaneous charges, the net deficit for the year amounted to $2,949,501.
The net revenues for fiscal year 1957 were $5,965,732.
Table I presents a combined statement of revenues and expenses for the system.
The data are prepared from commercial cost accounts kept in accordance with the Federal Power Commission's system of accounts prescribed for electric utilities.
Table II summarizes by customer categories the source of revenues by fiscal years to and including 1958.
The aluminum industry accounted for 26.21 percent of the revenue dollar for fiscal year 1958, while industries other than aluminum accounted for 14.19 percent, making a total of 40.40 percent of the gross revenues for the year provided by industrial customers.
Sales to publicly owned utilities were 35.33 percent of the total and privately owned utilities 21.24 percent.
Other operating revenues amounted to 3.03 percent.
Increased sales occurred in all categories except aluminum and private utilities.
Sales to aluminum industries decreased $2,534,165.
Sales to other industries increased $1,015,510 as compared with the previous year; sales to publicly owned utilities increased $1,529,450, and sales to privately owned utilities decreased $278,762.
The gross Federal investment in the power portion of all the generating projects in operation and in related transmission facilities comprises the total of all funds appropriated and requisitioned for construction and operations, together with indirect items such as WPA expenditures and amounts transferred from other Federal agencies, plus interest at the rate of 21/2 percent per annum on the unrepaid balance.
As of June 30, 1958, this investment amounted to $1,937,409,749, as shown in table IV.
This includes accumulated interest in the amount of $263,349,095.
A summary of the interest accumulation is shown in table III.
With the exception of the amounts transferred to the continuing fund, all receipts from power sales and miscellaneous sources allocated to power are deposited in the Treasury to repay the Federal investment.
As of June 30, 1958, repayments total $580,481,605, leaving an unpaid balance of $1,356,928,144.
Of the total repaid, $330,513,610 represents payment of all current expenses since inception of the program.
The remaining amount of $249,967,995 is repayment on the capital investment of $1,606,896,139 as shown in table IV.
A summary of plant accounts as of June 30, 1958, is shown in table V.
1 The Columbia River power system does not receive appropriations for payment of interest, but imputes and includes in its accounts provisions for interest expense and returns receipts to the Treasury in repayment of such expenses.
2 Includes interest during construction of $73,935,482 which will be repaid to the Treasury as part of capital cost of electric plant.
The data in this table are based on cost accounts maintained in accordance with the Federal Power Commission uniform system of accounts.
Over 30 billion kilowatt-hours of electric energy were generated at the 12 Federal plants for the Bonneville Power Administration during the fiscal year 1958.
This was an increase of 0.7 percent over the 1957 fiscal year.
The addition of five generating units at Chief Joseph and four units at The Dalles added 632,000 kilowatts to the system giving a total of 5,334,000 kilowatts nameplate rating as of June 30, 1958.
A new system peak was established during the 5–6 p.
Maximum coincident demand on the 12 Federal plants was 5,024,000 kilowatts, an increase of 2.8 percent over the previous year's maximum demand of 4,887,000 kilowatts which occurred on January 25, 1957.
Energy produced at Federal plants for the Administration is shown by years in table VI and illustrated in the accompanying chart.
Prepared on a quarterly basis, the chart shows the general trends of the Bonneville Power Administration's system-load growth.
Bonneville Power Administration's transmission grid forms the backbone of the interconnected transmission system of public and private utilities in the Pacific Northwest.
As a result, electric energy receipts and deliveries on Bonneville's transmission system cover many complex transactions in addition to receipts from Federal powerplants and deliveries by sales.
The integrated transmission grid makes possible the fullest utilization of power facilities in the area through diversity in peaking and water capabilities and diversity of system-load conditions.