EARLY AMERICA was a land of seemingly limitless plenty.
Its great plains were richly productive, its rivers and streams teemed with fish, its forests were timber-laden, its mountain ranges held vast mineral treasures.
If, at times, our fathers and forefathers were wasteful of these precious natural resources, there were always more trees to be cut, more land to be tilled, more deer and quail at hand for the hunter, more fuel near at hand for the taking.
But as the passage of time brought great population increases— together with an ever higher standard of living—it became evident that we could not continue indefinitely to deplete the Nation's natural resources without in time facing serious consequences.
Consequently, the wise concept of use without abuse came into being through the inspired leadership and vision of men such as Theodore Roosevelt and Gifford Pinchot, our pioneer conservationists.
This concept—coupled with a sober sense of responsibility toward future generations—has saved many of America's priceless resources from destruction.
Today, with population gains reaching ever more dramatic proportions, publie attitudes still vary between the extremes of those who complacently believe that our resources are inexhaustible— and those who feel that American living standards, caught in the crush between expanding population and a fixed resource base, must inevitably decline.
Actually, neither the view that our land, water, mineral, timber, wildlife, and recreational resources are without end, nor the pessimistic prediction of eventual resource poverty, is sound.
The first ignores the dangers inherent in unrestricted and unplanned use of resources, while the latter fails to consider the dynamic influences of science, technology, and human enterprise.
The Department of the Interior, as the Federal Government's principal agency in the field of natural resources, is fully aware of the impact of population pressures on America's natural resource base.
But it is the Department's conviction that sound conservation, wise use, and orderly development of our resources will insure a steadily higher standard of living not only for today's citizens but for the multiplying millions of future Americans.
Nevertheless, the achievement of this objective will require the best thinking and planning of the Nation as a whole in the decades ahead.
In this process, the Department will play a vital role.
It faces today, and expects to continue to face, many difficult problems in carrying out its responsibilities to provide for the wise use of the priceless heritage represented by our abundant natural resources.
During the first half of this century, population in the United States doubled—from about 75 million in 1900 to over 150 million by 1950.
Estimates for the future take into account a continuation of the high rate of annual increase which has characterized the years since World War II.
Since 1946, we have seen the population expand by some 38,000,000 Americans—more than the entire population of the Nation in the 1860's.
At the present time, our population is being increased by 1 person every 11 seconds, 330 every hour, 8,000 every day, a quarter of a million every month.
Our number is now approaching 180 million.
By 1980, just 21 years away, there will be nearly 275 million Americans.
By the year 2000—which is only 40 years away, despite the remoteness of its sound—our present population may well double, reaching a total of 350 million persons.
Examined within the framework of these figures, the task of building from a fixed resource base to provide a peaceful, abundant life for the America of tomorrow can indeed be seen to be a staggering one.
Research which will result in a fuller knowledge of the extent, character, and utilization of basie natural resources.
Management of renewable resources to insure full, efficient use on a sustained yield basis.
Prevention of waste in the development and use of mineral and water resources through new techniques and new programs to insure full utilization.
Preservation and enhancement of scenic, wildlife, and recreational resources which, once destroyed, can never be replaced.
On the following pages are outlined some of the problems which a growing America must face in the conservation and use of its natural resources—and the basic programs which the men and women of the Department of the Interior believe will result in finding ways to meet and solve the problems.
The availability of water—just plain, ordinary water—is rapidly becoming a major concern to America and to the world.
In fact, as early as 1975–80, it may well be our number one domestic resource problem.
American industries, farms, and homes are today calling for an ever-rising tide of water.
Presently, the Nation uses about 240 billion gallons of water daily.
In 20 years, our growing population may require in excess of 600 billion gallons per day—if we have it available.
This prospect need not be one to cause alarm, but it is a matter of serious concern to the United States—one which leaves no other choice than to continue our current water conservation progress and to plan wisely and imaginatively for the years ahead.
In essence, the water problem is this: First, how do we supply a growing population and a dynamic economy with inereasing amounts of water at a reasonable cost?
Second, how do we, also at a reasonable cost, make certain our flowing waters are an asset to our people and not a hazard?
Only the eastern one-third of the United States has an annual average precipitation in excess of 30 inches.
Here, our growing population will find an ample supply of water for present and foreseeable needs at a reasonable cost.
In the remaining two-thirds of the Nation, annual precipitation varies from a high of 30 inches to desert areas with less than 10.
In these areas, water costs are moving upward in proportion to a corresponding use of available supplies.
In the more arid areas, which include heavily populated regions, permanent water supplies in large quantities must be transported vast distances.
The water problem is not merely one of availability but also one of quality.
A considerable portion of the ground water in the southeastern coastal plain and in some Midwestern States is brackish.
Some streams are extremely salty, others are turbid and muddy, many more reek with man-made pollution.
For any one or a combination of these reasons, communities face water problems even in areas where precipitation is ample.
In the western United States, the principal problem is quantity— and this problem is immediate, not long range.
The quantity problem is further complicated by uneven seasonal streamflow, the need for regulation, limited knowledge of underground flow, and evaporation losses.
In the East, the water problem is primarily the treatment of surface water to make it usable, as well as more effective management of ground-water reservoirs.
Many areas will continue to get all the water they require from conventional sources.
Water flows in wasteful abundance into the oceans from streams throughout the United States.
After a century of water conservation, only about one-third of the water that courses to the sea is used in our 17 western States, and only about one-eighth of the supply in the East is put to human use.
Progress is being made gradually but steadily in capturing and using a larger percentage of this flow, but in many areas a more unorthodox, almost visionary, approach is needed to meet current and future water needs created by population pressures.
One day—sooner than many people realize—the United States will have to follow a new trail for its water supply, at least in certain areas.
This trail leads to the inexhaustible oceans and seas of the world and to huge, known supplies of brackish water within the continental United States.
Getting the salt out of sea water is nothing new.
Sailors have been doing it for centuries.
Today, the crews of atomic submarines, such as the Nautilus and Skate, drink water converted by heat from their atomic reactors.
In fact, for a long time people have known how to get fresh water from the sea—by simply distilling it.
How can saline water be converted to fresh on a large scale at a cost cheap enough to substitute for water from conventional sources?
Presently operated salt water coversion plants do the job with technical efficiency, but the cost is high.
Sheer necessity, not competitive advantage, has caused them to be built in recent years.
On the arid island of Aruba in the Caribbean, for example, people are drinking, and oil companies are using, about 3.5 million gallons of converted sea water daily.
The oceans and seas of the world can provide an endless supply of water for increasing home and industrial use—and eventually irrigation use.
The Department's saline water conversion program offers hope to solve one of man's oldest problems.
In the Virgin Islands, converted saline water will be used upon completion of a conversion plant.
The population there has outstripped existing supplies, and water is currently hauled by barge from Puerto Rico at a cost of nearly $4 per thousand gallons.
Coalinga, a small community in California, hauled its drinking water for years at a cost of $7 per thousand gallons.
Making history, the town is the first in the United States to get its water supply from converted brackish water—at a cost of $1.45 per thousand gallons.
In many areas of America, particularly in the West, new supplies of fresh water from natural sources will surely become more expensive and the amounts available will not meet requirements.
In many communities, cost curves will one day cross, and converted sea water will be the less expensive.
Of course, for some towns there is only one curve, one price, and one choice: pay the bill, suffer economic stagnation, or move out.
Their water supplies are running out and no more are in sight.
The goal of the Department is to help forestall any possible water-caused local economic disasters by developing processes to make large quantities of converted water available on an economic basis.
In this work, the Department enjoys the growing cooperation of private industry, research organizations, colleges and universities, and the scientists of more than 16 nations of the world.
In 1952—just a little more than 7 years ago—the saline water conversion program was authorized by Congress.
In that short span of time, the curve of comparative cost has gone down further and faster than in all previous human history.
As recently as the late 1930's, it cost between $4 and $5 to convert a thousand gallons of sea water into fresh.
Meanwhile, equipment, fuel, and labor costs have increased several fold.
In spite of this, saline water conversion costs have been eut by more than half.
In the most effective plants in existence, it is now about $1.75 per thousand gallons.
The Department's program began with laboratory research.
Next, it included small pilot plants, and now it is about to move on to construetion of large demonstration plants.
In 1959, the program waited in the wings of a new and larger stage; where, for the first time, prospects are hopeful for breaking the dollar-per-thousandgallons barrier.
During fiscal 1959, President Eisenhower signed Publie Law 85–883.
The bill as finally enacted had the support of the Department of the Interior.
This new law authorized the Department of the Interior to construct and operate five saline water conversion demonstration plants.
Three will be designed to produce fresh water from the sea.
One of these plants is to be located on the East coast, one on the West and one on the Gulf coast.
Two of this group of three will be capable of producing at least a million gallons per day.
In addition, two plants will be constructed for the treatment of inland brackish water—one in the Southwest, the other in the Northern Great Plains.
One of these plants will have a capacity of at least 250,000 gallons per day.
The first demonstration plant will use the long-tube vertical multiple-effect distillation process, developed jointly by the Department of the Interior and the late W. L. Badger of Ann Arbor, Mich.
It will be constructed on the Gulf Coast at Freeport, Tex.
During the past year, the Department requested funds from Congress to speed its construction.
The Department believes that potable water can be produced in this plant for less than $1 per thousand gallons.
As the size of the plant increases, it is expected that, where 15–20 million gallons per day are processed, the cost may be less than 60 cents.
The second plant will be located near San Diego, Calif., utilizing the multistage flash distillation process.
For this plant, the Department is requesting the Atomic Énergy Commission to supply a lowtemperature, low-pressure atomic reactor as the heat source.
The flash process lends itself to large-scale conversion and, with atomic heat, may open a new field for the peaceful applieation of the atom.
The third process, electrodialysis, will be demonstrated in a plant located either in the Northern Great Plains or the arid Southwest.
Work on this and the remaining processes and plants are being pushed forward by engineers and scientists of the Department.
The long-tube vertical multiple type effect distillation process, developed in this experimental facility, was selected by the Department for the Nation's first full-scale effort to convert sea water to fresh water for municipal and industrial use.
Looking to the future, the Department of the Interior holds great hope that a key fact in human history is about to change: The fact that up to now the people of the world have depended for life entirely on fresh water upon and beneath the land.
Bearing in mind that an acre-foot of water is 325,851 gallons, the world is a long way from the day when converted sea water can be used for irrigation.
That is not to say it can never be done.
Once the world can not only tap the oceans for fresh water for human and industrial use—as we now can—but also for agriculture, wastelands can become gardens.
From where we stand now, we can with justification gaze toward a new horizon where arid sections of America, Mexico, the faminecursed drought quadrangle of Northeastern Brazil, the vast unpopulated expanses of Africa, Saudi Arabia, West Pakistan, the Negev area of Israel, and Australia, to name a few, will flourish—some for the first time in all recorded history.
Bringing blessings to expanding populations in America and to millions of people around the globe, the arrival of one or more genuinely low-cost processes can well become one of the most important scientific achievements of our time.
Despite the remarkable progress in conversion of saline water to fresh water over the past few years, the reclamation program of the Department of the Interior continues to be a vital, life-giving source of water for our 17 Western States—as it has for over 50 years.
Nor will a successful saline water program place in obsolence the activities of the Department's Bureau of Reclamation.
The bulk of the Department's water conservation program will be administered by the Bureau of Reclamation whose multipurpose projects have been conservation landmarks.
In the West, the Bureau of Reclamation has been engaged in water resource development since 1902, and the Bureau has played and will continue to play an indispensable role in the conservation programs of the Department.
In 1860, the West contained only 4 percent of the National population.
By 1900, the population of the 17 Western States had increased to 11,187,961, or 14.7 percent of the National population.
By 1958, the West had increased to a population of 42 million, or roughly 25 percent of our National population.
However, the fact that the area has been able to develop sufficient water to permit this rapid growth is no cause for complacency for the future.
In fact, Western municipal and State officials are greatly concerned about future water needs, because they are well aware that the closest and cheapest sources of water already have been utilized.
This steadily increasing demand for water underscores the importance of engineering and economic investigations which are an important phase of Bureau of Reclamation operations.
Engineering and economic investigations determine the necessity for and feasibility of proposed projects.
They contribute to a shelf of planned projects which may be undertaken as authorized by the Congress.
All large water resource projects have a rather extensive “lead time" during investigation and legislative consideration.
This is a factor that must be considered in any plans for expediting water resource development to meet the demand of future generations.
Multipurpose dams of the Department are designed to meet the current and future needs of our population through water storage, power generation, flood control, fish and wildlife preservation, and recreational facilities.
The Central Valley project, for example, was conceived by the State of California more than 30 years ago.
The Federal Government undertook construetion of the project in the thirties and the big Shasta Dam was built just before World War II.
Construction was resumed after World War II ended and the $800 million project is now more than two-thirds completed.
The great Central Valley project will help control flood-rampaging rivers, store water and transport it in river-sized canals for use by municipalities, industry, and agriculture in a 500-mile-long valley.
Project powerplants will generate nearly 1 million kilowatts of hydroelectric power, and its reservoirs and canals will yield other major publie benefits in fish and wildlife propagation and new recreational facilities.
The Pick-Sloan plan for flood control and water development on the Missouri River likewise was conceived in the thirties, and initial features were authorized in the Flood Control Act of 1944.
Fifteen years later, $478.6 million had been expended toward construction of the reclamation features for this 10-State development, and additional millions had been invested in flood control-navigation structures built by the Corps of Engineers, U.S. Army, on the main stem of the river.
As of June 30, completed Bureau of Reclamation facilities of the Missouri River Basin project will provide full irrigation to 152,000 acres, supplemental irrigation to 50,000 acres, a power generating capacity of 126,200 kilowatts, and partial flood control on several main tributaries of the Missouri River.
Similarly, the Colorado River Storage project, authorized in 1956, was under investigation for a quarter century, and will require between 30 and 50 years to complete the ultimate project.
This great comprehensive project will store and transport water for consumptive use in a four-State, semiarid area larger than New England, and its multiple man-made "lakes" will contribute major fish and wildlife and recreation benefits.
Water released from storage reservoirs will generate needed power for the area in hydroelectric power-plants with a total capacity in excess of 1 million kilowatts.
About one-tenth of the Bureau's personnel are engaged in project and drainage basin investigations and advance planning.
Included along with the more than 100 proposed projects under active study are comprehensive investigations into the optimum development of land and water resources in 11 river drainage basins.
Statewide water resource development studies in Texas and Alaska also are being conducted by the Bureau of Reclamation, in cooperation with other Federal agencies.
In the decades ahead, these and other multi-purpose water resource projects will help to provide essential water in areas of mounting population in our 19 Western States, including Alaska and Hawaii.
In the arid Western area served by the Bureau of Reclamation, some 73 projects and units are currently under construction.
On many of these projects, construction is virtually completed or is far enough along so that the water development program is essentially complete or partially in operation.
When completed, the projects now under construction will provide facilities to bring irrigation water to an additional 1,717,000 acres of land, bringing the total area which can be served from Bureau of Reclamation facilities to 9,906,000 acres.
Construction is under way on 12 powerplants that will have an ultimate installed capacity of 1,225,150 kilowatts, increasing the total in plants built by the Bureau of Reclamation to 6,346,150 kilowatts.
Since the early days of reclamation, the important multipurpose aspects of providing water for municipal and industrial purposes have been recognized by the Congress culminating most recently when President Eisenhower signed the Water Supply Act of 1958, Public Law 85–500.
This act provides authority for the Corps of Engineers and the Bureau of Reclamation to make provision for storage not only for immediate but also for future water supply needs in connection with Federal multipurpose projects, thereby permitting the Federal Government and local interests to share equitably in the benefits of multipurpose construction.
The principle is established that storage for future use may be included in any reservoir project, planned or to be planned, constructed or to be constructed.
The act is intended to provide the additional means whereby anticipated future municipal and industrial water supplies may be developed to ensure the most effective and economical use of water resources for current and future generations.
Throughout the 57-year history of the Department's reclamation program, water has been put to work to meet the growing food demands of an expanding population.
Through the Department's reclamation program, storage of spring water runoff in the rocky desolate areas of the West provides irrigation water miles away for the cultivation of nonsurplus foods to feed our expanding population.
Since 1906, cumulative crop value has exceeded $14 billion, nearly three times the total of the Nation's entire reclamation investment.
In 1958, the latest year of record, the value of crops harvested on reclamation lands totaled $987 million, some $36 million higher than the 1956 record crop year.
While reclamation facilities have been doubled since 1940, total crop value during the same period multiplied nearly ninefold.
The vast bulk of irrigation-based agriculture has, over the past few years, been coneèntrated in specialty crops of high commercial value —unsubsidized by the Federal Government.
In the years ahead, growing demand for agricultural products such as fruits, table vegetables, and nuts will be met increasingly from farms which owe their existence to an adequate, dependable water supply provided by reclamation facilities of the Department of the Interior.
The contribution of irrigation to the growth of local areas can be seen in an economic study completed by the Bureau of Reclamation in fiscal 1959 showing how reclamation promoted the growth of farm-associated industries in the Columbia Basin Reclamation project in central Washington.
The study, entitled "Growth of Agricultural Processing and Marketing Facilities," points up the following economie benefits in the first few years of an irrigation project where a single crop economy was supplanted by diversified agriculture of high-demand, highvalue crops.
The marketing and processing of 50 different crops, worth $24 million in 1957, has resulted in widespread local business expansion.
Sixty-four new plants costing $17 million have been constructed.
Plant payrolls in spite of automation in modern processing increased the equivalent of 750 man-years and $3.1 million in wages.
Rail shipments to and from the project increased 40 percent, and truck shipments increased 275 percent between 1952 and 1957.
In 1949, fully 99 percent of the crop shipments from the project area consisted of small grains, most of which were in surplus.
By 1954, 44 percent of the crop shipments were nongrain products.
Livestock feeding and slaughtering and dairying also showed a marked increase.
Economic studies also were published on the accomplishments of reclamation on the Kittitas Division of the Yakima project in Washington State, and of the Lower Yellowstone project in Montana and North Dakota.
The Kittitas study disclosed that this project had produced in additional Federal tax revenues since 1940 a total of $11,400,000—a sum greater than the cost of construction.
In addition, area farm production was increased 84 percent, or $5 million annually; retail trade increased 57 percent, and farm value increased an average of $13,000 per farm unit.
On the Lower Yellowstone project, Federal tax revenues since 1940 are nearly double the cost of the $4 million project, which is now 65 percent paid for by its local beneficiaries.
Retail sales in the projeet area are four times as great as in the nonirrigated area, and project irrigated land outproduces adjacent nonirrigated land by about six times.
Barley and oats are the principal crop on the dryland area, while the irrigated farms produce a large acreage of sugar beets and other crops which contribute to a thriving livestock feeding operation.
Personal income in the project area is about three times greater than in the surrounding nonirrigated area, principally as a result of the irrigation of roughly 4 percent of the land area.
An estimated 11.5 million acre-feet of water—more than is stored behind Grand Coulee Dam—is lost each year through evaporation from the lakes and streams of the West.
Department scientists in cooperation with other Federal, State, and local agencies, are seeking new methods of making water resources fully useful.
The first large-scale research into the use of monomolecular "chemical shield" to reduce evaporation on large reservoirs was conducted during the year by the Bureau of Reclamation, in cooperation with other Federal, State, and local agencies.
The tests, conducted at Lake Hefner near Oklahoma City, indicated that savings of 9 percent in water losses from evaporation were achieved under difficult conditions during tests extending over a period of nearly 3 months.
Cost of the water saved was approximately equal in value to untreated municipal water to Oklahoma City.
Additional research and field tests may lead to improved procedures and lower unit costs.
Progress also was made during the year in research into the control of water-stealing phreatophytes.
These economically useless weeds, shrubs, and trees waste over 25,000,000 acre-feet of water each year, enough to more than fill Hoover Dam's Lake Mead or several lesser reservoirs.
For example, considerable remedial work has been done in the middle Rio Grande, where a saving of more than 300,000 acre-feet of water was accomplished between 1951 and 1958.
This cooperative Federal-State project to remove waterwasting salt cedars will continue, and when completed, is expected to save over 100,000 acre-feet of water annually.
This is but óne example of how millions of dollars are being saved and will be saved throughout the West through various methods of water conservation developed by the Department.
In many ways—from desalting of ocean waters to weed eradication programs—the Department of the Interior is working constructively to meet the water needs of future generations of Americans.
Water is the most familiar and the most important of our natural resources.
No individual can live without water, no nation can outlast its available supply, and no civilizatión can grow beyond its capacity to store and utilize water.
Growth—both in terms of population and prosperity—is certain in the United States.
Whether such growth is sustained and whether the American of the future lives a full, abundant life, depends to a great degree upon our wisdom, foresight, and efforts today to provide adequate water in the years to come.
At the time of the first census in 1790, the total population of the United States was 3,929,214.
Today, the population of the United States is nearing 180 million and is increasing at the net rate of 1 person every 11 seconds.
Since 1790 the land area of the United States has grown by about four times.
Population has increased by approximately 45 times.
In the years ahead, population growth may raise the United States census count to more than 250 million by 1980 and to 350 million by the year 2000.
Since the first land patent was issued by the Federal Government in 1788, the public domain has been a source of lands and resources for our growing population and productive economy.
Today, the Department's Bureau of Land Management is working to assure the Nation of a continuing contribution to national growth from the public lands.
Of the original public domain, covering about 1.8 billion acres, over 1 billion acres have now been transferred to private and local government ownership.
Of the remainder, the Bureau of Land Management is responsible for administration of about 475 million acres, mostly unreserved and unappropriated.
More people require more land—America's expanding population needs land for homes, farms, and factories; land for towns, for cities, highways, and recreation.
In the West, where most of the public domain remains, land needs will probably reflect the fact that the Western United States is growing about three times as fast as the rest of the Nation.
Over half of the population increase in the West since 1940 has been the result of people moving west, and an important portion of future land needs in the West will be met from the public domain.
The expanding dimensions of the Nation's urban areas, as the cities sprawl further and further into the rural hinterland, are putting new demands upon public lands in many areas of the West.
In California, in Nevada, in Arizona, and New Mexico, cities are reaching out to embrace public lands formerly valuable only for grazing and stockraising.
Another urgent need is land for recreational development.
In carrying out its land program the Department is cognizant that special emphasis needs to be placed on the satisfaction of local, State and National recreational land needs.
New legislation to permit planned urban and suburban development has been requested.
The proposed law would make possible the application of the first new concept in public land disposition since passage of the Small Tract Act in 1938, by authorizing the development of areas up to 1,280 acres by private companies and local government.
Also, total supply of public land for private and public use is, in effect, being enlarged.
Old, obsolete, or inefficiently used land withdrawals and reservations are being reviewed.
Some withdrawals are being reduced in size to reflect actual need for land.
Other unnecessary withdrawals are being eliminated entirely.
Requirements for public lands for public purposes are being met by a wide variety of program elements.
Land for wildlife conservation is receiving particular emphasis.
New arrangements for balanced multiple use of public lands are broadening the base of land use.
As new demands are made on the public land base, it will be increasingly necessary for the Department to manage the public lands wisely and assure balanced, harmonious use and development in the light of the long-term needs of the American people.
In the past, long before people and progress came to an area, public land surveyors of the Department's Bureau of Land Management laid out the familiar checkerboard of sections and townships.
Now, however, present-day needs no longer allow the time necessary for full surveys before all settlement and development.
The new State of Alaska is a good example.
When Alaska became a State in January 1959, it received a land grant from Congress totaling 103,350,000 acres.
The exact lands which the new State will receive were not spelled out in Statehood legislation; rather, Alaska will have 25 years to select land in Alaska from the public domain.
The exterior boundaries of all of these lands (in tracts usually at least 5,760 acres) must be surveyed, and the boundaries of land claims inside selected tracts also will have to be surveyed.
Most public lands suitable for homesteading have already been settled, except in Alaska, but the public domain still provides land for suburban use for 2- to 5-acre permanent or vacation homesites.
If all of the Alaskan grant lands were in a single, compact circle, the task of surveying the exterior boundary alone would be approximately equivalent to surveying a line from San Francisco across California, Nevada, Utah, Colorado, and Nebraska—to the Mississippi River at Omaha.
In making this and other surveys, the Bureau of Land Management is employing the latest survey techniques and equipment in its cadastral survey operations.
Electronie measuring devices are speeding the computation of distances.
Expert photogrammatists are applying the skills of precise aerial photography and photointerpretation to modern publie land surveys.
Helicopters are being used to speed survey crews to and from remote, rugged work areas.
To speed the development of resources and to permit many types of exploratory operations, the Department has begun an extension of the rectangular survey system by protraction over the remaining unsurveyed areas.
This means sketching out the form of the public land survey grid by drawing lines on paper instead of laying out the boundaries on the ground.
Protracted surveys will serve as the temporary basis for oil and gas leasing and many other land management activities until the lands are later surveyed on the ground.
To meet the growing needs for home and recreation sites, particularly in California, large areas are being surveyed and subdivided into small tracts.
No resource can demonstrate more clearly the need for planning for tomorrow's people than our forests.
With a growth and harvest eycle that may span two to four generations, forest conservation today will determine the volume of the forest crop for many years in the future.
Altogether, the Department's Bureau of Land Management administers some 161 million acres of forest land, including about 46 million acres of commercial forest lands.
Forest production and harvest from BLM lands is done under the scientific principle of continuous sustained yield by harvesting the annual replaceable forest growth without borrowing from growing stock needed for future generations.
BLM forestry programs have an important impact on many local areas.
More than 10,000 man-years of local employment are provided by this program annually.
Sustained yield timber management on public domain lands provides a constantly renewing supply of timber for our growing needs.
Multiple-use of our public lands, such as the O. & C. lands in Oregon shown above, provide mineral and forest resources, wildlife habitat, and recreational facilities to meet the requirements of an expanding population.
The Department's forestry program on public lands must, of necessity, take into consideration all aspects of resource conservation—timber production under sound methods; protection from insects, disease and fire; watershed management; recreational use; wildlife enhancement; grazing; and mineral production.
Idle and unproductive forest land must be put to use to help meet future timber needs.
Today BLM is seeding and reforesting lands that were formerly unproductive at an annual rate nearly double the previous 20-year total.
The amount of timber taken from each acre is now about double that taken from a comparable area 20 years ago.
Losses from fire, insects, diseases and delayed regeneration are now much below that of the past two decades.
The completion of forest resource inventories is raising the annual allowable cut.
New access roads are opening up virgin areas to intensive forestry.
Under competitive bid sales, the Department markets over a billion board feet of timber annually from BLM lands—enough lumber to build nearly 100,000 average homes every year.
The continual development of the resources on our public lands will help provide the expanding population with minerals and fuels necessary for a vigorous, growing economy.
The public domain lands contain a substantial part of the Nation's raw energy materials—oil, gas, coal, and nuclear fuels.
In order to meet the future demand for energy, the production of mineral fuels will have to be doubled by 1975 and possibly doubled again by the year 2000.
Exploration and development on the public domain will help meet this staggering increase.
Uranium, the raw material of nuclear power, will in the future be put to large scale commercial and industrial use.
Known uranium resources will probably more than meet the needs of the free world for the next few decades.
Uranium exploration has so far been confined principally to surface exploration, and subsurface exploration may multiply known resources many times.
Under the Mineral Leasing Acts of 1920, the General Mining Laws of 1872, and the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act of 1953, the Department of the Interior carries on mineral development and conservation programs.
Revenues to the Federal Government from these operations have totaled hundreds of millions of dollars.
The long-term goal of the Department's Bureau of Land Management range resource program is to rebuild the public domain range land to its full productive capacity.
Today, the downward trend in range condition has been stopped on more than four-fifths of the lands that were deteriorating at the time of the Taylor Grazing Act in 1934.
At the same time, Federal grazing lands are being put under effective permanent sustained yield management.
The task of restoring and rebuilding the Federal range will take years, but measurable progress already has been made.
For example, on a million acres of artificially seeded public range, beef production has been raised from an average of 2 to 3 pounds per acre to 40 pounds per acre.
The long-term methods by which the Federal range will be brought up to full productive capacity involve construction of a wide array of range improvements—fencing, watering holes, storage tanks, and spring development.
It will also involve seeding millions of acres of presently unproductive lands, substituting good forage for wildlife and livestock on millions of acres of lands now infested with low value forage plants and noxious weeds.
Wildlife management and conservation, along with other multiple range land uses, are integrated into patterns of grazing land use that are geared for the full productivity necessary to meet the growing needs of America's mounting population.
Population growth in the United States inevitably means an enormous drain upon our Nation's nonrenewable mineral and fuel resources.
Coal, oil, and natural gas in ever increasing quantities will be needed to supply our energy requirements, while increased output of mineral resources will be necessary to supply the growing "hardware" needs of our civilization.
One thing is certain: More people in the United States will consume more mineral and fuel resources in the years ahead than in any previous period of our history.
It is estimated that per capita consumption of mineral products will increase by 40 percent by 1975.
In the same period, we can reasonably assume that the rate of mineral and fuel consumption will be more than double the rate of population growth.
If the relationship between minerals consumption and population were a direct one, it would be simple enough to look ahead to predictable levels of consumption of various mineral and fuel commodities.
But such is not the case.
The amounts of mineral raw materials consumed are dictated by other factors that are sometimes of greater significance than the number of consumers.
We have entered into a civilization based upon rapidly changing technology of increasing complexity.
The replacement of human effort by machines and refinements that make our standard of living a thing of marvelous mechanical intricacy are all contributing to new and varied demands for specific commodities.
At the same time, the economies of production and utilization of some commodities have made competition among commodities a matter of very real significance.
The substitution of one mineral or metal or nonmineral material for other mineral resources also is continually felt by the producers of minerals and fuels.
Population growth alone is not enough to measure the future demand for minerals and fuel resources.
The per capita consumption of aluminum, for example, has increased many times in the past 10 years while the per capita consumption of copper has increased only modestly.
It cannot be denied that the increase for copper would be much greater were it not for competition from aluminum.
Consumption of plastics and glass has increased at the expense of such materials as tinplate, and in turn, plastics have won markets from glass in the container industries.
The prime historical example, of course, is the interaction of coal and petroleum and natural gas in satisfying our fuel requirements.
Although domestic production of minerals has increased markedly, it has not kept pace with the increase in consumption after World War II.
Since 1900, consumption has increased by a factor of 7.5— production, by a factor of 5.5.
The figure on opposite page illustrates the gap between production and consumption that is forever widening.
In the late 1940's, this country became a net importer of minerals and fuels.
Since the population of the rest of the world is growing faster than our own, it is to be expected that consumption of minerals by the rest of the Free World will grow at an increasing rate over the years ahead.
This will put considerable pressure on our overseas sources of supply of many minerals and intensify the problem of meeting our own rising demands.
Provision of mineral and fuel resources for an expanding population faces a series of challenges from dwindling reserves, expanding industry, and new and improved technology in other industries.
Because such resources are nonrenewable, these challenges will force us to move across new frontiers of scientifie knowledge in search of the solution to the ever lengthening lists of problems.
Horizons must be greatly broadened if these challenges are to be met.
Thus far science and technology have learned to use only a fraction of the elements and substances that surround them in the physical world.
The problems that must be solved by the minerals industries in the future will necessitate constant expansion of the basic sources of mineral raw materials.
The ultimate goal will be achieved when means have been found to extract and utilize all elements and compounds from even the commonest and most abundantly widespread rocks, soils, waters, and the atmosphere.
The Department of the Interior, through its Bureau of Mines, provides much of the forward-looking scientifie approach which is essential if we are to provide increasing supplies of minerals and fuel resources to meet growing demands.
The science of technology in mineral resources is necessarily coupled with scientific information concerning the discovery, appraisal, and systematic development of our mineral and fuel resources.
For the past 80 years, the Department's Geological Survey has been obtaining basic geologic data needed to supply the urgent mineral needs of our expanding population.
Despite continual effort, the need for geologic data far outstrips the rate at which data are acquired.
Discovery and development of new deposits.
Better use of existing reserves through sound conservation, improved development techniques, and wise utilization.
Mining research pioneered by the Department of the Interior has resulted in extensive open-pit mining of lower grade mineral ores to meet the requirements of our expanding population.
To meet these requirements, geologic research by the Department in the mineral and fuel resource fields will emphasize: Systematic studies in areas favorable for mineral occurrence; evaluation of known and potential deposits; theoretical studies of the geologic processes that form mineral.
New areas rich in mineral and fuel occurrence are becoming increasingly more difficult—and therefore more costly—to find in the United States.
Most of the easily found deposits have been discovered and developed, making the problem of maintaining an adequate level of domestic mineral supplies more difficult.
It is essential that increased emphasis be placed on mineral discovery to meet growing needs in the decades to come.
Today, financial risks are so great that private industry, in many instances, cannot continue to search without Federal assistance for strategic or critical domestie minerals at a rate sufficient to keep pace with the Nation's mounting requirements.
As a result, the Department, through its Office of Minerals Exploration, conducts a program to encourage exploration for needed minerals in the United States.
This permanent mineral exploration program in which the Department participates financially with private industry should continue to assist in developing new mineral reserves for the use of future generations.
To maintain and further the high living standards of the United States and to power our rapidly growing economy in concert with the heavy growth of our population will require the ready availability of increasingly large additional quantities of energy.
Widespread utilization of America's rich deposits of coal and its petroleum and natural gas began less than 150 years ago.
The explosive growth in total energy demand in the last 50 years and anticipation of the continuation of this trend have focused increasing attention on fuel reserves, their conservation, and the evaluation of their capability for meeting the energy requirements in the coming years.
Projections of energy requirements based on an annual 3 percent per capita increase indicate that our energy consumption will be more than doubled between 1958 and 1975.
The contribution by individual energy sources to meet the total demand will depend on reserves, production costs, and particular markets or uses.
Notwithstanding any adaptation of nuclear energy to the generation of electric power, the mineral fuels are expected to supply the preponderant portion of the increasing energy requirements.
Predictions indicate that coal eventually will have to contribute an increasingly greater share of energy supplies.
The United States has the largest known coal reserves, more than onethird of the world total.
These reserves can supply a major part of America's future energy needs.
Today, most fuel commodities are in adequate supply.
The capacity of producers to meet the upsurge in demand for raw fuels after World War II is evidence that the mineral resource base of the United States and of the world has a much greater potential capacity than many earlier forecasters had anticipated.
Indeed, for the foreseeable future, there would seem to be adequate fuel supplies to sustain an expanding economy.
Nevertheless, wise use of these nonrenewable resources is essential in order to assure the welfare of future generations.
Although long-term trends indicate a percentage increase in energy requirements derived from coal, petroleum and natural gas will continue for many years to be the primary source of energy supply for our population.
Additional Americans in the years ahead will be heavily dependent upon our oil and natural gas resource reserves.
Practically every human need is touched upon in some degree by the availability of petroleum products and natural gas.
Recent growth is most conspicuous in the field of petrochemicals where new and increasing quantities of petroleum-derived materials are used in textiles, pharmaceuticals, and countless other industrial activities.
Concerned with the future supply of this fuel resource, the Department is undertaking a long-range petroleum study to evaluate the potentialities of United States petroleum reserves, productive capacity, consumption projections, and the use of petroleum and its products in 1975.
This study—conducted by the Office of Oil and Gas, the Bureau of Mines, and the Geological Survey, all agencies of the Department—is nearing completion.
The potential availability of petroleum in the United States seems sufficient to provide the bulk of our domestic requirements for many years.
Estimates have been made that 240 billion barrels of recoverable oil may ultimately be developed in the United States.
In addition, tremendous reserves of oil shale exist in this country which may exceed a trillion barrels.
While these figures seem reassuring, oil conservation, intelligent development, and efficient use of our petroleum reserves are essential to meet the needs of Americans in future years.
Oil, like all other mineral fuels, cannot be replaced or renewed.
Once used, it is gone forever, and under such circumstances there can be no justification for its use on a wasteful basis.
The consumption of helium has increased approximately five times since 1950, and today it is a valuable military, industrial, medical, and basic research tool contributing to the safety and welfare of our citizens everywhere.
Unfortunately, however, while one of the most valuable of our natural resources, it is probably the scarcest.
Our known helium-bearing gas resources are concentrated within a small geographical area in the Texas and Oklahoma Panhandles and adjoining areas of Kansas.
Moreover, no important new discoveries of helium have occurred in the past 15 years.
So far as can be ascertained, United States helium resources constitute the total Free World's supply.
Unfortunately, continued production from known major reserves is unavoidable, because the natural gas containing helium is dedicated to commercial markets.
At present we are recovering only a fraction of the helium so produced.
The helium-bearing gas fields contain about 120 billion cubic feet of recoverable helium—350 times the present annual consumption of helium in the United States.
But all of these fields are being produced to supply fuel gas markets, and about 4 billion eubic feet of helium is being wasted annually when the gas is consumed in domestic and industrial furnaces.
At the current rate of loss, and with increasing consumption, the presently known helium-bearing gas fields would be incapable, after 1985, of supplying enough helium to meet all of our needs.
Consequently, the Department has requested legislation for a belium conservation program designed to conserve approximately 32 billion cubic feet of helium between now and 1985.
The program calls for the construction of 12 additional helium extraction plants as soon as possible to remove helium from natural gas going to fuel markets.
Helium, so conserved, will be stored until needed in the Government-owned Cliffside Field near Amarillo, Tex.
It is hoped that incentives will permit private industry to finance, construct, and operate these plants to produce helium for sale to the Government.
If private participation proves infeasible, however, the necessary new extraction facilities will have to be constructed and operated by the Department's Bureau of Mines.
While mineral resources are not renewable there is always the possibility of more than a single use for a given supply.
This comes about by recovery of scrap and reclamation of the valuable constituents it may contain.
Many commodities are now being shunted to the waste pile as discards from various production processes.
Some—such as gallium—have been victims of low demand, though new uses for gallium are just now coming to the fore.
Others, like sulfur, are being recovered at some plants, but are being lost at others.
The proper selection of material for uses can do much to conserve supplies.
The use of corrosion-resistant materials eliminates the wastes that come from oxidation by the atmosphere and the cost as well as the material required for protective surfacing.
The quality of mineral resources continually declines as the best deposits are mined.
One of the principal elements of Departmental research is directed particularly toward increasing production from currently submarginal deposits—those that appear likely to be called upon in the next 20 to 100 years to meet the Nation's growing mineral requirements.
Frequently, submarginal deposits are enormous in size and if economically workable would be able to fulfill large demands.
Often they are not only low in desirable mineral content but have the added disadvantage of being complex and difficult to treat metallurgically.
Department research in the fields of mining techniques and equipment has led to both governmental and private development of efficient machinery to mine coal and other minerals.
A good example of the attack being made on such deposits is found in bauxite, the raw material for aluminum production.
Domestic supplies of this valuable mineral are very limited, forcing the United States to import most of its high-grade bauxite from abroad.
However, in Hawaii there are immense low-grade bauxite deposits which have received preliminary examination and metallurgical tests that have led to a cooperative program with the State of Hawaii to measure more accurately the potential of this huge resource.
Much more attention also must be given to improving the techniques of exploration and their wide application, for these techniques can recognize evidence of deposits that do not reach the surface.
A half-billion-ton, deep copper deposit near San Manual, Ariz,, was found by Bureau of Mines exploratory drilling based on slight surface mineralization.
Coal-mining conditions in the Eastern States will inevitably become more difficult and techniques must be developed to overcome new problems in recovering coal from the ground.
Although advances in mechanization and productivity have been significant, safer and better procedures for mining and transporting coal are still needed and are being sought in the Department's research program.
In the Western States, emphasis must be placed on increased recovery to avoid leaving large quantities of coal in the ground.
The Department of the Interior has provided leadership through research in developing technology to increase the yield or recovery of petroleum from underground reservoirs.
This means producing more barrels of oil per acre and is part of a broad conservation program that is assisting industry to supply increasing amounts of natural resources to our growing population.
Improved recovery techniques resulting from such research are increasingly important to maintain adequate proved reserves because it is becoming more and more difficult and expensive to discover new reserves.
In recent years, new reserves resulting from exploratory drilling have not been as encouraging as in former years.
This does not indicate necessarily that the country is running out of oil.
In fact, total proved reserves are at an all-time high, but this is due mainly to oil proven by extensions of fields and revisions of earlier estimates for known deposits.
Increased recovery or yield resulting from the application of better production techniques is an important factor causing the upward revision of previous estimates.
Research was the forerunner of this favorable situation and more research will be needed to develop even better recovery techniques, so that petroleum can be produced in ever-increasing volumes to satisfy the continuing upward trend in demand that is being created by our growing population.
The advances of the past half century in the science of extracting mineral raw materials from lower-grade deposits have been remarkable.
Just as noteworthy have been recent developments that have permitted the extraction and utilization of many of the more esoterie metals that were unknown to commerce 25 years ago.
Department research provided the Nation with titanium, zirconium, and hafnium.
In the foreseeable future, industrial supplies of hyperpure metals such as yttrium, vanadium, cerium, chromium, and tungsten may become reality through research fostered and conducted by the Bureau of Mines.
To insure optimum utilization of coal and our ability to meet the needs of a dynamic society, a comprehensive coal research and development program is underway, directed toward insuring the ability of coal to retain its share of the energy market, exploring the possibility of expanding this share as other fuels become scarcer and more expensive in the years ahead, and evaluating alternative nonfuel uses of coal.
Improved preparation practices will be needed to permit satisfactory utilization of dirtier and finer-sized coals.
Although coal-derived liquid fuels are not now competitive economically with petroleum products, extensive research has indicated that their costs may be reduced.
In addition, the potential application of nuclear energy to gasification of coal, as well as a study of the effects of irradiation of coal, is now being investigated.
Ways will eventually be found to use our vast reserves of low-rank lignite as effectively as coals of higher rank.
Coal will eventually be the earth's most abundant source of organic compounds that will be needed for producing chemicals and pharmaceuticals.
New techniques for separating, identifying, and upgrading these coal products must be, and are being, developed.
Another attack on the problem of future mineral supply is through research on substitute, alternative, and synthetic materials.
In the Department, special attention is focused on use of abundant resources as substitutes for minerals that may be in short supply.
New metallurgical techniques are sought to relieve dependence of iron production on the shrinking supply of metallurgical-grade coal.
Copper may be replaced in some uses by more-abundant aluminum.
Abundant anhydrite may, through research, become an economic domestic sulfur-source material.
Research on synthesis of asbestos and mica is aimed toward improving the domestic supply of these strategic materials.
Such research on synthesis of nonorganic compounds may well have broader implications in relieving man's dependence on scarce natural sources for many industrial minerals.
In some instances, materials are synthesized that are superior to naturally occurring minerals.
Substitution and synthesis offer many intriguing possibilities for the future.
Such metals as iron, silicon, magnesium, aluminum, sodium, calcium, and potassium are available in common rocks and in the oceans in quantities that beggar our consumption requirements.
Perhaps the day will come when they will become the basis of our industrial civilization instead of the traditional copper, tin, zinc, lead, and ferroalloy metals.
The Indian people of the United States are by no means a vanishing race.
When the North American continent was discovered, the Indian population was, according to the best available estimates, in the neighborhood of 800,000 to 1,000,000.
For a period of years, the Indian segment of our population dwindled, and Census Bureau records show a low point of approximately 250,000 was reached in 1880.
Today, the Indian population—both on and off reservations—is estimated to be over 550,000.
Evidence indicates that the rate of population inerease in most tribal groups is now higher than the growth rate for the entire United States.
In recent years, there has been increasing population pressure on the physical and natural resources of the Indian reservations.
As a result, a growing tendency exists for the Indian peóple to look for other means of livelihood apart from the land.
For example, on the large Navajo reservation, the income of tribal members from agriculture and stock raising is only about 11 percent—compared with approximately -58 percent as recently as 1940.
Similar though less pronounced shifts away from the land are undoubtedly occurring in other tribal groups.
In many cases, Indian families are leaving reservations to move into the mainstream of American life.
In other instances, the land will no longer adequately support the growing Indian population.
This movement of the Indian people away from dependence on the land into other fields of human activity constitutes a major reason for the Department's programs to develop industry adjacent to reservations, to aid Indians who voluntarily leave their reservations, and to train Indians in skilled occupations through adult vocational schooling.
While dependence on land is lessening and the lands held in trust for the Indians constitute less than three percent of the total area of the United States, their wise use and development are of utmost importance to those who remain on tribal lands.
The Department recognizes that the development of human and physical resources must go hand in hand.
With this premise in mind, all special programs for Indians carried out by the Bureau of Indian Affairs are focused on the development of Indian potentials.
Over half of the annual appropriations made by the Congress for Indians is allocated to education programs and school construction specifically aimed at the development of Indian talents to the end that Indians may take advantage of opportunities wherever they exist, either on or away from their reservations.
Even the underlying purpose of the resource programs carried out on Indian reservations is a human purpose—to teach Indians how to conserve, manage, and better utilize the physical resources they own.
The Department sees its responsibility to Indians as being uniquely a responsibility for the development of people and the programs carried out are designed to give Indians the know-how to face the problems of modern living.
In the past most Indians were content to follow a simple way of life in cultural isolation on their reservations.
This is no longer true.
Indians today want better opportunities for themselves and their children; better education, better health; better standards of living; and an active part in determining their own destiny.
To achieve these legitimate aspirations, most Indians living on reservations must overcome two major roadblocks: (1) the imbalance between rapidly growing population and their resource base, and (2) the serious educational gap between Indian populations who have lived for several generations in cultural isolation, and the general population.
Since education is the key to Indian advancement, the growing upsurge of Indian interest in education is most heartening.
Indian parents, educationally disadvantaged themselves, are demanding better educational opportunities for their children and are learning how to participate in the management of their local schools.
Increasingly, Indian children are enrolling in school at the proper age, attending school more regularly, and staying in school longer.
More and more of them are enrolling in public schools.
This increased interest in education places a strain on already crowded Federal and public facilities, and makes it necessary to gear school construction and instructional programs closely to growing needs and requirements.
Indian youths in greater numbers are attending school beyond the high school level in both vocational and college courses.
Federal grant programs and tribal scholarship and loan programs assist the college-bound youth, and the Federal adult vocational training program provides educational opportunities for Indian adults between the ages of 18 and 35.
Special programs of the Department for educationally disadvantaged adults designed to upgrade their literacy and educational competency are well received by Indians.
No longer is the Indian satisfied to have his destiny shaped for him; no longer is he indifferent to education.
In consultation with him, the Department gears its programs to his special needs and helps him develop the understandings, the skills, and the capital he needs to achieve his goals.
Out of the total of approximately 53,000,000 acres presently held in trust by the United States for Indian tribes or individual Indians, an aggregate of about 34,500,000 acres is now being used by Indian people for the production of crops or livestock and another 9,500,000 acres is being used for the same purposes under lease or grazing permit.
To help the Indians in realizing the fullest possible income from their land and water resources, the Department carries on two major kinds of activity.
First, it provides technical guidance to Indian operators in farm and range management, in soil and moisture conservation, and in the operation of irrigation projects.
Secondly, it works with Indian people in bringing new lands and additional water supplies into production and in raising the available land and water resources from a lower to a higher state of use.
In this latter field, Departmental programs continue to bring desert or semiarid lands under irrigation in both old and new projects.
In some cases, this means agricultural production where previously there had been none.
In other instances, the change is from grazing values of a few cents per acre to cultivated crops which may be valued at over $100 per acre.
At the same time, efforts are being launched on a number of reservations to make a complete inventory of the available resources as a basis for more comprehensive development and utilization programs.
More than a fourth of all Indian trust lands, about 14 million acres, is classified as forest and woodland.
These timbered lands are an important factor in the Indian economy.
They provide fuel and other wood products for local consumption; they produce forage for livestock; and, in some areas, they provide game, fish, berries, and roots for tribal use.
Six million acres of these lands, classed as “commercial" forests, are producing important cash income for the Indian owners.
During the past 50 years, these forests have been consistently managed according to sustained-yield principles and have produced a harvest of 22 billion board feet of timber valued at more than $155,000,000.
For many years, the forestry program of the Bureau of Indian Affairs was handicapped by inadequate, incomplete, or outmoded information concerning the extent and quality of the timber growth on Indian lands.
As a result, the timber was harvested in most areas on an extremely conservative rather than a full-utilization basis.
During the past decade a determined effort has been made to eliminate this deficiency.
A program of forest inventories has been initiated to determine the volume, condition, and growth potential of the forests.
Aerial photography and other modern techniques are being used in developing this information.
As the inventory for each reservation is completed, a new plan of forest management and new cutting schedule are prepared and put into effect.
New inventories and management plans have now been completed for about 25 percent of the commercially important Indian forest lands and are under way on an additional 50 percent.
In comparison with other resources, the minerals in Indian lands —particularly oil and gas—have by far the greatest income-producing potential.
In fiscal year 1952, the total income to Indians from oil and gas leasing of their lands was about $19,125,000.
The comparable figures for the fiscal years 1957 and 1958 were $72,616,000 and $55,210,000, and $46,587,458 in 1959.
Water conservation on Indian lands is an important aspect of the Department's program for effective use of Indian resources by Indians.
Other tribal groups, however, have also benefited from mounting interest in oil and gas leasing of their lands, and the development of uranium has added significantly to the income of groups such as the Navajo Tribe and the Pueblo of Laguna in New Mexico.
A noteworthy aspect of the Navajo development is the fact that a substantial portion of the income realized from oil and gas leasing of the tribally owned lands has been channeled into programs to make more effective use of other tribal resources.
Funds have been budgeted, for example, to construct a new sawmill on the reservation which will permit the tribe to take full advantage of the increased timber harvesting that has now been scheduled as a result of a new forest inventory.
Water resources on the reservation range have been more fully developed and a special program to train tribal members in the techniques of irrigation farming has been launched.
These are only a few of the ways in which income from mineral leasing of Indian lands has been used to benefit increasing tribal populations.
In the future, if production of oil and gas measures up to expectations and brings in greater royalties, still broader programs of a similar nature will be undertàken.
Hoping to keep as much Indian land as possible in Indian ownership, the Department in 1959 recommended major amendments of S. 51, a bill dealing with the sale or leasing of land owned by two or more Indians.
One change would increase the Indian Bureau's $10 million revolving loan fund to $25 million.
The additional money would be available to tribes to buy up Indian land which otherwise might be sold to non-Indians.
The other amendments would give individual Indians or tribes a preferential right to purchase tracts put on sale.
Economie progress in the territories of the United States is the key to improved living standards for our inereasing insular population.
Progress depends upon careful and sound use of available resources, attention to modern skills and techniques, and introduction of new industry.
Meeting this challenge is an important and continuing responsibility of the Department of the Interior through its Office of Territories.
In few areas under the American flag is resource development for future generations a matter of as great importance as in the island possessions of the United States.
The territorial areas under the jurisdiction of the Department of the Interior total approximately 1,130 square miles of land inhabited by more than 152,000 persons—about 135 persons per square mile.
The Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa and the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands contain neither large land areas, significant forests, nor minerals or fuels of commercial importance.
In these islands, scattered across the Pacific and in the Caribbean, natural resources that can be used for economic development consist essentially of arable land and the products of the sea.
Climatic conditions impose definite limitations on agriculture.
Opportunities for diversification are few, and these island areas have passed the stage of development where the food needs of their people can be wholly met through local production.
In varying degrees, each must import food and other essential commodities in exchange for the sale of local products or services.
Guam and the Virgin Islands, in particular, import a large part of their food requirements.
In all cases, however, programs are in effect to solve technical problems and to encourage increased production of foods and commercial crops.
In the Virgin Islands, this effort is hampered by limited rainfall and the principal agricultural effort centers on sugar cane, a major commercial enterprise.
The Virgin Islands Corporation—a Federal corporation that aids small farmers, purchases and grinds their cane, and raises sugar cane upon its own lands—is the prime mover in the effort to increase production.
American Samoa and the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands rely upon copra as their cash crop.
Programs are under way to increase copra production, to improve local crops, and to introduce secondary cash crops, such as cacao in the Trust Territory.
While climate has a limiting effect upon agriculture, it has substantial compensating benefits as witnessed by the tremendous growth of the tourist industry in the Virgin Islands.
Tourism has become a mainstay of the Island's economy and its further development is actively encouraged.
American Samoa may also benefit from tourism through the construction of a new airfield to accommodate jet aircraft on South Pacific air lanes.
Once an important port of call on the sea lanes, American Samoa may well become an important stop for air travelers of the future.
Conservation of marine resources has been initiated in the Trust Territory where trochus shell constitutes an important source of incóme.
Sanctuaries and harvesting seasons have been established to protect this shellfish, which inhabits the reefs.
A pilot fishing operation has been started to train Micronesians in deep sea fishing, and a major objective is the possible canning of fish to supply local markets that now rely upon imports.
In American Samoa a deep sea fishing training program already is well under way.
Expanding population and economic development focus attention on the need for adequate water supplies in island areas and Department programs are giving particular attention to this requirement.
For example, the Government of American Samoa and the Ġeological Survey recently cooperated in surveying additional sources of potable water.
In the Virgin Islands a critical shortage of potable water is faced by the Island of St. Thomas where the supply was maintained through the year only by virtually continuous barging of water from Puerto Rico.
Salt-water distillation will eliminate this costly operation.
Subject to Congressional review of plans, construction has been authorized of a plant to produce a minimum of 250,000 gallons of water daily with electric power as a byproduct.
A contract has been signed for planning and design of the plant.
The Virgin Islands Corporation will operate the facility and sell.
In Alaska, which was admitted into the Union as a State at the midpoint of the fiscal year, the several resource agencies of the Department of the Interior will continue their important functions, although in some cases statehood results in changed emphasis.
For example, the Alaska Railroad, operated by the Office of Territories, will play an important role in the further development of the new State.
In order better to serve the Alaska population, its businesses and industries, the Railroad is continuing its program to improve equipment and facilities.
Transportation in Alaska, as elsewhere in our territorial possessions, is a key factor in improving the living standards and economic opportunities for the increasing population of these areas.
Together with the enormous upsurge in population, quick transportation, repeating guns, better ammunition, electrical aids in fishing, and many other instruments and implements have immeasurably increased recreational use of our Nation's precious wildlife resources.
Wildlife habitat has dwindled to a fraction of what it was some decades ago, and there is an increasing demand upon the supply of fish in our oceans.
Under these conditions, it is readily apparent that the task of the Department's Fish and Wildlife Service in seeking to assure adequate wildlife resources to meet growing future needs is a most difficult one.
Consequently, in its wildlife programs, the Department has set three primary goals: Maximum production, intelligent harvest, and highest utilization.
By spotting and studying new fishing grounds, the Department constantly enlarges known commercial fishing areas, thereby increasing the ocean food supply for American tables.
Finally, that there will be no costly waste of wildlife resources through nonuse or misuse.
Other agencies and other forces are working energetically with the Federal Government in this cooperative aim.
Day by day, an enlightened public is becoming more conservationconscious.
An ever-increasing fund of pertinent scientific information is being developed, of which the Department contributes its proportion.
A number of other Federal agencies are presently considerably more concerned with wildlife conservation and development than formerly.
State conservation agencies and numerous private conservation groups put perpetuation of fish and wildlife at the top of their activities, and other public and private organizations list such activities prominently in their programs.
The drive to safeguard and develop wildlife resources goes on unceasingly on land and sea.
In this effort the Department's Fish and Wildlife Service performs important duties in its own specific field of responsibility, while at the same time sharing cooperative responsibility with the 50 States and a score of Nations.
The avenues along which the Service works to meet recreational needs include oceanographic studies, biological and technological research, river basin and water project planning, improved management practices, research on chemical controls, Federal aid to States, and cooperative activities.
Implements involved in the program include nearly 18 million acres of National Wildlife Refuges; a hundred fish hatcheries; nearly two score laboratories devoted to various phases of fish and wildlife research; a fleet of research, exploratory and law enforcement vessels; half a hundred planes, a wide range of equipment, and a staff of professional and technically trained employees.
Game biologists of the Department of the Interior often do unique chores in their efforts to insure our game population is sufficient to meet the hunting pressures created by expanding population.
In recent years the probing of the secrets of the sea has been accelerated, and the Department of the Interior has been among the active agencies in this field.
As the work progresses, the Department expects to help unravel some of the mysteries, such as those surrounding the life and death of many species of food fish, and in the end to make the production of food in the ocean as scientific as the growing of grain and livestock on farms.
But before that goal can be achieved, there must be more knowledge of the life history and migration of the various species of fish; more knowledge of the food chain, how it starts and how it develops; and more knowledge about the composition of ocean water, about its thousands of currents, the effect of temperature and light and waves and weather and countless other things of which presently little or no knowledge exists.
One major breakthrough in marine biology is believed near at hand in the development of methods by which American salmon can be identified as distinct from Asian salmon, and the charting of the migrations of these races to show when and where and to what extent they intermingle.
This huge task is being undertaken by scientists of three Nations, and when complete, will be the base upon which management plans of two continents for securing the maximum sustainable yield of salmon can be built.
In the rapidly growing field of chemical control, the Department's Fish and Wildlife Service has begun a broad scale investigation of the effects of the 200 obtainable pesticides, insecticides and herbicides upon America's fish and wildlife resources.
The purpose of this study is to meet agricultural pesticide needs without seriously depleting the fish and wildlife which might be subjected to their uses.
A field of chemical control which has been pushed vigorously by the Service is that of selective control.
Painstaking research in which 5,000 chemical formulations were tested by the Service resulted in poisons which would kill the dreaded and destructive sea lamprey larvae without damage to desirable varieties of fish.
This success has led to a wide search for selective toxicants for the control of other predators.
Through wildlife research and management, the Department of the Interior preserves and improves wildlife habitat and breeding grounds so that hunting and fishing facilities are available for America's increasing millions.
In one area, the reforestation cyele has been cut from 10 to 20 percent because of the protection given to seeds and shoots and young stock.
Through the persistent efforts of conservation agencies, both publie and private, the protection and development of fish and wildlife resources has taken an important place, guaranteed by legislation, in the planning of water development projects and in the development of river basin areas.
The importance of protecting and enhancing fish and wildlife resources in agricultural and industrial developments is, as a result, becoming a fixed American practice.
At the same time, the Department's Fish and Wildlife Service is moving toward more effective management of its own resources.
Research, bird banding, and improved survey techniques are resulting in more reliable waterfowl inventories.
Preservation of America's important salmon fishery resources cannot be left to nature, and salmon on the tables of American homes often get their start in life in Departmental fish hatcheries.
Elimination of noxious weed growth in some places has had the effect of adding hundreds of acres to the refuge system.
Research on commercial fishing grounds is leading to mesh-size limitations which prevent the catching and loss of fish too small to market.
To protect the duck population in the face of shrinking water supplies, the Department's programs are often geared to make water do double duty.
This is accomplished in a variety of ways by adding a few feet to a dam to flood an area in spring highwater and thus have a duckfood producing area after the summer drawdown; by utilizing water without consuming it as is done when water is run through a marsh to freshen it and then returned to the stream; by reclaiming water which is polluted by urban or factory wastes; or by managing certain areas in such a way that ducks can get value out of waters which would otherwise stagnate or evaporate.
Under the Federal Aid program, funds are channelled through the Department to the several States, which in turn conduct research and management programs on their own fish and wildlife resources.
The program in actuality has a double effect—it not only assists the States in producing more fish and game, but at the same time it helps in the establishment of professional fish and wildlife staffs in every section of the country.
The Department's aim in its many related programs in the fish and wildlife field is to preserve and expand our wildlife heritage so that Americans of the future, as well as today's citizens, will know and appreciate the wildlife world of John Audubon and Daniel Boone—the world known and beloved by all our forefathers.
Probably in no other area of National life are the immediate demands being placed on an invaluable resource by the explosive nature of population growth more dramatically illustrated than in the increasing pressures on America's recreational resources.
The growth of population over the past few years provides some startling statisties.
Population growth, however, does not begin to approach the corresponding rate of increase in outdoor recreational activities by countless millions of Americans.
In our national parks, for example, there were just 1 million visitors in 1920.
The Department of the Interior through its many agencies—the National Park Service, the Bureau of Reclamation, the Fish and Wildlife Service, the Bureau of Land Management, and the Bureau of Indian Affairs—is taking urgent action to meet the recreational needs of our citizens today and to provide recreational facilities for Americans of the future.
Each agency is working earnestly to meet the mounting pressures on our recreational resources which population growth and increasing leisure time will inevitably bring.
A number of factors in our national life have contributed to the astonishing trends for expanded use of Federal, State, local and private recreational resources.
First, of course, is the dynamic rate of population growth itself.
Along with this, unparalleled prosperity since the end of World War II has resulted in increased disposable family income and greater leisure time for our people.
These factors, coupled with accelerated improvement in our network of roads and highways, have made Americans a traveling, sightseeing people intent on knowing and enjoying the scenic, historic, and outdoor resources of their Nation.
These facts have led recreational planners at all levels of Government to take new, forceful steps to preserve and improve existing recreational resources and to develop additional resources to cope with the constantly increasing population pressures on recreational facilities.
The agencies of the Department of the Interior—either as a prime function or a corollary activity—have been in the vanguard of those seeking to provide wholesome recreational facilities for all Americans.
The National Park Service with its 10-year program, Mission 66, is making progress in preserving, protecting, and improving the national park system.
The Bureau of Reclamation, whose prime responsibility is development of irrigation for the water-hungry West, is creating manmade lakes, thereby establishing new water recreational facilities in the arid areas of our Nation.
The national parks of the Department of the Interior provide scenic majesty and wholesome outdoor recreation for millions of Americans annually.
The Fish and Wildlife Service, through its Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife, carries out far-reaching programs designed to provide abundant supplies of fish and wildlife for recreational hunting without permanently depleting our wildlife resources.
In less spectacular, but equally important ways, the Bureau of Land Management and the Bureau of Indian Affairs are making positive contributions to improving and increasing the recreational facilities of America for present and future generations.
Unfortunately, however, at the time of greatest need for recreational resources, some of the prime areas for recreational use are vanishing from the face of the earth.
Population means people—and people need land for housing, for roads, for shopping centers, and for industry to meet the demands for a constantly higher standard of living.
Everywhere across the Nation, the swelling tide of people and the 20th century phenomenon known as "urban sprawl" is swallowing up Ameriea's open spaces from coast to coast.
For example, the critical scarcity of land for public recreational use is illustrated by the loss of unspoiled shoreline areas.
Twentyfive years ago, the Department's National Park Service surveyed our seashore resources, listing 12 areas as most deserving of dedication for public recreational use.
One of these areas, Cape Hatteras National Seashore Recreation Area, has been established but 10 of the remaining 11 are in various stages of private or commercial development.
In 1954, another survey showed that almost every worthwhile shoreline area accessible by road—on the East, West, and Gulf coasts, as well as the southern portion of the Great Lakes—is being rapidly filled by private resorts, estates, suburbs, and commercial developments.
For the country as a whole, there is only 1 mile of shoreline for public recreation for every 220,000 people.
In the past year, the Department requested Congress to approve legislation which would permit preservation of some of the remaining shoreline area of the United States.
Legislation now introduced would authorize appropriation of $15 million to acquire three additional national shoreline areas.
There are also hundreds of smaller areas which provide excellent opportunities for public use and enjoyment and are most suitable for administration by the States—areas which are also being withdrawn from public use through other pressures.
Working to provide additional public shoreline areas is only one phase of a concerted Department effort to meet the recreational needs of our growing population.
Mission 66, a long-range program of the Department instituted in 1956 and administered by the National Park Service, will provide for the conservation, protection, improvement, and expansion of our national park system to meet inevitable population pressures on park resources.
The National Park Service—which administers 181 areas of scenic, scientific, or historical importance—has made rapid strides in restoration and development of park areas.
When Mission 66 was inaugurated, our parks were neither staffed nor equipped to protect their irreplaceable features, nor to provide proper facilities for the increasing millions of visitors.
Lodging and eating facilities were inadequate and outmoded.
Interpretive services for proper park enjoyment were lacking while priceless park features were deteriorating.
Mission 66—which will be completed in 1966, the fiftieth anniversary of the Department's National Park Service—will insure that our national parks, monuments, and shrines will be adequately protected for the benefit of present and future generations.
In the first 3 vears of operation of Mission 66, the National Park Service has increased park staffs to provide proper protection of natural park features and to facilitate service to the mounting tide of visitors.
Through the investment of over $100 million, the National Park Service has provided new and better park roads, trails, parkways, visitor centers, museums, campsites, utility systems, and a variety of interpretive services throughout the Nation.
The sign, "A Mission 66 Project," has become a familiar landmark to millions of traveling Americans.
During the same period, private enterprise has invested more than $17 million to provide new hotels, lodges, motels, restaurants, and other accommodations which allow park visitors to do more than merely drive through park areas.
While this phase of Mission 66—and its continuing additions to park facilities and capabilities—is meeting the more pressing needs, the National Park Service recognizes that new ways must be found to expand recreational resources and to save additional unspoiled lands for park additions.
Accordingly, the National Park Service is reappraising the Nation's outstanding scenic, scientific, historic, and cultural resources.
Work is in progress to inventory and to evaluate the factors that affect public demand for these facilities—population shifts, transportation patterns, trends in recreational habits and interests, and present and potential uses of our recreational resources.
Results of this intensive planning and survey effort will not only permit efficient park planning over the years ahead but also will provide basic data for the National Outdoor Recreation Resources Review Commission in its study of future requirements for total outdoor recreational opportunities and its formulation of long-range policies and programs to meet these needs.
The Commission—composed of four Senators, four Representatives and seven citizen members—will inventory and evaluate total national recreation resources and the needs of the Nation for the years 1976 and 2000.
Its work will go far in coordinating and improving recreational resource efforts at all levels.
As part of the survey work in progress, studies are being made of the basic adequacy of the National Park System itself and the individual areas which comprise it.
The National Park Service has also reinstituted its National Survey of Historic Sites and Buildings which was discontinued during World War II.
By producing an authoritative document identifying, describing, and evaluating archeological and historic sites and buildings of national significance, the survey will accomplish three significant objectives.
It will aid the Federal government in determining its proper role in historic and archeological preservation and will provide a basis for development and interpretation of these resources.
It will provide information for guidance in the use and disposal of surplus Federal property containing historic and archeological values not currently protected.
It will develop basic data for State, local, and private historical bodies in their activities to conserve significant sites in the Nation's history and prehistory.
The survey is a step forward to insure that our children's children will know, understand, and gather inspiration from the places which shaped our Nation's history and progress.
In 1958, the latest year of record, the national wildlife refuge system administered by the Department's Fish and Wildlife Service recorded more than 9 million visitors—in contrast with nearly 3.5 million in 1951.
Mission 66, the Department of the Interior's program to expand park facilities to meet population growth, preserves and protects our scenic, historic, and wilderness resources.
Here, visitors register for tour of Abraham Lincoln National Historic Park.
Americans flock to the wildlife refuges for many purposes—to fish, swim, picnic, to hunt under controlled management plans, and to observe and photograph birds and animals in their natural habitat.
The use of wildlife lands for recreational purposes represents another aspect of the Department's multiple-use policy in administering our natural resources.
While preserving and protecting the refuges for their primary purpose, the Department encourages the secondary use of these recreational lands in the Nation.
It is the wise use of lands which belong to all Americans such as typified by the recreational use of wildlife areas, which will insure added resources to meet outdoor requirements of Americans of today and tomorrow.
Under the Taylor Grazing Act, the vacant public domain is open and available to the public for hunting, fishing, camping, and other recreational use.
Every year, countless thousands make use of these lands for outdoor recreation.
To help meet the expanding recreational needs of our increasing population, the Department's Bureau of Land Management administers an active program to provide public land to local, State and national agencies, as well as organizations and individuals, for recreational use.
State and local bodies are being encouraged to inventory present and future recreation land needs which the Bureau of Land Management can fill, and from the public domain will come many recreational areas for the use of Americans yet unborn.
Like other owners of land in scenic areas away from metropolitan centers, Indian tribal groups in recent years have become increasingly aware of the attractiveness of certain reservation areas to sportsmen and tourists.
With the prospect of rapidly growing population and greater amounts of leisure time, the potentialities of recreational development of Indian lands by the Indians are tremendous.
Tribal groups which have shown keen interest in developing the recreational resources of their lands include the Eastern Cherokee Band in North Carolina, the Seminoles of Florida, and the White Mountain Apaches in Arizona.
Fishery research and stream stocking, promoted by the Department of the Interior, make this scene possible throughout the rivers, lakes, and streams of the United States.
The White Mountain Apache Tribe, for example, has on its reserevation about 80 percent of the trout stream mileage in Arizona.
Fishing on the reservation has been permitted under tribal license for nearly 20 years, but recently the tribe has moved toward fuller realization of the recreational potentialities of their lands.
After a comprehensive survey of recreational resources, the Tribe created a manmade lake in the mountain setting, stocked it with fish, and laid out 500 summer cottage sites for lease.
This has been only one aspect of a progressive development plan on the reservation which not only increases recreational resources but adds substantial rental income from lands previously unused.
In these and other ways, the Indians of America will continue to develop the recreational resources of their reservations for their use and the use of many other Americans.
One of the major recreation attractions in the United States is water—a lake for boating, fishing, swimming, or to provide a scenic setting for a family picnic or campsite.
Today the manmade reservoir lakes of the Department's Bureau of Reclamation provide our people with such wholesome outdoor enjoyment.
Recognizing the popularity of water recreation and public demand for the use of reservoirs for recreation, the Congress authorized recreation as one of the specific beneficial uses of the gigantic Upper Colorado River Storage project.
The scenic and scientific values of this area have been recognized for decades.
The Colorado River is one of the outstanding recreational regions in the United States because of its great variety of natural scenery, climatic conditions, areas and objects of scientific interest, and abundant evidence of prehistoric occupation. ... Here one may enjoy a large amount of sunshine and find perfect climates and settings for various types of outdoor recreation."
The Upper Colorado River project, enormous in scope and imagination, will contribute not only large amounts of water for irrigation and hydroelectric generation, but also will create a great network of manmade lakes which will provide many hours of wholesome recreation for our growing population in years to come.
Current use of Reclamation reservoirs is mounting phenomenally.
Man-made lakes in the arid west, such as Lake Mead behind the gigantic Hoover Dam, bring water sports and recreational facilities to meet the family needs of our growing population.
By 1959, 19.5 million persons used these recreational resources—an increase of almost 100 percent in less than 5 years.
Coordinated planning for recreational facilities is now and will continue to be a part of each Reclamation project.
Current facilities are being improved for recreational use.
As the Bureau of Reclamation creates new recreational resources, administration of these areas is transferred to the Fish and Wildlife Service, the National Park Service, the Forest Service, and to State and local agencies.
Through the efforts of the Bureau of Reclamation, the highways and roads of the West carry automobiles, packed with camping equipment, followed by boat trailers to water paradises where only sand, sagebrush, and intermittently flowing streams once existed.
The American who knows his country—its scenic places and wilderness, its historic and cultural sites, its outdoors as a positive way of life—lives intimately with the timeless concepts of freedom.
All Americans, as private citizens or in collective groups either public or private, have a never-ending responsibility to themselves and their posterity to conserve and enjoy these priceless resources.
The technical responsibility for the conservation of the recreational and physical resources described on the preceding pages falls upon the Department of the Interior—an expression of the will of the people of the United States through their elected representatives.
Despite the rapid tempo of modern life and the myriad of its material comforts and benefits, the people of America are close to their history, close to their land, and close to one another.
This is our heritage and the source of our material and spiritual strength.
The Department assumes a solemn trust in its resource work and approaches its responsibilities with the precept that Government is not a vehicle unto itself but a working tool to serve the best interests of all Americans today and in the years to come.
THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY for Water and Power Development discharges the duties of the Secretary of the Interior with respect to the Department’s programs in the field of water and power development.
The Assistant Secretary exercises secretarial direction and supervision over the Bureau of Reclamation, Bonneville Power Administration, Southeastern Power Administration, and Southwestern Power Administration.
The principal function of the latter three agencies is to market surplus power generated in their respective areas at Federal projects.
The Bureau of Reclamation constructs water-use projects whose primary purpose is the reclamation of arid and semi-arid lands in the West, and also markets surplus power produced at Federal projects in the West outside the-boundaries of the Bonneville Power Administration and Southwestern Power Administration and at Falcon Dam on the Rio Grande River, an international project.
The activities of the Office of Saline Water, which are more fully deseribed in another section of this report, and the defense functions of the Secretary with respect to electric power are also the responsibility of the Assistant Secretary for Water and Power Development.
The table on the next page, prepared on a consolidated basis for fiscal year 1959, shows the capacity installed in hydroelectric power plants from which surplus power is marketed by Department of the Interior agencies, net energy generation, energy marketed, and gross revenues.
The Assistant Secretary for Water and Power Development participated in the negotiation of contracts and agreements for the disposition of water and power from Federally constructed water-use projects.
Several new and revised contracts for integration, wheeling and sale of power were approved.
Details of these activities are explained in other sections of this report.
In the Southeast an analysis of the rates and charges for sale of power from the Wolf Creek, Dale Hollow, and Center Hill projects on the Cumberland River to Tennessee Valley Authority was sent to the Chairman of the Senate and House of Representatives Public Works and Appropriations Committees.
In 1948 the Government made a long-term contract with the TVA to sell the power at rates based on then existing policies and practices.
In 1955 the Department requested the Federal Power Commission to approve the rates and charges in the 1948 contract as amended and on May 20, 1958, the FPC issued an order disapproving the request.
Surplus power produced at these projects is marketed under section 5 of the Flood Control Act of 1944.
During the fiscal year, the Department through the Assistant Secretary for Water and Power Development reviewed 64 reports of the Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army, primarily for flood control and navigation improvements; 27 Federal Power Commission applications for permits and licenses for hydroelectric developments; and one report of the Department of State on the Diablo Dam, International Boundary, Texas and Mexico.
River Development, and participated in inter-agency conferences on the coordination of watershed, flood-control, and reclamation programs.
He conducted conferences in the field and in Washington on power marketing and irrigation development, attended by water and power users, Congressional delegations, and representatives of local interests and industry.
Outstanding among these, were those in connection with the Missouri River Basin 1959 additional power allocations.
He directed the organization of and conferred with a group of Federal and non-Federal advisors to the Secretary on the selection of processes and sites to meet the time table specified in Public Law 85–883 for saline and brackish water conversion programs.
Staff of the Office served as Departmental representatives on interagency committees concerned with radio frequency allocation, procurement of heavy electrical equipment, international water developments, the International St. Croix River Engineering Board, public works planning, financial practices for water and power projects, economic analyses, atomic energy, and allied technical subjects.
WATER IS THE MOST IMPORTANT single natural resource required to permit expansion of population and the economy in the 17-State semiarid western region in which the Department of the Interior's Bureau of Reclamation operates.
During the fiscal year ending June 30, 1959, the Bureau of Reclamation made sound and significant progress in development of this basic resource.
During 1959, construction was completed on 3 water storage dams, with a combined storage capacity of 551,000 acre-feet; 3 diversion dams, and 410 miles of canals, pipelines, laterals and drains.
Irrigation facilities were completed to serve 199,471 acres of land.
Installed hydroelectric generating capacity of 45,450 kilowatts was completed.
This construction activity represented an addition of about $180 million to the Federal Government's $3 billion investment in western projects.
Notable construction starts during the year included Paonia Dam on Colorado's Paonia project, and Stanaker Dam on the Central Utah project, first "participating" irrigation projects of the billiondollar, five-State Colorado River Storage project.
Final design was completed on initial features of the Farwell unit of the Missouri River Basin project, Nebraska, and the San Angelo project, Tex.
The Bureau of Reclamation's 79 irrigation projects serve more than 128,000 farms and embrace a total of 8,049,642 acres.
A total of 6,756,737 acres was irrigated during 1958, producing crops valued at $987,441,504.
This record-breaking harvest brought the cumulative total value of crops produced in Reclamation project areas since 1906 to $14.2 billion, nearly five times the net Federal investment in Reclamation.
Bureau projects provided 260 billion gallons of water for municipal and industrial and other nonirrigation uses in 1958.
This water was delivered to 106 municipalities and 68 industrial entities in 32 project areas scattered throughout the West.
The importance of this aspect of the Reclamation program is indicated by the fact that about 81 million persons live in the municipal and industrial entities served by the Bureau, including the large metropolitan areas of Los Angeles and San Diego.
These are in addition to the 790,000 who live on irrigated homesites on the fringes of the cities and towns on Reclamation projects.
Nearly a half million persons make up the farm families who reside on project farms.
Thus the daily activities of nearly 10 million persons are vitally affected by Reclamation water supplies.
In addition to these direct uses of water resources developed and distributed by going Reclamation projects, a tremendous recreational resource has been created by the artificial lakes built in the semiarid West for water conservation purposes.
The Bureau's reservoirs provide 1½ million acres of water surface for recreational use.
Public visitations to these reservoirs tripled in the past 8 years to reach a total of nearly 19.5 million visitor days of use in 1958.
The new popularity of boating in the West was typified by region 7 of the Missouri River Basin, where, on 28 Bureau reservoirs, watercraft in use during the year totaled 55,700, with a peak-day use at Horsetooth Reservoir in Colorado of 1,150 boats.
In spite of an increase in activities, the continued utilization of carefully planned staffing control resulted in a further decline in Bureau employment during fiscal year 1959.
At the beginning of the year there were 10,125 full-time employees on the rolls; at the end of the year, the figure was 9,717.
Eleven project offices were established and three offices at completed projects were closed.
During the year, the Bureau, in cooperation with other agencies, was engaged in comprehensive surveys in 10 river basins throughout the West, in 12 subbasins of the Missouri River Basin, and in Alaska.
A total of 134 projects were under investigation at the elose of the year.
A far-reaching new loan program for local construction of small Reclamation projects and distribution systems began to hit its stride in fiscal 1959.
Congress appropriated $14,497,000 for the first six loans approved under the Small Reclamation Projects Act of 1956, and construction was initiated on four projects.
Eight other applications for loans totaling $16,032,000 had been approved by the Bureau or forwarded to Congress.
Three distribution system loans also were approved.
As of June 30, the Bureau opęrated 41 powerplants with a total installed nameplate capacity of 5,137,550 kilowatts.
In addition, the agency marketed power generated at four U.S. Army Corps of Engineers powerplants, with a capacity of 745,000 kilowatts, and one 31,500-kilowatt powerplant installed by the International Boundary and Water Commission.
Total sales by the Bureau aggregated 26,504,260,413 kilowatt hours, with $70,968,412 in gross revenues.
Design improvement and research at the Bureau's Engineering Laboratories in Denver, Colo., and in the field, led to substantial achievements that will increase project efficiency, reduce water evaporation and waste, and otherwise save money and water for water users.
Results of large-scale reservoir evaporation tests at Lake Hefner—part of the municipal water supply system at Oklahoma City, Okla.
These latter studies showed that even under the unfavorable conditions which prevailed at Lake Hefner during the 1958 tests, a 9 percent reduction of evaporation loss was achieved through use of a monomolecular layer of hexadecanol (an invisible chemical layer one molecule thick) on the reservoir surface.
Under ideal conditions, evaporation savings at the prevailing temperatures could have been increased fourfold.
Reclamation"know-how"was exported to assist friendly semiarid countries through the Bureau's Foreign Activities program.
On-thejob training was provided to 86 technicians from 33 countries, and 215 additional individuals spent shorter periods in the Bureau's various offices.
Twenty-three Bureau representatives visited 12 countries as consultants, 6 engineers were on extended advisory assignments in Taiwan and Australia, and a team of 9 initiated a reconnaisance survey of the Blue Nile River Basin in Ethiopia.
A total of 47 repayment contracts were executed with irrigation and conservancy districts for repayment of costs of Reclamation project works.
This brought the total value of all Reclamation repayment contracts to $916,073,149, of which $140,294,832 has been repaid.
Delinquencies are negligible.
In addition, more than $125 million will be returned to the Government in water service payments under contracts now in force.
A modification of the Reclamation Project Act of 1939 was enacted into law during the year.
This legislation authorizes the adoption and operation of a variable repayment formula to permit variations in annual payments consistent with economic conditions, without extending the contracted repayment period.
Soil and moisture conservation work was carried out in 108 individual programs on 49 Federal irrigation projects or units.
Much progress has been made in reducing costs and water losses due to weeds on irrigation systems through the Bureau's weed control program and it was estimated that such losses have been reduced $12 million annually as compared to 1948.
A total of 339 cooperative agreements with other Federal, state, and local agencies for studies on the efficient use of soil and water, recreational management, and other problems related to the management and operation of Reclamation projects were underway at the close of the fiscal year.
Roughly half of the 10 million acres of land under the Bureau's jurisdiction has been turned over to other Federal, State and local agencies for recreational administration.
Eleven development farms are operated for research and demonstration purposes.
The Bureau conducted one land opening on the Columbia Basin project, making available for settlement 31 farm units embracing 3,223 irrigable acres of new land.
Since the close of World War II, 62 land openings have been held on 14 projects, opening a total of 2,756 new farm units, encompassing 263,856 irrigable acres.
Formal dedication services were held to mark completion of construction of the Glendo Dam and its 24,000-kilowatt powerplant on the Missouri River Basin project in Wyoming, and of the Bureaudesigned Glen Canyon highway bridge, highest steel arch (700 feet) and second longest (1,271 feet) of its type in the United States.
Dam embankment placement at a rate of more than 1 million cubic yards per month pushed construction of the country's highest earthfill dam, the 537-foot high Trinity Dam on California's Central Valley project.
Trinity Dam is about 60 percent complete.
The Ventura project in California, and the Roza and Kennewick Divisions of the Yakima project in Washington were substantially completed.
This was the first year of full-scale operation for the Palisades project on the Upper Snake River, in Idaho.
The usable storage capacity of 1,200,000 acre-feet was filled for the first time, 558.8 million kilowatt-hours of hydropower was generated, and the Palisades Reservoir became a favorite fishing and recreation spot.
All of the larger Bureau reservoirs are operated to achieve the maximum degree of flood control consistent with reasonably safe operation for their primary purposes.
In the Northwest, for example, preliminary data indicated that storage control by Bureau reservoirs reduced peak flows on the lower Columbia River by 70,000 to 80,000 cubic-feet per second.
The impact of a regulated river on an area was well typified by the lower Colorado River.
Construction activity at site of Nation's second highest dam—Construction activities dominate this section of the Glen Canyon gorge of the Colorado River where the Bureau of Reclamation's 700-foot Glen Canyon Dam is being built to rival the 726-foot Hoover Dam farther downstream.
The contractor's cofferdam construction is visible at lower left, while excavation for the spillway and erection of the concretemixing plant are progressing on the right rim.
And this was accomplished in spite of the fact that inflow to Lake Mead above Hoover Dam during the year was only about 54 percent of the 36-year (1923–58) average.
Three major contracts, totaling approximately $312 million were awarded for manufacturing of the last major generating unit in the Hoover powerplant.
Scheduled for operation in 1961, the 95,000- kilowatt unit will complete the Hoover powerplant, raising it to its full capacity of 1,344,800 kilowatts.
Preliminary studies of the transmission system required for the Colorado River Storage project indicated the possibility of using extra-high-voltage transmission.
A tentative report on a 345-kilovolt backbone transmission system, showing the results of these preliminary studies, was prepared for initiating discussion with potential customers.
The heaviest line in Bureau transmission systems is 230 kilovolts.
When the flow of the mighty Colorado River was first diverted in the 1930's to construct Hoover Dam, the closure of the diversion dam made headlines throughout the world.
The river was diverted again by the Bureau on February 13, 1959, when closure of the upstream cofferdam was effected at the Glen Canvon area and the full flow of the river was diverted through the right diversion tunnel.
The scant attention this incident received in the press indicates that diversions of mighty rivers have become commonplace.
Construction of the 4,500-kilowatt Big Thompson Powerplant and switchyard in Colorado, initiated in fiscal 1957, was completed in June 1959.
This marked completion of the Colorado-Big Thompson project, started in 1938.
The scope of the year's achievement in construction is indicated by the completion of irrigation facilities to serve 199,471 acres of land and installation of 45,450 kilowatts of hydroelectric generating capacity.
Construction was completed on 3 storage dams which have a combined capacity of 551,000 acre-feet, 3 diversion dams, and 410 miles of canals, pipelines, laterals, and drains.
Awarded during the fiscal year period were 465 construction, material, equipment, and supply contracts.
The total value of these contracts was about $72 million.
Contracts for construction totaled about $62 million, or about 86 percent.
The 145 construction contracts in progress at the end of the fiscal year had a total face value of about $345 million.
On the Columbia Basin project in Washington, irrigation facilities were completed to serve an additional 34,000 acres, bringing the total to 385,000 acres.
Completed was the 15-foot-diameter, 3-mile long Wahluke Siphon.
Also completed were 62 miles of laterals, ineluding 8 pumping plants, on the Wahluke Branch Canal and the 10-mile Esquatzel Diversion Canal.
In the same State, the 11,250- kilowatt capacity Roza Powerplant on the Yakima project began commercial operation.
Construction progress in Oregon was highlighted by completion of the earth and rock-fill Howard Prairie Dam on the Rogue River Basin project and the Soda Creek Diversion Dam.
Completed also were 15 miles of delivery canal and collection canals.
Virtually completed at the end of the fiscal year were the 16,000-kilowatt Green Springs Powerplant and Power Conduit.
The earthfill Keene Creek Dam neared completion.
Work was begun on enlargement of Emigrant Dam, a thin concrete arch structure built about 35 years ago.
Elsewhere in Oregon, construction began on the earthfill Prineville Dam on the Crooked River project, now about 35 percent completed.
Construction of Wasco Dam, an earthfill structure on the Wapinitia Project reached the midway point.
By the end of the year, some 12 million cubic yards of the 33-million cubic yard embankment required for 537-foot high Trinity Dam in California had been placed.
Excavation and concrete lining of the 10.8-mile-long, 17.5-foot-diameter Clear Creek Tunnel, second longest tunnel on a Bureau of Reclamation project, was about 55 percent completed.
The dam and tunnel will ultimately make possible the project's average annual transbasin diversion of 865,000 acre-feet of surplus waters from the Trinity River watershed to the Central Valley Basin.
Also in California, Twitchell Dam, an earthfill structure on the Santa Maria Project, was completed, as was the earthfill Casitas Dam on the Ventura River project.
Also completed on the latter project were the Robles Diversion Dam, Robles-Casitas Diversion Canal, and 33 miles of distribution system pipelines.
World's highest steel-arch bridge frames dam construction scene—This 700-foot high steel-arch bridge, spanning the Colorado River above the Glen Canyon Dam construction site, was opened to traffic in February, 1959.
Before completion of the Bureau of Reclamation-designed bridge, it was 200 miles from rim to rim by existing roads and a crossing at Marble Canyon downstream.
Outlet of one of the two large diversion tunnels is shown lower left.
Earth- and rock-fill cofferdams upstream and downstream of the damsite permit unwatering of the foundation.
Also virtually completed was the excavation of the right and left abutment keyways for the ends of the concrete arch dam.
Earthfill cofferdams were constructed upstream and downstream from the dam site to isolate the construction area from encroachment by the river, which was successfully diverted from its channel in February 1959.
Excavation of foundation for the dam was about 50 feet below the original stream bed by the end of the year.
First concrete for the dam, which will have a volume of more than 5 million cubic yards, is expected to be placed in the dam in 1960.
The contract for construction of the dam and the 900,000-kilowatt Glen Canyon Powerplant is now about 27 percent completed.
Also completed on the Glen Canyon Unit were 200 residences, an administration building, fire station, and police building for the new community of Page, Ariz., near the damsite.
Completed also were the community's streets and water supply and sewerage systems.
Scaling operations at rugged Flaming Gorge Damsite—Construction workers scale off loose dirt and rock from the sheer walls of the Flaming Gorge Damsite near the Utah-Wyoming border.
The contractor's construction bridge across the Green River at lower left carries a concrete pipeline used in conveying concrete for lining of the diversion tunnel.
The 495-foot arch-type concrete dam and 91-mile-long Flaming Gorge reservoir will be a major storage unit of the Colorado River Storage project.
During the vear, construction of access roads to the Flaming Gorge dam site on the Green River in northeastern Utah was in progress.
Excavation of the diversion tunnel was completed in April 1959, and diversion of the river is expected to be made early in the fall of 1959.
Construction was completed on 50 residences and streets at Dutch John, Utah, the new Government community near the dam site.
The 1.425-kilowatt Wanship Powerplant and the 4,500-kilowatt Gateway Powerplant on the Weber Basin project in Utah were completed and placed in commercial operation during the fiscal year.
Also completed were the project's West Farmington and Woods cross trunkline pipelines of the Davis Aqueduct and 20 miles of the Uintah Bench laterals of the Weber Aqueduct.
Essentially completed was the first stage of the earth-fill Willard Dam, which will create a fresh water reservoir along the east shore of Great Salt Lake.
In western Colorado, construction of the earthfill Vega Dam on the Collbran project was virtually completed, and the Southside Tunnel was about one-third finished.
Construction of a 21-mile long section of the Southside Canal and of the Upper and Lower Molina Powerplants (8,400 kilowatts and 4,600 kilowatts, respectively) and the 51/2-mile long Bonham-Cottonwood pipeline was initiated last spring.
A significant undertaking in New Mexico was start of construetion of Navajo Dam, a principal storage feature of the Colorado River Storage projeet.
This large earthfill dam on the San Juan River, will have a height of 408 feet and a volume of 26 million cubie yards.
By June 30 construction was about 30 percent completed.
On the Washita Basin project in Oklahoma, construction of the earthfill Fort Cobb Dam also was several months ahead of schedule and is expected to be completed early in the next fiscal year.
The 21-mile long Anadarko Aqueduct was started in May.
Construction of the Foss Dam, was about 35 percent completed with about 21 million of the required 11 million cubic yards of earthfill in place.
On the Glendo unit of the Missouri River Basin project in Wyoming, construction of the 48,000-kilowatt Fremont Canyon Powerplant, and the 3-mile-long, 18-foot-diameter power conduit advanced to about 85 percent of completion.
The conduit was “holed through" in December 1958, and placement of concrete lining was begun.
Also in Wvoming, construction of the 203-foot-high, concrete-arch Anchor Dam on the Owl Creek Unit of the Missouri River Basin project was about two-thirds ready.
Reclamation builds Paul Bunyan-sized tunnels.
Top: workmen at Glen Canyon Dam start a huge "jumbo," or working platform for tunnel excavation toward mouth of left spillway tunnel, which will range from 50 feet in diameter near inlet to 41 feet in diameter at the outlet.
Bottom: construction advances on 18-foot-9-inch diameter outlet tunnel at Navajo Dam, a 395-foot earthfill structure on the San Juan River in New Mexico.
Both are units of the Colorado River Storage project.
The Helena Valley Unit of the Missouri River Basin project in Montana noted completion of the 2.6-mile long, 7-foot-diameter Helena Valley Tunnel and the Helena Valley Pumping Plant.
Completed also were 37 miles of the Helena Valley Canal and laterals.
On the Missouri River Basin's Bostwick Division in Kansas, 45 miles of the Courtland West Canal and laterals were completed, and construction of 5.5 miles of the White Rock Canal was about 80 percent completed.
Also in Kansas, on the Kirwin Unit, the Woodston Diversion Dam and a 6-mile long section of the Osborne Canal were finished.
Work was started on a 14-mile-long section of the canal together with laterals and small pumping plants.
In Nebraska, progress on the Frenchman-Cambridge Division included completion of 28 miles of the Driftwood West Canal, laterals, sublaterals.
Rehabilitation of the Culbertson Canal Diversion Dam and reconstruction of the first 6 miles of the old Culbertson Canal was finished and reconstruction of an additional 14 miles of the canal was initiated.
The Transmission Division of the Missouri River Basin project was advanced to 85 percent of completion by the construction of footings and towers for the 165-mile, 230-kilovolt steel tower transmission line between Fargo, N. Dak., and Granite Falls, Minn.
Completed was the 67-mile, 230-kilovolt Utica Junction-Sioux Falls transmission line in South Dakota.
Work reached the midway point of completion on the 310-mile, 230-kilovolt steel tower transmission line which extends from the Fort Peck Powerplant in Montana to Bismarck, N. Dak.
Construction started late in the fiscal year on the 37-mile, 115-kilovolt transmission line from the Boysen Powerplant to Pilot Butte Powerplant in Wyoming.
The Bureau continued to emphasize its safety program aimed at prevention of personal injuries through use of modern safety practices and other preventive measures against construction hazards.
Significant progress was made by reducing the accident frequency rate 7 percent below last year's level.
The overall frequeney rate was kept well below average for heavy construetion, despite the fact that high hazard tunnel work accounted for more than 12 percent of the total man-hours worked.
Major construction and supply contracts (more than $1,000,000 each) awarded by the Bureau are listed in table 1.
Principal features completed on Bureau of Reclamation projects are shown in table 2.
Increased emphasis was given during the year to utilizing automatic computing devices in design work.
A comprehensive program was developed to utilize an electronic computer in determining canal and earthwork quantities and related information.
Such machine processing of data led to considerable savings in time and effort in computing required quantities.
Electronic computer techniques were also developed to solve a variety of technical problems in studying operations of multiple-purpose hydrology systems, determining total sediment load in streams, determining temperatures in concrete dams, and reducing field data from tests on large hydraulic and electrical machines.
Design developments led to the method of disposing of high sediment loads in the Peralta Main Canal of the Middle Rio Grande project in New Mexico through use of a hydraulic dredge.
The dredge will operate in a settling basin which is to be constructed near the canal headworks at the Isleta Diversion Dam on the Rio Grande.
The dredge will have an operating capacity of 110 cubic vards an hour.
Sediment dredged from the settling basin will be discharged at selected spoil areas along the bank of the Rio Grande.
Other design innovations developed during the year included a new stoplog design for stopping the flow of water through the diversion tunnel at Flaming Gorge Dam.
Outlet gates, 7 feet wide by 10.5 feet high, for heads up to 350 feet (highest head gates of this size and type to be designed by the Bureau), were designed to regulate discharges through the left diversion tunnel at Glen Canyon Dam.
A new method of counterweightsuspension was developed for the spillway gates at Glen Canyon Dam, which will make possible appreciable savings in construction costs.
Designs were completed during the year and construction began on the earthfill Sheep Creek Barrier Dam in the Paria River Basin in Utah, the first dam to be undertaken by the Bureau of Reclamation for the sole purpose of retaining sediment.
The Paria River Basin was formerly a fertile meadow, but because of extensive over-grazing during the early 1900's and damaging floods it became an unproductive, badly eroded area.
Design and construction of the dam is part of a cooperative program of various Federal and State agencies to demonstrate that by building suitable structures and by proper soil and moisture conservation practices, the basin lands can revert to former productivity.
The first full-scale field trials of electrical logging to detect possible leakage from operating canals were made on the Central Valley project in October 1958.
The method is an adaptation of drill hole logging which has widespread application in the oil industry.
Electrical logging permits a continuous measurement and recording on a chart of variations of the electrical resistance of materials making up the bottom and/or banks of a canal.
Logging has shown that water lowers the resistance of earth materials, and in those reaches of a canal where the resistance is low, leakage may be suspected.
Identifying such reaches permits subsequent verification of the leakage and remedial measures as necessary.
Research in the Bureau's Denver engineering laboratories led to the first large-scale use of heavy media processing of concrete aggregates at Glen Canyon and Flaming Gorge Dams.
Nearby aggregates at both sites contain soft, absorptive, lightweight particles that would produce poor quality concrete.
The heavy media separation process removes the undesirable lightweight material from the aggregate by introducing the aggregate into a "heavy liquid" having a specific gravity between the specific gravities of desirable and objectionable aggregates.
The light objectionable materials float to the surface and are carried off as waste products; the desirable aggregate sinks in the medium and is recovered for use in concrete.
Substantial progress was made in laboratory and field experiments with water-reducing retarding agents for concrete.
The benefits from use of such agents inelude increased workability and reduction in cement content.
For some concrete, particularly that pumped for tunnel lining, the agents have further advantage in permitting the concrete to remain plastic for an extended period.
One of these agents was used in the concrete of the Glen Canyon Dam diversion tunnels.
In hydraulic research, new techniques were developed to dissipate the energy contained in jets issuing from controls in high head outlets.
Data were derived in the Hydraulic Laboratory for revised discharge tables for the constant head orifice turnout originally developed by the Bureau.
Aquatic weed control investigations, which have been conducted at the Denver laboratories for a number of years in collaboration with the Agricultural Research Service, were significantly expanded by the initiation of a series of investigations in California aimed specifically at developing economic and effective means of controlling aquatic weeds in large canals conveying up to 5,000 cubic feet per second.
A laboratory method was developed for the evaluation of emulsifying agents for aromatic solvent water-weed killer, which would result in a savings of about 25 percent in the use of emulsifiers.
This water-stealing plant "wanted" by western authorities—This thriving velvet mesquite, photographed on the banks of Arizona's Gila River, is a phreatophyte, one of many water-stealing plants which invade canals and reservoir areas in western states.
It is estimated that phreatophytes infest more than 15 million acres in the 17 western states and that they transpire at least 25 million acre feet of water annually—almost enough to fill Lake Mead.
The Bureau of Reclamation directs research and control measures against these plant pests.
The contraction joint simulator tests the materials under conditions closely approximating the field service but at an accelerated rate, thus permitting quick and accurate evaluation in advance of use.
Cooperative studies of the water consumption by salt cedar (tamarisk) conducted by the Bureau of Reclamation and the Department's Geological Survey continued at a 10-acre site near Buckeye, Ariz.
The studies are expected to be significant not only in the control of the objectional phreatophyte (water stealing) plants which infest large areas of certain river basins in the Southwest, but also in the development of techniques to study the water consumption of beneficial crops raised on irrigated projects.
The studies utilize six lysimeters, 33-foot square by 10-foot deep tanks placed in the ground and in which salt cedar plants have been transplanted for observation of growth with water levels maintained at different depths.
During the year, 113 laboratory reports were issued covering hydraulic laboratory investigations, structural studies, research in weed control, dimineralization of saline water, and water evaporation, and research and testing of concrete and concrete materials, earth and bituminous materials, and protective coatings.
Foreign manufacturers’ interest in Bureau of Reclamation equipment advertisements continued.
A total of 18 contracts, principally for electrical equipment, was awarded to companies offering equipment manufactured outside the United States.
This compares with 21 contracts awarded to foreign manufacturers in fiscal year 1958, and 26 in 1957.
The 1959 contracts, which totaled $899,076, were awarded to 6 Swiss, 5 English, 3 West German, 2 Austrian, 1 French, and 1 Italian firm.
The required differential was added to foreign bids for comparison with domestic bids.
Construction costs on Bureau of Reclamation projects increased about 21/2 percent during the year.
Most of this increase occurred during the first half of the year.
For the same period, construction wage rates and costs of materials increased from 3 to 5 percent.
Bidding interest in Reclamation construction work was more than 20 percent higher than the average for the past 10 years, and about 15 percent higher than the average for last year.
An average of 7.6 bids per construction schedule was received.
The average low bid was 13 percent under the Bureau's engineers' estimates for all construction schedules advertised.
Table 3 shows cost indexes for Bureau of Reclamation construction work based on the combined costs of materials and labor supplied by the contractor, and materials and labor supplied by the Government.
Published during the year were the technical records on the design and construction of Monticello Dam and the Potholes East Canal.
Also published were two engineering monographs, describing, respectively, the structural behavior of Hungry Horse Dam and the hydraulic design of stilling basins and bucket energy dissipators.
Completed and scheduled for issuance early in fiscal year 1960 were technical records on the design and construction of the Cachuma Dam, Tecolote Tunnel, Delta-Mendota Canal, and the Tracy Pumping Plant.
The irrigation systems of Reclamation projects embrace 8,049,642 acres of land in the 17 Western States.
The 79 irrigation projects serve more than 128,000 farms.
These fertile, well-watered farmlands stand out in sharp contrast with the adjacent dryland areas.
They provide a feed base which plays the key role in stabilizing the rangeland livestock economy.
They provide for the distant areas of the Nation, as well as for the West itself, large quantities of fruits and vegetables, which provide nutritious diversity to the American diet.
These project areas are important hubs of trade and commerce throughout the 17-state Reclamation West, and the livelihoods and investments of a sizeable share of the population of that area are influenced by irrigation farming and its associated enterprises.
The acreage irrigated on Reclamation projects increased 199,471 acres in 1958.
This brought to 6,756,737 the total acreage irrigated.
Irrigation service was initiated in 1958 on the Chief Joseph Dam project and the Michaud Flats project.
Supplemental water service was made available on the Glendo Unit of the Missouri River Basin project.
Reclamation provides water for the nation's fastest growing area—Water developed by Bureau of Reclamation facilities has been a major factor in making possible the tremendous postwar population and industrial growth in the West.
This table shows that this area is maintaining its rapid rate of growth making additional development of the area's key resource—fresh water—a continuing, high priority requirement.
Full irrigation service, wherein the complete water supply is provided through works constructed or rehabilitated by the Bureau, was provided to 3,407,057 acres.
A supplemental water supply was furnished to 3,254,388 acres.
Temporary water service arrangements covered 95,292 acres of irrigated land.
Reclamation orchards create oases in semiarid Southwest—Acreage on Reclamation projects planted to fruit and nut trees increased 18 per cent between 1954 and 1958.
Total production of fruit and nut crops now exceeds 2 million tons annually.
These thriving citrus and avocado orchards are in the Ojai Valley of California's Ventura River project.
The total value of all crops grown on Reclamation projects in 1958 was $987,441,504 bringing the cumulative total since the initiation of the Federal Reclamation program to $14.2 billion.
See Table 4.)
This aggregate value is almost 5 times the net investment of the U. S. Government in Reclamation project facilities, which serve not only irrigation but also the associated functions of flood control, hydroelectric power, municipal and industrial water, river regulation for pollution abatement, fish and wildlife, and other purposes.
The crop value in 1958 was nearly $60 million greater than for the previous year and exceeded the previous record year of 1952 by $22 million.
The per-acre value averaged $146.14, but ranged up to $681.70 per acre on a total project basis.
See Table 5.)
The highest average per-acre value for a single crop was $1,620 for celery.
Other specialty crops averaging more than $1,000 per acre were cucumbers, green onions peppers, and dates.
Water for the semiarid West—Bureau of Reclamation storage dams impound spring flood waters and surplus runoff of western streams for release for multiple-purpose use when natural stream flow has been reduced or dried up entirely.
Some large storage reservoirs like Hoover Dam's Lake Mead and the Glen Canyon Dam and Reservoir, now under construction, will store water many years for use in prolonged dry periods.
This is a view of Canyon Ferry Dam and Reservoir in Montana, a major unit of the multiple-purpose Missouri River Basin Project.
Reclamation plays major role in western livestock economy—Feed grains and forage for livestock occupy seven-tenths of irrigated lands on Reclamation projects and play a strategic role in enhancing and supplementing the productivity of Western range lands.
These Herefords are being fattened on the Grand Valley project at Grand Junction, Colo.
Note the ensilage corn in the background.
The grain and forage crops which occupy about seven-tenths of the irrigated land provided 17 million tons of feed for use on the farms and ranches of the West (table 6).
These feed crops, together with the specialty crops, the fruits, nuts, and vegetables, and the nurseries and home gardens complement the Nation's agriculture.
Because of Reclamation, a better balance is attained in the total food and fiber production of the Nation.
Bureau of Reclamation projects provided 260 billion gallons of water for municipal and industrial and other nonirrigation uses in 1958.
This usage occurred on 32 projects involving 106 municipal and 68 industrial entities.
More than two-thirds of this municipal and industrial water·was furnished to the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, a water utility district serving more than 75 cities, including Los Angeles and San Diego.
Some of the other important cities receiving water service from Reclamation works include Salt Lake City, El Paso, Phoenix, Yuma, Las Vegas, Rapid City, Fort Collins, and Ogden.
About 81/2 million persons live in the municipal and industrial water service entities which are served by the Bureau.
These are in addition to the 790,000 persons who live on irrigated homesites on the fringes of the cities and towns on Reclamation projects.
Nearly a half-million persons make up the farm families who reside on the project farms.
Thus the daily activities of nearly 10 million persons are vitally affected by Reclamation water supplies.
Water recreation for the semiarid West—Bureau of Reclamation reservoirs provide a total normal water surface area of 1½3 million acres for boating, swimming, fishing and other water recreation.
This picture shows a portion of the shoreline on the Bureau's Deer Creek Reservoir in Utah during the fishing season.
Such "man-made" lakes are not only scenic attractions in the mountain-desert land, but also are among the outstanding fishing spots in the West today.
About 19.5 million visitor days of use were recorded at Reclamation project areas in 1958.
The tremendous pressures of public visitations to the reservoirs— which tripled in the past 8 years—reemphasize each year the need to provide the facilities which will adequately safeguard the visitors as well as the physical works themselves.
On only a relatively few of the projects has authority been provided to include public use facilities.
For the greater majority of the projects, the entire cost and responsibility for installation and maintenance of public use facilities, if provided at all, rests with the organization responsible for recreational administration.
During fiscal 1959, more than 40 contracts were executed with districts for the repayment of costs of Reclamation project works.
Repayment, water service, and loan repayment contracts were executed for projects constructed under the terms and conditions of: (1) general reclamation law; (2) Small Reclamation Projects loan program authorized by the Small Reclamation Projects Act of 1956; and (3) the Rehabilitation and Betterment Act of October 7, 1949.
The largest contract executed during the year was for $13,184,000 with the San Angelo Water Supply Corporation.
A summary of the principal repayment and water service contracts executed is presented in table 8.
Only one small project loan repayment contract was executed prior to fiscal 1959.
During the past fiscal year, six small project loan repayment contracts were executed with a total repayment obligation of $10,099,000.
Contract obligations vary from $402,000 to $3,510,000, and average about $2,000,000.
The maximum contribution by the Federal Government for a single project is limited by the authorizing legislation to $5,000,000.
Recreation—an extra dividend of reclamation—Dots on this map represent water recreation areas developed by the Bureau of Reclamation.
These areas, which now provide more than 19½/2 million visitor days of recreational use, are a dividend of a western program that builds control facilities to develop water for other major purposes—essentially domestic, agricultural and industrial uses.
Recreational administration of these areas normally is transferred to other Federal, State, and local public agencies.