The Department of Labor fosters and promotes the welfare of job seekers, wage earners, and retirees of the U.S. by improving their working conditions, advancing their opportunities for profitable employment, protecting their retirement and health care benefits, helping employers find workers, strengthening collective bargaining, and tracking changes in employment, prices and other national economic measures.
The Department accomplishes this mission through component agencies and offices that administer various statutes and programs.
These programs are carried out through a network of regional offices and smaller field, district, and area offices, as well as through grantees and contractors.
Administration (MSHA), Veterans’ Employment and Training Service (VETS), Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA), and Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).
The Agencies, Programs and Strategies section of this report introduces each of DOL’s agencies; they are grouped by program type (employment and training, worker protection, etc.).
Each narrative describes agencies, their programs, the Departmental outcome goals they support, and the strategies they are using to reach performance goals.
The Priority and Strategic Goals sections present results and plans organized under the five strategic goals and fourteen outcome goals established in the FY 2011-2016 Strategic Plan.
Strategic goals are general outcomes clearly linked to the Department’s mission.
Outcome goals articulate more specific objectives associated with one or more programs and DOL agencies.
Agency performance goals outline each agency’s contribution to the Department’s objectives.
The Department will track progress toward achieving these goals by using quantifiable performance measures.
Tables and narratives present complete results including brief analyses and summaries of independent program evaluations.
Results and analyses are organized by agency; however, evaluations and audits are presented together at the end of each outcome goal section.
Narratives explain data, summarize the analyses, and provide plans in the performance goal tables, providing important context and details as needed.
Performance goal summary tables list each applicable agency goal, its key indicators, and applicable targets and results.
Where “baseline” appears in the target cell for new indicators, no data were available for establishing a numerical target.
If results improve over the prior year but do not reach the target, “I” appears in the target cell.
Where applicable, tables at the end of each outcome goal section summarize findings, recommendations, and actions for relevant evaluations and audits completed during the fiscal year.
The Employment and Training Administration provides high quality employment assistance, labor market information, and job training through the administration of the following programs: programs authorized by the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (WIA) for adults, dislocated workers, youth (including Job Corps), and targeted populations; Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) authorized by the Trade Act of 1974, as amended; Employment Services authorized under the Wagner-Peyser Act; Foreign Labor Certification activities authorized by the Immigration and Nationality Act; the Senior Community Service Employment Program authorized by the Older Americans Act; Apprenticeship programs authorized by the National Apprenticeship Act; significant enhancements to many of these programs, and Competitive Grants for Worker Training and Placement in High Growth and Emerging Industry Sectors authorized under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Recovery Act).
The public workforce system has a vital role to play in our knowledge-based economy, contributing to our nation’s global competitiveness and economic productivity by providing lifelong learning opportunities and a broad array of services.
The economy’s downturn posed substantial economic and workforce challenges to our nation, but the workforce system is responding to these challenges by becoming more flexible and innovative in order to get workers back to work quickly and support the workforce needs of employers in the recovering economy, particularly in high demand and emerging industry sectors.
The workforce system provides critical services to a broad array of customers at all skill levels.
These services include highquality career counseling and case management and assessments that identify transferable skills.
ETA and the workforce system are committed to continuous improvement and testing and rigorously evaluating new ideas and approaches.
Outcome Goal 1.1 – Increase workers’ incomes and narrow wage and income inequality.
Outcome Goal 1.2 – Assure skills and knowledge that prepare workers to succeed in a knowledge-based economy, including in high-growth and emerging industry sectors like “green” jobs.
Outcome Goal 1.3 – Help workers who are in low-wage jobs or out of the labor market find a path into middle class jobs.
Outcome Goal 1.4 – Help middle-class families remain in the middle class.
Outcome Goal 1.5 – Secure wages and overtime.
Provide an innovative public workforce system that helps enable future economic growth and advancing shared prosperity for Americans.
Continue support of Green Jobs ― supporting the creation and expansion of good green jobs by developing a skilled workforce for these industries.
Increase services and training for workers in need.
Provide workers with the resources necessary to increase their likelihood of obtaining middle class jobs.
Enhance programs that provide opportunities to particularly vulnerable populations – WIA Youth, Job Corps, and YouthBuild for disadvantaged youth, Indian and Native American and Migrant and Seasonal Farmworkers programs, and One-Stop services for individuals with disabilities.
Improve the effectiveness of services through innovative funding mechanisms and rigorous research and evaluation.
Expand regional partnerships and collaboration.
Promote sector strategies for high-demand industry sectors, including the nation’s investment in green jobs and health sector jobs as an effort to restart the economy.
Forge meaningful partnerships with other Federal agencies.
Continue to develop a workforce system that embodies a dual customer approach ― meeting the needs of both workers and employers.
The Veterans’ Employment and Training Service provides veterans and transitioning service members the resources and services to succeed in the workforce by maximizing their employment opportunities, protecting their employment rights, and meeting labor market demands with qualified veterans.
VETS helps veterans obtain positive employment outcomes through services provided at One-Stop Career Centers and other locations.
Grants are provided to State Workforce Agencies (SWA) to support staff dedicated to serving Veterans, including those who require special assistance due to disabilities or other barriers to employment.
VETS also provides funding, through the Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program (HVRP) and Veterans’ Workforce Investment Program (VWIP), to organizations that serve Veterans with employment barriers that warrant more comprehensive services.
VETS protects the employment and reemployment rights of veterans and members of the National Guard and Reserve Forces under the provisions of the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) program so that they can serve on active duty without harm to their employment status and by assuring that veterans who seek Federal employment obtain the preferences agencies are required to apply.
Support Disabled Veterans’ Outreach Program specialists, Local Veterans’ Employment Representatives, and Transition Assistance Program Employment Workshops through the Jobs for Veterans State Grants.
Launch a new Jobs for Veterans State Grants program service delivery model to improve the quality and effectiveness of employment services.
Enhance Transition Assistance Program (TAP) workshops to make them more accessible to spouses of separating Service Members, so that the entire military family can successfully transition to new jobs in new locations.
Provide Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program competitive grants to operators of employment programs that specialize in outreach, supportive services and training for homeless veterans, including homeless women veterans and incarcerated veterans, to assist in their reintegration into the workforce.
Provide training to Federal staff and Veterans service providers through the National Veterans’ Employment and Training Services Institute.
Award competitive grants through the Veterans’ Workforce Investment Program that are geared toward focused training, re-training and employment opportunities for recently separated veterans to meet the needs of employers for qualified workers in high demand industries, particularly those occupations requiring a license or certification.
The goal has been refined to provide services that will result in new skills and employment in Green Jobs as referenced in the Green Jobs Act of 2007.
Collaborate with the Departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs and with State partners and Veterans’ service organizations to implement USERRA and Federal Veterans’ Preference enforcement activities.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs ensures that employers doing business with the Federal Government comply with the laws and regulations requiring a fair and diverse workplace, free of discrimination and harassment.
OFCCP also ensures that federal contractors meet contractual equal employment opportunity and affirmative action requirements mandated by the Code of Federal Regulations.
Conducting compliance evaluations and complaint investigations of federal contractors and subcontractors’ personnel policies and procedures.
Obtaining conciliation agreements from contractors and subcontractors who are found in violation of regulatory requirements.
Monitoring the progress of those contractors and subcontractors found in violation through periodic compliance reports.
Forming linkage agreements between contractors and community organizations and job training programs to help employers identify and recruit qualified workers.
Recommending enforcement actions to the Solicitor of Labor.
Offering technical assistance to federal contractors and subcontractors to help them understand the statutory and regulatory requirements and review process.
OFCCP contributes to Outcome Goal 3.1 – Break down barriers to fair and diverse work places so that every worker’s contribution is respected.
Strengthen and clarify requirements for federal contractors and subcontractors through regulatory reform.
Revitalize enforcement capacity – a new enforcement strategy that focuses on corporatewide accountability.
Develop and conduct programmatic initiatives and litigation focused on the most persistent and egregious violators.
Implement a stakeholder strategy that reaffirms commitments to equal employment opportunity and affirmative action by building coalitions and collaborative partnerships among Federal and State agencies, federal contractor communities, community-based organizations, advocacy groups, and other public and private sector community resources.
Strengthen compliance evaluations of federal contractors’ and subcontractors’ compensation practices.
Conduct more thorough compliance evaluations and complaint investigations of federal contractors’ and subcontractors’ personnel policies and practices.
Expand identification and resolution of systemic and individual discrimination.
Partner with national and community-based advocacy groups to educate workers on their equal employment opportunity rights and employer responsibilities.
Promote and quantify new job opportunities that stem from conciliation agreements with federal contractors.
Expand construction reviews to include MEGA projects with a focus on improving employment opportunities for women and minorities.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration was established by the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 with the mission to assure, so far as possible, that every working man and woman in the American workplace has safe and healthful working conditions.
OSHA ensures the safety and health of America's workers by setting and enforcing workplace safety and health standards; delivering effective enforcement; providing training, outreach, and education; and encouraging continual improvement in workplace safety and health.
Through these efforts, OSHA aims to reduce the number of worker illnesses, injuries, and fatalities and contribute to the broader goals aimed at promoting economic recovery and the competitiveness of our nation's workers.
OSHA contributes to Outcome Goal 2.1 – Secure safe and healthy workplaces, particularly in highrisk industries.
Strengthen enforcement capabilities ― target the most egregious and persistent violators.
Increase OSHA’s presence in the workplace.
Protect workers in high-hazard occupations.
Protect worker populations that are vulnerable due to impediments related to communication including Spanish-speaking/non-English speaking workers – and disabled workers.
Review and restructure penalties to ensure that penalties imposed are consistent with the seriousness of the violation and act as effective deterrence to violators.
Maintain a strong outreach, education and technical assistance program.
The Wage and Hour Division is responsible for administering and enforcing a number of laws that establish the minimum standards for wages and working conditions in the United States.
These labor statutes provide basic protections for all workers and while they differ in scope, all of the statutes enforced by WHD are intended to protect and to promote the welfare of the nation’s workforce, to provide opportunities for advancement, and to ensure fair compensation for work performed.
The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) minimum wage provisions and the prevailing wage laws provide a floor for the payment of fair wages, while the FLSA overtime provisions are intended to broaden work opportunities and promote employment.
The Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act and the immigration programs establish working conditions intended both to protect the wages and the safety and health of vulnerable workers and to ensure that the labor force is not displaced by lower-paid foreign or migrant labor.
The prevailing wage programs provide protection to local middle class workers who may be disadvantaged by competition from outside labor who offer their services at wages lower than those in the locality.
The Family and Medical Leave Act was enacted to help workers balance family and work responsibilities, and the child labor provisions of the FLSA ensure the safe employment of young workers, encourage their educational endeavors, and provide a path to future employment.
Protect the most vulnerable workers in the workplace ― ensure that they are employed in compliance with wage and hour laws.
Promote sustained and corporate-wide compliance among employers ― make certain that employers, including the most persistent violators, are brought into and maintain compliance.
Foster a customer-oriented, quality-driven culture within WHD and boost customer satisfaction among workers seeking WHD services and other entities that share the goals of improving the lives of working men, women, and children.
Issue prevailing wage determinations that are current and accurate.
The FY 2012 budget is the first budget submitted under the Secretary’s new Strategic Plan.
The Secretary’s plan lays out the Department of Labor roadmap for continuing to meet the workplace and economic challenges we face as a nation.
Contained within the plan are the strategies which DOL will use to accomplish the Secretary’s vision for the future: Good Jobs for Everyone.
The Secretary defines good jobs as, among many other factors, jobs that provide health benefits and retirement security.
In support of the Secretary’s vision, EBSA has a single outcome goal of “improving health benefits and retirement security for all workers.”
EBSA is charged with protecting more than 149 million workers, retirees and their families who are covered by an estimated 718,000 private retirement plans, 2.6 million health plans, and similar numbers of other welfare benefit plans which together hold $6.1 trillion in assets.
Under the Secretary’s leadership, in FY 2010 and FY 2011, the Administration sought to reestablish a credible foundation for the EBSA enforcement, participant assistance, and regulatory programs.
EBSA contributes to Outcome Goal 4.3 – Improve health benefits and retirement security for all workers.
Continue a multi-faceted enforcement program that effectively targets the most egregious and persistent violators.
Play a major role in the implementation of significant health reform legislation.
Provide innovative outreach and education that assists workers to protect their pension and health benefits.
Conduct a robust, well-integrated research program based on evidence and comprehensive analysis.
The Mine Safety and Health Administration protects the safety and health of the nation’s miners under the provisions of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977, as amended by the Mine Improvement and New Emergency Response (MINER) Act of 2006.
The purpose of the Mine Safety and Health Administration is to prevent death, disease, and injury from mining and to promote safe and healthful workplaces for the nation’s miners through the enactment and enforcement of mandatory safety and health standards, mandated inspections which require four complete inspections annually at active underground mines and two complete inspections annually at active surface mines, and miner training and compliance assistance.
Increase Inspection and Enforcement Effectiveness.
Increase Training and Education.
Promote Mine Operator Adoption of Prevention-focused, Comprehensive Health and Safety Management Programs by Mine Operators.
Improve Mine Emergency Response Preparedness.
Increase Efforts to Protect Miners from Discrimination.
Strengthen Mine Regulations.
The Office of Labor-Management Standards (OLMS) administers the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959, as amended (LMRDA) and related laws.
These laws primarily establish safeguards for union democracy and union financial integrity and require public disclosure reporting by unions, union officers, union employees, employers, labor consultants and surety companies.
OLMS also administers employee protections under various Federally-sponsored transportation programs that require fair, equitable protective arrangements for transit employees when Federal funds are used to acquire, improve, or operate a transit system.
These arrangements must be approved by the Department of Labor before Federal funds may be released to grantees.
OLMS contributes to Outcome Goal 3.3 – Ensure worker voice in the workplace.
Increase the number of reports filed by employers and consultants who make agreements to persuade employees with regard to their rights to organize and bargain collectively.
Increase the percent of disclosure reports filed electronically.
Improve timeliness in resolving complaints filed by labor union members that their union violated democratic standards for conducting union officer elections.
Increase effectiveness of audits by focusing resources on labor unions most likely to be in violation of the law.
Improve the Internet public disclosure service and public access to information reported by unions, union officers, union employees, employers, labor consultants, and surety companies under the Act.
Reduce the number of delinquent filers of Labor Organization Annual Financial Reports.
Reduce the number of chronically delinquent filers of Labor Organization Annual Financial Reports.
Increase provision of compliance assistance to national and international labor organizations to increase their affiliates’ LMRDA compliance by developing, implementing, and doubling the number of voluntary compliance agreements to establish goals, baselines, and measures for improving recordkeeping, reporting, and internal controls.
Improve compliance with minimum bonding requirements of local and intermediate union affiliates by working closely with their parent national and international unions, including those who are not party to a voluntary compliance agreement.
The Women’s Bureau provides collaborative leadership on policies and activities that impact 72 million women in the labor force.
The Women’s Bureau is the only Federal office exclusively concerned with serving and promoting the interests of women in the workforce.
The Bureau conducts research, projects, outreach, and evaluations on issues of importance to working women, and provides information about women in the labor force to stakeholders and customers.
The Women’s Bureau supports the Secretary’s vision of Good Jobs for Everyone by focusing on the economic and financial security of working women through policies that narrow the wage gap and ensure fair compensation, promote higher paying/non-traditional jobs for women, ensure safe and quality work environments through workplace flexibility, and – in cooperation with VETS – improve services for women veterans who are homeless.
Conduct research and studies on issues concerning women in the workforce.
Build collaborations with stakeholders, partners and colleagues that lead to adoption and implementation of policies and practices developed by the Bureau through it research and programs.
Develop and share resources and information with employers, unions, and working women on fair pay and negotiating for better wages and benefits.
Collaborate with stakeholders and other agencies to decrease occupational segregation ― one of the leading causes of income inequality.
Provide collaborative leadership on data sharing and public awareness efforts related to gender based compensation practices.
Collaborate with other Federal agencies, workforce professionals, non-profits, and women’s organizations to increase awareness of training, employment, and entrepreneurship opportunities in emerging industries and markets including “green” and non-traditional sectors.
Address critical issues associated with women veterans who are homeless so they may gain economic security for themselves and their families.
Promote flexible work schedules, family-friendly leave policies, and telework.
Promote workplaces that are free of discrimination and harassment through publications and a broad-based multi-media campaign on employment rights, including the rights of pregnant women, mothers, women with disabilities, and women veterans.
Collaborate with BLS to explore ways to improve the collection of data on parental leave, child care responsibilities, family leave insurance program usage, and other data related to the intersection of work and family responsibilities.
The Office of Disability Employment Policy was established to bring a permanent focus within the U.S. Department of Labor and across the Federal government to develop, test, validate, and disseminate evidence-based policies and strategies, fostering their adoption and implementation through the provision of technical assistance and collaboration with its public and private partners.
Although many American workers with disabilities are educated, trained, willing, and able to work, they remain out of the labor force at a much higher rate than their similarly qualified counterparts without disabilities.
ODEP will focus on collaborating with Federal agencies, private and public sector employers, labor organizations, and other stakeholders to develop policy solutions that will expand physical and programmatic access to One-Stop Career Centers and the workforce system in general; improve employer organizational practices and make workplaces more inclusive; and increase access to the employment supports that are crucial to every worker’s success throughout the employment process, and especially to a job seeker or worker with a disability.
Conduct research & analysis that identifies/validates effective disability employment policy/strategies.
Validate and replicate evidence-based disability employment policy and effective practices.
Provide technical assistance regarding the adoption and implementation of disability employment policy/practice.
Emphasize inclusive planning and universal usability to leverage limited resources and ensure access to more individuals.
Reach out to public and private sector organizations to provide information and technical assistance to dispel misperceptions/broaden understanding of disability and employment issues and to improve employment practices.
The Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB) supports the President’s international agenda on labor matters, carries out international responsibilities for the Secretary of Labor, fulfills mandates from the Congress, and provides oversight and coordination of the Department’s international activities.
ILAB works to improve working conditions and labor standards for workers around the world.
Fostering fair working conditions in the global marketplace is an integral component of the Department of Labor’s strategic goal “Good jobs for everyone”.
The Department recognizes the need to ensure that global markets are governed by fair market rules that protect vulnerable people, including women and children, and provide workers a fair share of their productivity and voice in their work lives.
These objectives will contribute to achieving the Department’s goals for U.S. workers, build the foundation for a sustained recovery of the global economy and contribute to a more balanced pattern of global trade in the future.
Pursuing these objectives will once again position the U.S. as a leader and pace-setter on international labor issues and demonstrate our commitment to assist governments that have the political will to foster better livelihoods and rights for their workforces.
In order to carry out these strategic objectives, responsibilities, and mandates, ILAB collaborates with other U.S. government agencies to formulate international economic, trade, and labor policies, including the formulation and implementation of the labor aspects of international trade and investment agreements; coordinates U.S. government participation in international organizations relative to labor issues; oversees and implements technical assistance programs; and conducts research and analysis and publishes reports on international labor issues.
ILAB contributes to Outcome Goal 1.6: Foster acceptable work conditions and respect for workers rights in the global economy to provide workers with a fair share of productivity and protect vulnerable people.
Implement new approaches to counter the root causes of child labor.
Improve the ability of workers in trading partner countries to work in good jobs, receive a fair share of their productivity, and enjoy a voice in their work lives.
Improve worker rights and livelihoods for vulnerable populations.
Improve its monitoring and enforcement of trade agreements to protect workers’ rights.
Engage more extensively and substantively with other countries’ labor ministries and with international and regional organizations.
Coordinate the Department’s participation in international labor organizations and the interagency trade and economic policy process.
The Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs (OWCP) is comprised of four separate compensation programs which provide wage replacement, medical treatment, and vocational rehabilitation benefits and one division providing information technology support services.
The Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA) program provides monetary wage-loss and medical compensation to civilian employees of the Federal Government injured at work, and to certain other designated groups.
The Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act program provides similar benefits to injured private sector workers engaged in certain maritime and related employment.
The Black Lung Benefits program provides monetary and medical benefits to totally disabled miners suffering from coal mine pneumoconiosis stemming from mine employment, and monetary benefits to their dependent survivors.
The Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation Program Act (EEOICPA) provides benefits to employees or survivors of employees of the Department of Energy (DOE), contractors or subcontractors with DOE, who have been diagnosed with cancer due to exposure to radiation or toxic substances.
The Division of Information Technology Management and Services (DITMS) provides information technology General Services Support (GSS) shared by the Wage and Hour Division (WHD), the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP), the Office of Workers Compensation Programs (OWCP), and the Office of Labor Management Standards (OLMS).
Major workload activities in OWCP include: claims adjudication, benefit payment, disability case management, assisting in the re-employment of people with disabilities, medical bill processing, information services delivery, benefit fund management, and technical assistance to employers to ensure proper compliance with OWCP procedures and requirements including insurance/selfinsurance and payment of benefits.
OWCP outcomes include earlier recovery from injury, shorter time away from work, and reduced lost production days being supported by proactive disability claims management.
OWCP uses early nurse intervention to coordinate medical treatment and provide reemployment assistance in new FECA cases.
Permanently disabled claimants receive vocational rehabilitation assistance.
OWCP provides income support and medical care by ensuring proper claims adjudication and efficient case processing, effective mediation of disputed claims, and accurate and timely payment of benefits.
Timely delivery of compensation payments also ensures that the economic position of workers with injuries will not be jeopardized by extended interruptions in income.
Timely delivery of medical services is ensured through centralized coordination and processing of requests from providers for treatment authorizations.
OWCP has improved customer access to program information through its communications systems to be more responsive to customer service needs.
Advance the Administration’s Priority Goal to make the Federal Government as a model workplace for safety and return to work in the event of on-the-job injury or illness.
Continue to implement improvements in FECA’s disability claims management and return to work assistance activities as recommended in independent evaluations of the program.
Continue proper claims adjudication, effective mediation in disputed claims, efficient case processing, and accurate and timely payment of benefits.
Speed claims reporting and shorten the duration between injury and first payment of benefits by industry employers and insurance carriers in the Longshore program.
Through outreach and other educational activities, improve Black Lung stakeholders understanding of the program and improve the quality of claims and supporting documentation filed.
Continue to assess OWCP customer services and improve the agency’s efficiency and effectiveness.
Continue to identify and pursue opportunities to evaluate OWCP program performance and results.
Continue to enhance systems and develop integrated IT technology services that improve and support business processes.
Continue to seek reform of the Federal Employees’ Compensation Act.
The federal-state UI program, authorized under the Federal Unemployment Tax act and Title III of the Social Security Act, provides temporary, partial wage replacement for unemployed workers, providing them with income support when suitable work is unavailable.
To be eligible for benefits, unemployed workers must meet eligibility requirements established by state laws that conform to federal law, including that they have worked recently, be involuntarily unemployed, and be able and available for work.
UI contributes to Outcome Goal 4.2 – Ensure income support when work is impossible or unavailable.
Partner with state agencies with a focus on bolstering broad program accountability and facilitating performance improvement nationally.
Enact new strategies to prevent, detect, and recover improper payments.
Develop a national vision on reemployment that will promote and support states service delivery to all jobseekers, helping reconnect unemployed workers with jobs.
Extend income support to more categories of unemployed—recent entrants to the workforce, low-wage workers, workers who are upgrading their skills, and workers with family care giving obligations.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) of the Department of Labor (DOL) is the principal Federal agency responsible for measuring labor market activity, working conditions, and price changes in the economy.
Its mission is to collect, analyze, and disseminate essential economic information to support public and private decision-making.
As an independent statistical agency, BLS serves its diverse user communities by providing products and services that are objective, timely, accurate, and relevant.
BLS serves the general public, the U.S. Congress, other Federal agencies, State and local governments, business, and labor by providing up-to-date, high-quality statistical information to formulate policy, negotiate purchasing agreements, and plan for the future.
In line with the Interagency Council on Statistical Policy’s (ICSP) Guidelines for Reporting Performance by Statistical Agencies, BLS measures timeliness, accuracy, relevance, dissemination, and mission achievement.
BLS also reports the full cost to produce its data products.
These criteria are common among statistical agencies because these are critical aspects of a statistical program’s performance.
BLS supports Outcome Goal 5.1 – Provide sound and impartial information on labor market activity, working conditions, and price changes in the economy for decision making, including support for the formulation of economic and social policy affecting virtually all Americans.
Continue to produce objective data and analyses that are timely, accurate, and relevant.
Improve the timeliness, accuracy, and relevance of BLS products and develop new products that meet the needs of a broad customer base.
Inform current and potential customers about the availability and uses of BLS products and reach out to BLS customers to understand their needs for economic information.
Maintain high response rates in BLS surveys.
Make the data and other products and services available on bls.gov accessible, understandable, and usable.
Recruit, train, and retain a talented and diverse group of individuals who are experts at the production and continuous improvement of BLS products and services, including employees who will support those functions, and who are well prepared to represent the agency and become its future leaders.
Continuously evaluate and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of BLS programs and processes.
The BLS performance measures that support Outcome Goal 5.1 are available in the 2012 Congressional Budget Justification in the Detailed Workload and Performance Tables.
The Department of Labor has identified five performance goals that will be a particular focus through FY 2012.
These goals are a subset of those used to regularly monitor and report performance.
Detailed information on progress with these goals will be available at www.performance.gov.
Workplace Fatalities: Reduce fatalities resulting from common causes by two percent in Occupational Safety and Health Administration-covered workplaces, and all fatalities in mining by five percent per year based on a rolling five-year average.
Wage Law Enforcement: Increase the percent of prior violators who remain in compliance with the minimum wage and overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA).
International Labor Rights and Livelihoods: By the end of 2011, improve worker rights and livelihoods for vulnerable populations in at least eight developing country trading partners.
Workers’ Compensation: Create a model return-to-work program to reduce lost production day rates by one percent per year and reduce injury and illness rates by at least four percent per year.
Worker Job Training: Increase opportunities for America’s workers to acquire the skills and knowledge to succeed in a knowledge-based economy.
By June 2012, increase by 10 percent (to 220,000) the number of people who received training and attain a degree or certificate through the following programs: Workforce Investment Act (WIA) adult, dislocated worker, and youth, National Emergency Grants (NEG), Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA, and Career Pathways.
Train over 120,000 Americans for green jobs by June 2012.
Outcome Goal 1 .
Among the three employment measures utilized by ETA the performance under average earnings has been the least impacted by the economic downturn.
Performance targets for average earnings were reached by six of seven programs in this goal.
To encourage effective workforce system responses to the current challenges facing American workers including the need for quality job placements with living wages the Department issued new guidance on the importance of credentials.
In TEGL 1 5- 1 0 Increasing Credential Degree and Certificate Attainment by Participants of the Public Workforce System the Department emphasized the value of credentials to employers and workers.
For employers credentials demonstrate and document skills increasing their ability to fill skilled positions build talent pipelines and compete.
For workers and job seekers credentials improve their labor market experience through higher earnings, greater mobility and enhanced job security.
Good-paying jobs in high demand industries generally require some form ofpostsecondary education or training and the earnings bump that accompanies postsecondary credentials is well established.
ETA will continue to provide technical assistance to the workforce system to improve credential attainment for its customers.
ETA also continued to build expertise around career pathways a key strategy to improve labor market outcomes for low-skilled low-wage adults.
In FY 20 1 1 , the Office of Apprenticeship is planning to issue a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) to update regulations for equal employment opportunity (EEO) in apprenticeship and training, which have not been revised since 1 978.
Under a reauthorized TAA program after expiration ofthe 2009 Amendments DOL plans to provide additional guidance and training for State staffwho deliver services to trade affected workers to reflect changes to the program.
TAA developed the capability to process the significantly increased flow of petitions.
Through refining and modifying those changes to reflect continued petition workload the Department will continue to manage petition processing workload within the 40 day processing time allowed for each investigation.
For the TAA program ETA will continue to focus on obtaining timely and accurate data.
The 2009 Amendments required an extensive revision to the data collection component of State reporting.
VETS assesses the performance of the One- Stop Career Center system on behalf of veterans by applying three common measures : the entered employment rate the employment retention rate and the average earnings For PY 2009 all three of these indicators were sharply impacted by the severe recession in progress at the time that these outcomes were measured The entered employment rate experienced the most severe decline dropping by 2 1 percent from the prior year.
Analysis conducted by VETS found that this outcome measure declined directly and immediately on a quarterly basis in response to the increases in the unemployment rate .
The declines in the retention rate and average earnings were not nearly as severe at six percent and four percent respectively compared with the prior year.
VETS has encouraged front-line service delivery staff to respond in a variety of ways to the severe constraints imposed by current economic conditions .
First veteran j obseekers are encouraged to maintain their active status in the workforce system for longer periods while they continue to seek employment.
In conjunction with that approach, DVOP specialists and LVER staff also have sought to refer greater numbers and proportions of veterans for enrollment in WIA training under the provisions of priority of service .
Second VETS has encouraged a refocusing of the responsibilities of DVOP specialists and LVER staff.
DVOP specialists have been encouraged to place greater emphasis on the delivery of intensive services (e . g. counseling assessment lifelong learning skills and referral to training) which better prepare veteran j obseekers to compete for scarce j ob openings LVER staff members have been encouraged to place greater emphasis on employer outreach which is intended to expand the number ofj ob openings available with employers who are favorably inclined to hire veterans In addition to these service delivery emphases VETS has proj ected the performance targets for this goal for PY 20 1 0 by applying the regression adjusted methodology developed by ETA, which seeks to account for the impact of economic conditions on performance outcomes .
In FY 20 1 0 the Wage and Hour Division (WHD) reengineered it Davis-Bacon wage survey process to begin improving the timeliness of its wage determination rates .
With respect to highway construction WHD examined State highway wage determination methodologies and where consistent with WHD ’ s methods adopted wage rates from surveys conducted by State Departments of Transportation.
In 20 1 0 new wages rates from state conducted highway surveys were published for Delaware Virginia Maryland West Virginia Tennessee Kentucky Nevada and Minnesota WHD also implemented pilot wage surveys of building and heavy construction in the States of North Carolina South Carolina Wyoming Montana Maine Vermont New Hampshire West Virginia Oklahoma and Nebraska.
Under these pilot surveys WHD reduce the survey size by concentrating on only two construction types building and heavy as opposed to all four construction types (building heavy highway and residential) .
WHD also used contractor staff to do all mailing imaging data collection and data entry.
This shift in tasks allowed WHD regional survey staff to focus on data analyses and data clarification as soon as data was received from contractors rather than waiting until the final data collection end date By clarifying the data soon after receipt WHD significantly reduced the time spent in this survey phase and increased the accuracy because submitting contractors could be contacted immediately after they submitted their payment data.
This reduced survey time also reduced the time spent in the data verification process particularly on-site verification as contractor records were readily available and on-site was being conducted six to ten months after cut-off date rather than two to five years later.
WHD will implement a pilot program for residential construction in FY 20 1 1 with planned residential surveys in the State of Ohio Wisconsin Indiana and Pennsylvania The pilot program will focus on more direct contact with contractors and interested parties to increase participation which has always been the primary problem with residential surveys .
In FY 20 1 0 the Bureau as a member of the National Equal Pay Enforcement Task Force worked with the DOL Office of Federal Contract Compliance (OFCCP) , the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) , the Department of Justice (DOJ) , and the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) to better understand the pay gap and to improve enforcement efforts through data collection and education of workers and employers .
The Bureau funded a year-long comparative research study on the occupational progression of African American women to identify new issues facing this population and a year-long baseline research study on the occupational progression of Latinas in the U. S .
In FY 20 1 1 the Bureau hosted an Equal Pay Research Summit to gather information to identify current research and data gaps in equal pay best approaches to information gathering and current state-level best practices on ensuring equal pay.
The Bureau will assess/revise its educational tools materials and publications to both educate employees on their rights and employers on their obligations related to equal pay.
Equal pay publications for employees and employers as well as an overall background report will be issued.
These publications will be shared with the National Equal Pay Enforcement Task Force and will be disseminated through a national outreach effort and regional equal pay events .
Independent evaluations and audits completed in FY 20 1 0 are summarized below.
Through investments in youth education and training programs under the WIA Youth formula program Job Corps and YouthBuild grants the Department worked to ensure that workers get the skills and knowledge needed to prepare them to succeed in a knowledge-based economy, including in high-growth and emerging industry sectors like “green” jobs.
The Job Corps WIA Youth and YouthBuild programs exceeded their degree or certificate attainment targets while the Job Corps and WIA Youth programs fell short of their target for the placement in employment education or training.
The unprecedented high unemployment rates and low employment rates for youth likely contributed to DOL’ s lower results on the placement measure The placement result mirrors both trends in the national economy.
The FY 20 1 0-20 1 2 targets are based on a methodology developed by DOL for setting national performance targets using regression analysis.
This econometric model uses program results from the prior year, current labor market conditions and individual characteristics to correct for the effects ofthe business cycle and labor market conditions on the outcomes of employment and training programs producing targets that objectively reflect the impact of the economic environment on program performance.
The first full cycle ofthe 2007 YouthBuild grantees was completed in PY 2009 and the YouthBuild program was able to achieve its goal of establishing a baseline for the degree or certificate measure.
To continue the upward trend for this measure the Department provided a “coach” (a youth development content expert) to each of over 200 YouthBuild grantees to provide grantees with phone and on-site coaching services Targets for FY 1 0 - 1 2 are based on the aforementioned regression analysis methodology.
Job Corps achieved two of its three performance goals for PY 2009.
Placement of Job Corps graduates and former enrollees in employment the military or post-secondary education continued to mirror the national employment picture; the placement result was nine points below the 75 percent target.
Certificate attainment outcomes however reversed a three-year decline and literacy/numeracy gains rose six points It appears that the strategic focus on academics had a positive impact.
In FY 20 1 0 and FY 20 1 1 ODEP developed successful physical and programmatic universal design strategies designed to increase access to and use of WIA One- Stop Career Center services by all customers including adults and youth with disabilities .
In FY 20 1 2 ODEP and ETA through continuation of the Disability Employment Initiative and other collaborative work will develop and issue j oint policy guidance for the public workforce system ODEP in partnership with ETA and the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management (OASAM) plans to conduct a survey that provides a baseline assessment of the physical, programmatic and communications accessibility of the One- Stop Career Center system in a related initiative .
This baseline information will be invaluable in guiding targeted efforts to enhance accessibility on an as needed basis .
In FY 20 1 0 the Women’ s Bureau hosted a series of seven (7) teleconferences for workforce professionals designed to offer information and an exchange of ideas to help better connect women to green j obs training and green employment The Women’ s Bureau conducted nine green j obs training proj ects throughout the country.
These proj ects were developed in conjunction with experts in green industries to serve as models for engaging and preparing women for a variety of high-growth and emerging green j obs over the next decade .
In FY 20 1 1 the Bureau will publish “ Why Green Is Your Color: A Woman ’s Guide to a Sustainable Career” to increase women’ s access to highgrowth and emerging industry occupations in the green j obs sector nationwide Data collected from the nine green j obs training proj ects conducted in FY 20 1 0 will be analyzed, and a report prepared that will be shared with the workforce development community, and education and training providers .
The report will contain model practices to help workforce professionals and educational entities prepare women for j obs in the emerging green economy.
No relevant independent evaluations or audits were completed in FY 20 1 0.
Although news from the past program year showed that the economy began adding j obs demand far outpaced supply.
This mismatch between the number of workers looking for j obs and the number ofj ob openings remained the single biggest challenge to successful j ob placement.
The inverse statistical correlation of local unemployment rates and entered employment rates for participants of publicly-funded workforce programs has long been established.
As the national unemployment rate increased program exiters took longer to find j obs .
As a result only 1 out of 7 ETA programs with measures included in this goal met the entered employment rate target during the past year.
While training cannot create j obs the Department will continue to stress the need to train individuals for j obs and occupations in demand.
Throughout the year the program worked to accurately determine which sectors and career opportunities were gaining strength Critical investments were made to further understand promising reemployment approaches such as on-the-j ob training and career pathways .
Information on these and other effective strategies for reemployment will be shared with the workforce system in the coming year The agency also issued new guidance to the workforce system to support individuals in gaining credentials that have labor market value.
In the coming program year DOL will focus on assisting participants with entry to career pathways that lead to middle-class j obs and strengthening strategic partnerships with businesses and the education community.
Workforce solutions will be developed within the context of state and regional economies DOL will continue to target placement of workers in high-demand sectors and occupations and to emphasize occupational training and adult education – especially in green and health care occupations .
Apprenticeships are tied to employment and therefore have declined in number with the nation’ s widespread j ob losses over the past few years especially since a large maj ority of apprentices are in the construction and manufacturing industries both of which have been severely affected by the recession.
On a positive note, over 1 00,000 new apprentices nationwide participated in registered apprenticeship programs in FY 20 1 0 .
Reemployment (in suitable j obs) is one of the underlying purposes of the UI program.
Although the UI program does not provide reemployment services directly many of its payment eligibility provisions such as work search and Employment Service registration requirements are designed to promote reemployment.
In the year ending June 3 0 20 1 0 5 3 .
0 percent of UI claimants were reemployed in the calendar quarter following the quarter in which they received their first UI payment.
This performance was below the FY 20 1 0 target of 5 8 .
6 percent and represents a decrease of 1 .
8 percentage points from the FY 2009 level Analysis of the state reemployment data indicates that performance is significantly influenced by factors outside the control of the state agencies administering the UI program most notably economic conditions measured by the Total Unemployment Rate (TUR) Regression analysis indicates that the reemployment rate declines by about two percentage points for every one point rise in the Unemployment rate and so the 1 .
8 point decline is quite consistent with the 1 .2-percentage point rise in the TUR.
The administration expects that the TUR will fall to 8 .
8 percent from the 9 .
7 percent experienced during the year ending June 3 0 20 1 0 and so reemployment is expected to rebound to 5 6 .4 percent by FY 20 1 2 .
The measure is also sensitive to the percentage of UI claimants who have no expectation of recall to their previous employment.
This group which increases during economic downturns has a reemployment rate significantly below the rate for claimants on temporary lay-off.
Notes : UI Data are for claimants who received their first payments between April 20 1 0 and March 20 1 1 who were reemployed between July 20 1 0 and June 20 1 1 .
In FY 2009 the Office of Apprenticeship converted to the Common Measures to track the outcomes of apprentices that either have completed or cancelled from the program.
Currently 3 2 states enter data on registered programs and apprentices into the program’ s case management system RAPID S .
VETS assesses the performance of the One- Stop Career Center system on behalf of disabled veterans by applying three common measures : the entered employment rate, the employment retention rate and the average earnings .
Under Goal 1 .
1 , VETS assesses the outcomes for all veterans by applying the same measures .
For PY 2009 all three of these indicators for disabled veterans were sharply impacted by the severe recession in progress at the time that the outcomes were measured.
The entered employment rate for disabled veterans declined by 2 1 percent from the prior year, which is identical to the decline experienced by all veterans .
The declines in the retention rate and average earnings for disabled veterans were much less severe at five percent and two and one-half percent respectively compared with the prior year.
The rates of decline in these two measures for disabled veterans were slightly lower than the corresponding rates of decline for all veterans .
For disabled veterans VETS has encouraged front-line service delivery staff to respond in two principal ways to assist disabled veterans to counter the severe constraints imposed by current economic conditions .
This is intended to help disabled veteran j ob seekers to be better prepared to compete for the scarce j ob openings in the current labor market.
LVER staff members have been encouraged to place greater emphasis on employer outreach which is intended to expand the number ofj ob openings available with employers who are favorably inclined toward veterans and disabled veterans .
Second some disabled veterans are referred to One- Stop Career Centers as part of their participation in the Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment (VR&E) Program which is sponsored by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) .
For those disabled veterans DVOP specialists coordinate closely with their VA counterparts to identify other opportunities such as eligibility for VA sponsored work experience to enhance their employability.
With respect to the employment of transition-age youth ODEP will build on its Guideposts for Success series lessons learned from its Individual Learning Plan research on postsecondary career goal outcomes and information gleaned from ODEP s demonstration apprenticeship grants ODEP will finalize development of policy and strategies to increase the staff expertise and provide a youth-oriented youth-concentric soft skills curriculum to build capacity within youth-service organizations .
In addition ODEP will collaborate with OFCCP to develop technical assistance tailored to Federal contractors ’ affirmative action obligations with respect to hiring individuals with disabilities .
In FY 20 1 0 the Women’ s Bureau continued its emphasis on helping women veterans who are experiencing homelessness .
The Bureau created the publication Trauma-Informed Care for Women Veterans Experiencing Homelessness: A Guide for Providers to better equip service providers with a deeper understanding of the unique experiences and needs of female veterans .
Additionally a “Women Veterans Who are Experiencing Homelessness Summary Report” was created This report included information from listening sessions identified the needs of homeless women veterans and explored factors that lead to homelessness as well as issues regarding reintegration into the workforce and how to improve services and resources for this population.
In FY 20 1 1 the Bureau will conduct four regional “Stand Down” events for women veterans .
Independent evaluations and audits completed in FY 20 1 0 are summarized below.
It is the Department’ s goal to help keep middle-class families in the middle-class Over 1 50 000 exiters were still employed nine months after completing program services and gaining employment through the WIA Dislocated Worker program NEGs and TAA.
TAA achieved its retention target while the WIA Dislocated Worker and National Emergency Grant programs fell slightly short.
During the past year the Department developed and disseminated career and workforce information to the workforce development system partner agencies and the public through national electronic tools ETA believes that improved workforce information and job assessment tools are critical in creating a match between jobseekers and those employers willing to hire.
ETA developed and disseminated O*NET occupational competency profiles coordinated workforce information grants to states and provided technical assistance on the analysis and strategic use of labor market information To improve the Department’ s ability to provide information with the public ETA launched the worker reemployment website that provides employment training and information financial assistance for unemployed workers including those who have been recently laid-off workers.
DOL plans to provide additional guidance and training for State staffwho deliver services to trade affected workers to reflect changes to the program.
TAA developed the capability to process the increased flow ofpetitions.
During the coming year, ETA is continuing to bolster the workforce information to aid job matching.
In PY 2009, mySkillsmyFuture.org was released.
The website helps laid-offworkers and those changing careers find new occupations to explore Users can identify occupations that require skills and knowledge similar to their current or previous job learn more about these suggested matches locate local training programs and/or apply for jobs.
Two enhancements are being planned this year to allow the selection of additional worker preferences as well as provide access to information in Spanish.
For those without a prior work history, the Department is developing a career assessment tool called Career Profiler.
For the TAA ro rams ETA will continue to focus on obtainin timel and accurate data The 2009 Amendments re uired an extensive revision to the data collection component of State reporting.
In FY 20 1 0 one of the two goals was achieved The percent of USERRA referrals completed within the 60-day target established by the Veterans Benefits Improvement Act of 200 8 (VBIA) surpassed VETS ’ FY 20 1 0 goal by four percent as both VETS and the Office of the Solicitor successfully implemented streamlining measures to improve efficiency and effectiveness .
Compliance assistance efforts will continue to focus on National Guard and Reserve components because they are the source of most USERRA claims In FY 20 1 0 for example claims by National Guard and Reservists accounted for 82 percent of total claims VETS expects this trend to continue and possibly increase due to continued use of the National Guard and Reserve in America's ongoing wars overseas .
VETS is committed to continuous improvement of its USERRA program and toward that end conducted a rigorous independent process evaluation using the Lean Six Sigma method.
The study recommended that VETS should make refinements to specific aspects of the USERRA investigation process ; reorganize the allocation of workload; assign cases based on the level of complexity and the needs of the case; and measure the quality of USERRA investigations by applying distinct criteria to cases referred for prosecution and cases not referred for prosecution.
The results of this study are being used by VETS to develop other outcome‐oriented and quality measures to be incorporated in performance goals for future years .
In FY 20 1 1 ODEP conducted research and held a Strategic Roundtable on Aging Disability and Employment to identify actionable steps that address Federal workforce systems and employer facilitators and barriers encountered by mature workers with disabilities extending their careers beyond the traditional retirement age and also conducted related research on effective practices to assist workers with disabilities who have exhausted their unemployment insurance benefits return to work and remain in the middle class .
In FY 20 1 2 ODEP will issue policy and practice recommendations for the workforce system based on this research.
Independent evaluations and audits completed in FY 20 1 0 are summarized below.
WHD has completed the investigative work on 1 94 randomly selected janitorial firms.
Preliminary results indicate a compliance rate of approximately 43 percent.
The evaluation investigations found over $47 1 000 in back wages due 1 1 43 workers.
Several firms employed independent contractors but incurred only recordkeeping violations because the workers were paid at or above the minimum wage and worked only part time.
WHD expects to complete the final analysis in the near future The final analysis will guide compliance strategies in this industry WHD will implement those strategies are part of its FY 20 1 2 operating plan.
Statutes regulations and administrative requirements establish mandatory timeframes within which OFLC must process certain applications or take given actions Each foreign labor certification program is administered under a different set of requirements according to its unique role in the labor market.
For the permanent labor certification program, 3 7 percent of permanent labor certification program applications were resolved within six months of the initial filing date .
When compared to FY 2009 processing times improved substantially due in large part to the implementation of a management plan that resulted in the reduction of the backlog of pending permanent cases by approximately 5 0 percent from 66 8 8 5 in September 2009 to less than 3 5 000 cases in October 20 1 0 .
As part of its FY 20 1 1 Operating Plan OFLC will continue backlog reduction activities designed to bring processing times in line with established FY 20 1 1 goal of 8 1 percent.
A key and long standing challenge within the foreign labor certification programs has been balancing program integrity activities and the impact of those efforts on overall case processing times and the generation of case backlogs .
Eligible U. S .
However additional screens and analytical rigor in the foreign labor certification programs helps ensure American j obs are truly open to U. S .
Increased integrity activities such as conducting audit investigations and supervised recruitments which began in 2009 increase the average length of time to resolve a permanent application as these are labor-intensive regulatory processes .
The results of these integrity activities are now being reported and demonstrate that a little more than one half of the resolved permanent applications during FY 20 1 0 selected for integrity review were found in compliance .
Because the regulations require employers to attest to compliance with program requirements at the time of filing a permanent application this indicator measures the likelihood that OFLC will certify an employer application following a more thorough investigation of the employer's compliance with program requirements or when U. S .
OFLC will apply stricter scrutiny to applications In the future OFLC will revise the PERM application form – which expires in June 20 1 1 – to both strengthen its integrity (by clarifying program requirements) and seek more detailed justifications in key parts of the form.
Managers at OFLC headquarters and the national processing center levels will where feasible attempt to implement operational strategies to maintain production levels while enhancing audit investigations and other program integrity efforts .
Finally OFLC will initiate a baseline review of its S OP s to confirm they are still accurate and appropriate for the current busines s proces s and will develop a methodology to randomly select a sample of resolved permanent program applications for quality review.
Implementation of this quarterly review process will be labor intensive and will require an adequate base level of funding in FY 20 1 1 to achieve the desired performance outcome .
Independent evaluations and audits completed in FY 20 1 0 are summarized below.
In FY 20 1 0 ILAB went through a maj or rethinking and retooling of production measures and performance indicators that reflect its policy agenda of fostering fair working conditions in the global economy that protect vulnerable people and provide workers with a fair share of productivity and voice in their work lives .
In light of these new measures ILAB began collecting initial data during the first quarter of FY 20 1 1 .
In order to measurably improve worker rights and livelihoods for vulnerable populations ILAB ’ s nine new performance indicators will provide information on every area of work in which ILAB engages .
ILAB will now track the number of policy positions adopted reflecting ILAB and DOL priorities by the U S Government and other international fora With regard to ILAB ’ s technical assistance to eliminate child labor ILAB will track the number of current or potential child laborers provided education or vocational services along with the number of countries with increased capacity to address child labor or forced labor and the number of households receiving livelihood services ILAB will also measure the number of countries in which worker rights or conditions improve as well as those countries with improved capacity to protect worker rights or improve working conditions as the result of DOL interventions .
Finally the number of workers better able to exercise their rights or those who experience improved working conditions as well as those workers with improved livelihoods all as the result of DOL interventions will be measured.
These measures will provide tangible evidence that DOL interventions are improving worker rights and livelihoods for vulnerable populations around the world.
While ILAB revised its performance indicators in FY 20 1 0 ongoing DOL-supported child labor prevention and elimination proj ects continued to report their progress under ILAB ’ s previous performance indicators .
These indicators which capture information related to the new indicators are : number of children prevented or withdrawn from exploitive child labor and provided education and/or training opportunities as a result of DOLfunded child labor elimination proj ects ; and number of countries with increased capacities to address child labor as a result of DOL-funded child labor elimination proj ects .
ILAB exceeded its targets for both indicators .
Under the first indicator DOL-funded child labor elimination proj ects prevented or withdrew 1 03 002 children from exploitive labor in FY 20 1 0 bringing the total number of children reached since the program’ s inception to almost 1 .
5 million.
Additionally in FY 20 1 0 Congress provided DOL $6 5 million to implement model programs to address worker rights through technical assistance in countries with which the United States has trade preference programs .
With the new funding ILAB awarded a grant of more than $5 .
3 million to the International Labor Organization to support a new Better Work proj ect in Bangladesh and expand existing Better Work proj ects in Cambodia and Vietnam.
With funding received through the State Department ILAB also initiated a new Better Work proj ect in Nicaragua.
Better Work is a unique partnership program of the International Labor Organization and the International Finance Corporation that seeks to improve labor conditions in global supply chains .
Better Work proj ects monitor conditions in export factories publish the results in a transparent manner and assist suppliers to comply with labor standards that many buyers and customers demand In FY 20 1 0 ILAB also continued its oversight of previously funded Better Work proj ects in Haiti and Lesotho launched a new worker rights program in the Maldives and continued oversight of other worker rights initiatives in Afghanistan Bahrain Costa Rica the Dominican Republic Egypt El Salvador Guatemala Guyana Honduras Pakistan Sri Lanka Tanzania and Ukraine.
Going forward ILAB is realigning its efforts and focusing on monitoring and oversight of Free Trade Agreements improving the analytical quality of its research disseminating its reports strategically actively engaging labor ministries and international and regional organizations and addressing the root causes of child labor.
ILAB will expand technical assistance funding to design new integrated programs in countries that show sufficient political will to improve worker rights working conditions and livelihoods as well as a new generation of child labor prevention and elimination projects that will place a greater emphasis on improving family livelihoods.
ILAB will also continue its role as the lead agency within the United States government on International Labor Organization policy and program issues ; representing the United States government in the labor and employment components of key international organizations ; providing education and technical assistance to trade agreement countries ; and assisting in the development and implementation of United States government policy on international child labor forced labor and human trafficking issues .
In FY 20 1 2 ILAB will support Presidential and Department priorities of ensuring protection of worker’ s rights internationally through robust enforcement of labor commitments under U. S .
Improving incomes and working conditions in key labor markets is critical to having a lasting impact on global workers ’ rights and livelihoods including those of U. S .
In FY 20 1 2 ILAB will target key countries for monitoring and enforcement of labor issues thereby contributing to the strengthening of regulatory programs .
These countries will include as many as feasible of the following : the 1 3 developing countries with which the U. S .
ODEP will continue its exchange of disability employment policy effective practices and strategies with members of the G-20 and other foreign delegations who request a briefing with ODEP through ILAB ’ s International Visitor’ s Program.
In FY 20 1 2 ODEP will also build on its Individual Learning Plan research to study the long-term post-secondary career goal outcomes for youth with disabilities in comparison with youth without disabilities Significant trends identified will inform policy and practices that may affect working conditions productivity and limit opportunities to attain employment goals .
No relevant evaluations or audits were completed in FY 20 1 0.
Outcome Goal 2 .
In FY 20 1 0 O SHA reached seven of eight performance indicator targets The target of one performance indicator Federal Agency lost time case rate for injuries and illnesses was not reached On July 1 9 20 1 0 a Presidential Memorandum established Protecting Our Workers and Ensuring Reemployment (POWER) – a new federal agency safety health and return to employment initiative that directs the Department of Labor to reduce injury and illness rates and improve return-to-work (RTW) outcomes for injured federal Executive Branch employees .
Under the Presidential Safety Health and Return to Employment (SHARE) Initiative – which aimed for comparable goals and was completed in FY 2009 – Federal agencies improved workplace injury and lost production time rates and improvement is expected to continue under POWER.
While POWER did not immediately follow the conclusion of SHARE government-wide performance improvement did continue in FY 20 1 0 as measured against the new POWER goals.
In FY 20 1 1 in an effort to encourage hazard abatement among all employers O SHA will target high-risk workplaces strengthen enforcement initiatives focus on a broader range of hazards increase publicity and direct outreach strengthen support for Whistleblower protection activities and increase enforcement effectiveness evaluation activities The agency through the regulatory agenda will also seek to make fundamental changes in the way employers and workers cooperate to secure safe workplaces by requiring employers to plan prevent and protect workers from exposure to occupational hazards through the Injury and Illness Prevention Program standard.
Sources : O SHA Information System (OIS), the OSHA Integrated Management Information System (IMIS), and OWCP/OPM data.
MSHA did not meet its FY 20 1 0 target to reduce the mining industry ’ s 5 -year fatality rate by 5 percent.
MSHA has developed and is implementing an escalating enforcement strategy that identifies mines with compliance or other safety and health issues for more aggressive oversight and uses the agency ’ s most aggressive enforcement tools against egregious violators MSHA ’ s impact inspection initiative selects mines with s ecific conditions or com liance issues that merit increased a enc attention and enforcement for intensified inspections MSHA ’ s new potential pattern of violations (PPOV) process focuses on chronic violators that have failed to improve compliance in response to increased inspections and other enforcement actions .
PPOV mines violations must significantly reduce their rate of significant and substantial (S&S) violations and have incentives to implement comprehensive corrective action programs that address the root causes of the mine ’ s compliance problems Mines that fail to improve will be placed in pattern of violation (POV) status and be subj ect to closure orders for any S&S violation Fourteen mines are currently going through the new PPOV process Mines that do not respond to administrative enforcement tools and their conduct presents a continuing hazard to miners are subj ect to injunctive action under Section 1 0 8 of the Mine Act.
MSHA has set ambitious targets for reducing mining fatalities .
While MSHA is confident that its integrated approach to prevention of mining accidents including aggressive enforcement meaningful outreach and special emphasis programs will result in a significant reduction in mining fatalities over the long term However because of the low probability high impact nature of mine disasters and the fact that mine operators are ultimately responsible for the health and safety of miners , the ability to predict achievement is limited.
MSHA ’ s approach toward reducing fatalities in mining not only targets chronic violators of health and safety rules but also focuses the industry on preventing common causes of fatal mine accidents and disasters through initiatives such as Rules to Live By and Rules to Live By II .
This program includes industry outreach and education to raise awareness as well as enhanced enforcement The Rules to Live By initiative focuses on 24 frequently citied standards that cause or contribute to fatal accidents in the mining industry in nine categories .
Rules to Live By II focuses on frequently cited standards which were cited during maj or disasters over the last ten years and which contributed to five or more fatalities .
Regardless of increased enforcement efforts MSHA cannot be at every mine on every shift.
In addition to making sure operators carry out their responsibility to ensure the health and safety of miners miners must also be aware of their rights and responsibilities to be engaged participants in ensuring their own health and safety.
MSHA has updated its guidance for miners on their rights and responsibilities and will be ramping up a program to educate miners on their rights .
MSHA is also conducting a program evaluation to develop a survey instrument to assess the degree to which miners are aware of their rights to identify hazardous conditions request Agency inspections without discrimination and select a co-worker or other as a representative of miners to represent them in health and safety matters with MSHA and the mine operator.
This evaluation will help improve MSHA ’ s miners ’ rights education program.
MSHA met its Noise Reduction Performance Goal of reducing miners ’ noise overexposures .
Requiring mine operators to implement dust control parameters proven to be effective in controlling respirable dust.
Stepped-up enforcement with emphasis on operator compliance with the approved dust control parameters at mines targeted by MSHA ’ s Special Dust Emphasis Teams and by individual districts .
Training of enforcement personnel and meetings with mine operators on lessons learned from the special inspections performed by the national Dust Emphasis Teams to achieve more consistent compliance with approved dust control parameters on a daily basis .
Dissemination of information on Best Dust Control Practices under MSHA ’ s End Black Lung – Act Now campaign.
Conducting j oint MSHA/NIOSH Dust Control Workshops around the country on Best Practices for Controlling Respirable Dust in Coal Mining.
Notes : MSHA ’ s fatality rate reflects the number of fatalities per 200 000 hours worked during the prior five-year period - FY 20 1 1 result is required to calculate the five-year average in FY 20 1 2 .
FY 20 1 2 target for noise exposures in coal mines will be two percent below the FY 20 1 1 target or less .
MSHA ’ s rate for the number of high-hazard potential impoundment/dam failures with significant release per year reflects the prior 1 0-year period - FY 20 1 1 result is required to calculate the FY 20 1 2 target.
During 20 1 0 WHD investigators completed the field work in 65 investigations of employers utilizing the H-2A immigration program in order to establish a statistically valid baseline While the investigations were primarily conducted to determine the level of compliance with H-2A compliance with the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) the Migrant Seasonal Protection Act (MSPA) and the Field Sanitation standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Act (O SHA/F S) was also addressed This initiative was undertaken pursuant to the Secretary ’ s strategic goals of securing safe and healthy workplaces, particularly in high risk industries (which includes agriculture) , and increasing workers ’ incomes and narrowing wage and income inequality.
WHD program planning has not specifically included investigations of H-2A employers for the past eight years This initiative sought to reinvigorate Wage and Hour’ s presence among users of the H-2A immigration program Field work was being completed on some cases to the very end of the fiscal year and not all investigations have been concluded and not all case information recorded, so there is analysis remaining to be done .
In addition timely appeals of assessed civil monetary penalties have been received.
Preliminary analysis found that 7 8 percent (5 1 of 65) of the employers surveyed were not in compliance with H-2A regulations .
New H-2A regulations are now effective WHD ’ s compliance strategies will center on identifying crops geographic locations and employer types i .
Independent evaluations and audits completed in FY 20 1 0 are summarized below.
FY 20 1 0 was a period of transition for OFCCP which included the development of new performance indicators that better reflect the impact OFCCP has on the contractor community This is a challenging task given that the federal contractor community is dynamic with employers entering and leaving daily.
In addition there is no one repository that lists all entities involved in federal contract work.
However OFCCP is undertaking the implementation of statistical techniques to estimate the size of the contractor community which will serve as a foundation for measuring its performance .
Compliance rate with technical requirements for federal contractors .
Data collection was initiated for the compliance and discrimination measures beginning in the first quarter of FY 20 1 1 and targets will be established in FY 20 1 2 and updated annually thereafter.
In FY 20 1 0 OFCCP embarked upon the development of a predictive statistical model to more accurately identify potential violators .
OFCCP will use its predictive model the results from an assessment of patterns of discrimination within select industries and data regarding the impact of evaluations on the contractor community to both maximize its limited resources and focus on those contractors and industries that are more likely to be found in non-compliance.
To accomplish the goals and improve the compliance rate of contractors OFCCP has engaged in several initiatives centered on regulatory reform training and outreach.
Regulatory Reform: An effective enforcement program begins with clear regulatory language that sets forth the requirements a federal contractor must take to ensure a diverse workforce free from discriminatory practices .
In FY 20 1 0 OFCCP embarked on an aggressive program to evaluate revise and strength its regulations .
In addition OFCCP set a priority to revise its Federal Contract Compliance Manual that provides guidance to both OFCCP staff and contractors on how to evaluate their affirmative action programs .
Combined both initiatives will aid OFCCP in detecting and reducing workplace discrimination.
Training : In FY 20 1 0 OFCCP revitalized its Training Academy and provided more than 25 0 new compliance officers (CO) with a revised Introductory Course The purpose of the training was to improve the quality of our compliance audits and ensure consistent evaluations In FY 20 1 1 OFCCP will continue its introductory training program and begin development of an intermediate and advanced level curriculum.
In addition OFCCP will also partner with EEOC and DOJ to provide j oint training.
Outreach: The FY 20 1 1 production measures include the reporting of compliance assistance hours and events These measures reflect the enormous effort OFCCP will undertake to break down barriers to fair and diverse workplaces by educating workers about their rights .
In FY 20 1 0 a Communications Team was created within OFFCP to expand beyond traditional outreach and compliance assistance to outreach community groups workers and their advocates .
As a part of this outreach OFCCP will develop tools for employees of federal contractors so there is a better understanding of rights and responsibilities OFCCP will continue to report its compliance assistance activities but this goal will now report a greater proportion of events focused on community and worker groups .
ODEP will continue its Add Us In initiative designed to develop policy and strategies to increase employment of all individuals with disabilities by small businesses particularly those owned or operated by African-Americans ; Asian-Americans ; Latino or Hispanic Americans ; members of federally recognized tribes and Native Americans ; lesbian gay bisexual and transgender individuals ; women and people with disabilities .
In addition ODEP will continue prior work with BLS and the Census Bureau under Strategic Goal 5 to develop and implement a CPS disability supplement and report which will provide relevant disability statistics .
In FY 20 1 1 WHD will conduct a customer satisfaction survey of FMLA complainants to determine their level of satisfactions with the services that the agency has provided to them in response to their concerns.
This baseline with provide a benchmark from which WHD can measure new techniques in responding to incoming FMLA allegations ofviolations as well as the impact ofthe agency’ s American Bar Association referral program for FMLA complainants.
ODEP will partner with the WB in FY 20 1 2 to j ointly sponsor research on workplace flexibility practices across industry sizes and geographic sectors regarding the issues justification and recommendations on the positive effects of workplace flexibility and telework on the environment government efficiency and work-family balance that address the needs of all employers and workers but especially those with complex needs .
In FY 20 1 0 the Women’ s Bureau worked with the White House Council on Women and Girls and national work and family researchers and advocates to organize a series of ten National Dialogue on Workplace Flexibility events Additionally the Women’ s Bureau worked with BLS to create a series of questions for the purpose of producing a supplemental module to the American Time Use Survey (ATUS) Supplement designed to measure workers ’ use and access to paid leave and flexibility of work schedules For FY 20 1 1 the Bureau will host National Dialo ue on Workplace Flexibility events in ten large cities across the nation.
No relevant evaluations or audits were completed in FY 20 1 0.
In 20 1 0 OLMS was able to meet or exceed all performance goals while setting baselines for four new goals While setting the baselines OLMS began developing strategies for meeting these new goals The new goals endeavor to increase public disclosure reporting of employer-consultant agreements to persuade employees concerning their collective bargaining rights decrease the number of delinquent filers of labor organization financial reports decrease the number of chronically delinquent filers of labor organization financial reports and improve customer satisfaction with the OLMS web site.
In 2008 OLMS established baselines and targets for three measures: the elapsed number of days to resolve union officer election complaints the percent of electronically filed reports and the percent oftargeted audits that result in criminal cases Each ofthese measures and goals were established to promote both OLMS effectiveness and efficiency and to increase union financial integrity and democracy and labor-management transparency.
The increased complexity ofunion financial transactions continues to be a major challenge.
By identifying anomalies in union financial reports and using other tar etin measures OLMS strives to more effectivel identif unions where criminal activit ma be resent As noted OLMS has become more successful in this area exceeding its related performance goal for both 2009 and 20 1 0.
OLMS has also invested in the use ofnew technology to facilitate the electronic filing ofunion financial reports.
During 20 1 0 OLMS implemented a new web-based system for the electronic filing ofLM-2 union annual reports that ameliorates barriers to electronic filing that have been identified by OLMS stakeholders In 20 1 1 OLMS will implement a similar system for its LM-3 and LM-4 union filers Continued outreach enabled OLMS to reach its e-filing goal in 20 1 0 and the rollout of Phase II of its e-filing proj ect should contribute to additional electronic filings for 20 1 1 .
OLMS also established a goal in 2008 to decrease the number of elapsed days to resolve union officer election complaints.
In passing the Labor- Management Reporting and Disclosure Act in 1 959 Congress established a 60-day deadline for court filing of an election complaint.
An analysis of data indicated that in these cases waivers of the 60-day limit were increasing extending the average elapsed time to 92 days.
Waivers of the 60-day filing deadline are sometimes necessary to accommodate settlement discussions between OLMS and the union and for other valid reasons However quicker resolution of election complaints ensures quicker restoration of democratic voice and a democratically operated union and because ofthis in 2008 OLMS created a performance measure tracking elapsed days, with 92 elapsed days as the baseline.
In both 2009 and 20 1 0, OLMS exceeded its goals for this measure and continues to examine new methods for reducing its elapsed days further.
A new team-based approach for handling election cases has proven successful and will continue to be implemented throughout OLMS during 20 1 1 .
OLMS also plans to accelerate early Office of the Solicitor involvement in cases that may result in litigation.
Data for the OLMS Website Customer Satisfaction performance indicator is collected and reported under a contract with ForeSee Inc .
Notes : The e LORS database is a robust and mature database that provides data in a timely and verifiable manner allowing OLMS to access data and information on an as- needed basis .
MSHA ’ s Office of Assessments coordinates discrimination complaint processing and temporary reinstatement proceedings to protect miners from discrimination when they exercise their right to report health and safety hazards without fear of retaliation MSHA completed 1 8 7 discrimination case investigations in FY 20 1 0 completing 1 45 cases (7 8%) within 60 days .
Beginning in FY 20 1 0 from October 2009 through June 20 1 0 the Office of Assessments transmitted a weekly status report to MSHA ’ s field investigators and solicitors reporting on all active section 1 05 (c) discrimination cases and provided alerts of cases approaching their scheduled completion due date .
During the fourth quarter of the fiscal year due to a shortage of staff the weekly activity report was temporarily suspended.
MSHA will resume the weekly reports during the second quarter of FY 20 1 0 .
In addition the Agency is reviewing the Special Investigations program to determine if the current reporting structure organizational location and/or staffing levels of the Headquarters ’ special investigations review functions should be changed.
There were no relevant program evaluations or audits completed in FY 20 1 0.
Outcome Goal 4 .
1 ―Facilitate return to work for workers experiencing workplace injuries or illnesses who are able to work.
OWCP supports the Secretary of Labor’ s vision of good j obs for everyone through the achievement of Strategic Outcome Goal 4 .
Return to work is most successful through early identification of work injury or illness prompt development of case information and efficient provision of assistance services that will support recovery and return to work.
A July 1 9 20 1 0 memorandum from President Obama launched the Presidential initiative Protecting Our Workers and Ensuring Reemployment (POWER) replacing the Safety Health and Return to Employment initiative (SHARE) .
SHARE concluded in FY 2009 and was successful in reducing both new injury and lost production day rates in the Federal Government.
POWER was formally rolled out in September and October 20 1 0 through a memorandum from the Secretary of Labor and at a formal meeting j ointly led by OWCP and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (O SHA) for Federal agency Washington headquarters staff.
POWER expands on SHARE ’ s accomplishments by setting more aggressive targets over four years (FY 20 1 1 - 1 4) for non-Postal Executive Branch agencies to continue to reduce injury and illness rates and increase return-to-work outcomes for injured federal employees .
Decrease Government-wide Lost Production Day (LPD) rates – Under POWER individual Executive Branch agencies are directed to reduce LPD rates (per 1 00 employees) by 1 percent per year through FY 20 1 4 .
The Government-wide LPD rate was reduced in FY 20 1 0 to 3 4 .
6 days from the FY 2009 result of 3 5 .
8 days .
Success is due to FECA ’ s early intervention strategies in assisting injured workers to return to work and employing agencies ’ continuing dedication to reemploying their workers emphasized under POWER’ s antecedents – Federal Worker 2000 and SHARE.
The ability of DFEC to promptly initiate supportive actions is improved if Federal employers are timely in their submission of injury reports and wage-loss claims .
For this reason POWER includes two additional goals .
The first of these is to increase nationwide timeliness of Notices of Injury by FY 20 1 4 to 8 5 percent filed within 1 4 days .
The FY 2009 result was 80 .
1 percent filed within 1 4 days .
In FY 20 1 0 8 1 .
7 percent were timely filed.
Agencies continue their attention to timely delivery.
Fourteen agencies are using Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) systems to report injuries electronically.
Most of these agencies made immediate significant gains in timeliness subsequent to adoption of EDI .
To expand the electronic filing capability to all agencies DFEC is developing a web-based capability (ECOMP) that will enable employing agencies to transmit Notice of Injury forms electronically and cut the time of delivery.
E-filing will be required by FECA regulations starting January 1 20 1 3 .
The second goal through FY 20 1 4 is to increase the nationwide timeliness for Wage Loss Claim filing to 70 percent filed within 7 days .
The FY 20 1 0 result was 62 .2 percent filed within 7 days .
In the context of Federal employment ODEP will partner with OWCP to identify effective practices develop materials and conduct outreach tailored to successfully returning FECA claimants particularly those deemed hardest to re-employ to work.
Working with OWCP OPM and other Federal partners ODEP will provide technical assistance to support government-wide adoption and implementation of effective and innovative return-to- work strategies including but not limited to j ob accommodations and centralized accommodations funding j ob restructuring and customization telework and technology.
Independent evaluations and audits completed in FY 20 1 0 are summarized below.
Increase the timeliness of First Reports of Inj ury and First Payment of Compensation – The Division of Longshore and Harbor Workers ’ Com ensation met its FY 20 1 0 tar ets for each of two erformance indicators which measure the timeliness of Defense Base Act (DBA) case actions by employers and insurance carriers .
Injury report timeliness in FY 20 1 0 for DBA cases was 75 percent within 3 0 days against a goal of 63 percent within 3 0 days .
Growing numbers of DBA cases present significant challenges for the Longshore program.
Between FY 2002 and FY 20 1 0, DBA injury and death cases received by the Longshore program have increased from 3 47 to 1 4 844 .
Because of overseas ’ communications geographic and other limitations DBA claims typically entail lengthy and more resource-intensive development time on the part of employer/carriers .
Performance goals focus on the role of employers/carriers ’ in achieving results .
The Longshore program will continue to work with upper management of large employers and carriers to improve timelines s .
On individual cases , the program will work with insurance claims adj usters to make timely claim investigation and claim decisions leading to faster payment of benefits .
In FY 20 1 1 the Longshore program will add two new indicators to measure first injury reporting and first payment timeliness for all other Longshore cases .
Black Lung Claims Decision Timeliness – The Black Lung Program did not meet its goal of reducing the average time to render a Preliminary Decision and Order.
Against a target of 200 days results were 2 1 0 days .
Performance was affected by an increase in claims by 62 percent over FY 2009 in response to the extended eligibility provided by amendments in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) of 20 1 0 .
Timely Adj udication in EEOICPA Claims – The Division of Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation (DEEOIC) continues to provide timely claims adjudication and benefit delivery.
In FY 20 1 0 the Energy program reached its initial processing performance targets for average days under Part B with a result of 97 days against a target of 1 20 days and for Part E with an average of 1 25 days against a target of 1 60 days .
The goal for Final Decisions was achieved with a result of 95 .
7 percent against a target of 8 9 percent.
The FY 20 1 0 performance targets were not achieved.
First Payment Timeliness – Making timely payments to unemployed workers is critical to fulfilling the UI system’ s key statutory obj ective of making full payment of unemployment compensation "when due. " The FY 20 1 0 target of 8 5 .
9 percent was not attained; 82 .2 percent of first payments were made within 1 4/2 1 days down from the FY 2009 level of 82 .
9 percent.
First payment timeliness declined in 3 1 states .
The 3 2 states performing below the 87 percent minimum acceptable level of performance in the UI performance management system (UI Performs) have submitted corrective action plans that outline the actions they will take to improve their performance as part of their FY 20 1 1 State Quality Service Plan.
Detection of Overpayments – Establish for recovery at least 52 .
8 percent of the amount of estimated overpayments that states can detect and recover.
States detected and established for recovery 49 .
5 percent of the estimated overpayments which was below the FY 20 1 0 target of 52 .
8 percent.
Recoverable overpayments estimated by the Benefit Accuracy Measurement (BAM) survey increased from $2 8 billion in FY 2009 to $4 0 billion in FY 20 1 0 as benefits paid increased 5 0 percent, from $ 5 0 billion to $76 billion.
Although States increased overpayment detections by 3 1 percent, from $ 1 .
5 billion to almost $2 .
0 billion they could not keep pace with the increase in overpayments .
Establish Tax Accounts Promptly – 90 .
0 percent of the UI tax liability determinations for new employers will be made within 90 days of the end of the quarter in which employers become liable .
In FY 20 1 0, 8 6 .4 percent of new status determinations were made within the specified 90-day period.
Although this is considerably short of the 90 percent target it represents a 2 .
3 percentage point improvement from the year before .
Statistical studies have indicated that new status timeliness is broadly countercyclical with a significant upward trend since 1 997 As economic activity falls status timeliness tends to rise because the status determinations workload falls .
However the broad historical relationship was broken temporarily by the recent recession as it appears that many states reassigned staff from tax to UI claims functions in response to the sharply increased claims workloads .
This caused status determinations timeliness to decline between FY 2008 and FY 2009 despite a fall in status determinations workloads Staff diversion seems to have moderated between FY 2009 and FY 20 1 0 as status performance improved Reflecting the 2007-2009 recession’ s impact the FY 20 1 2 target has been set a 8 6 .
9 percent.
Independent evaluations and audits completed in FY 20 1 0 are summarized below.
During FY 20 1 0 EB SA’ s program was significantly impacted by the ongoing implementation of the COBRA premium assistance program and the increased call volume from the public that it created for our participant assistance program In addition early in FY 20 1 0 the Congress passed the Patient Protection and Affordability Care Act (ACA) which significantly impacted both the workload and regulatory priorities of the Agency Notwithstanding this unprecedented workload EB SA achieved its performance goals that were established before any of these unanticipated events With respect to the enforcement program the agency reached its performance target for the ratio of closed civil cases with corrected fiduciary violations to closed civil cases .
With respect to criminal case work EB SA achieved its target to report cases accepted for prosecution.
In previous performance reports EB SA cautioned that the safe harbor regulation could substantially impact both the civil and criminal enforcement programs .
Approximately one-third of the investigations conducted by EB SA focus on this issue of determining the appropriate period within which participant contributions to a small plan need to be deposited to the participant’ s account in order to be deemed to be in compliance with the law.
However in EB SA ’ s analysis the safe-harbor to date has not materially reduced EB SA ’ s overall enforcement ratios in FY 2009 or FY 20 1 0 .
Despite experiencing unprecedented call volume from the public in FY 20 1 0 the Office of Participant Assistance provided superior participant assistance by responding to 99 percent of all written inquiries within 3 0 days of receipt and responding to over 99 percent of telephone inquiries by the close of the next business day Total inquiry volume for the fiscal year exceeded 3 76 000 including the adjudication of over 1 5 000 COBRA subsidy denial appeals .
More than 99 percent of the appeals were processed within the 1 5 business day statutory requirement.
Benefit recoveries achieved by the participant assistance program contributed more than $ 1 64 million to EB SA ’ s overall monetary results of over $ 1 billion.
This informal resolution of complaints without utilizing the more resource intensive investigative proces s enables EB SA to direct its investigative as sets to more egregious and wide-spread violations of ERISA.
The Agency also conducted outreach and education programs designed to educate plan participants and officials regarding their rights and responsibilities under ERISA.
Seven compliance webcasts were held reaching 1 1 000 plan sponsors and service providers .
Eight Health Benefits Education Seminars and five Fiduciary Education Seminars were conducted; 479 Rapid Response Workshops were held for dislocated workers ; over 600 000 educational publications were distributed and over 7 8 million visitors were hosted on the Agency ’ s website These activities are a critical component of our efforts to enhance the benefit security of America ’ s workers retirees and their families We believe that retirement health and other benefits will be more secure if plan officials are more knowledgeable and therefore in a better position to be in compliance .
Going forward, in 20 1 1 , EB SA, for the first time, will begin conducting investigations that will lead to measuring overall compliance with ERISA and the impact of EB SA investigations on the compliance rate .
These broad-based composite measures will provide us information related to compliance in the community beyond those investigations that we conduct.
ODEP will expand ePolicy Works Health Care an online collaborative workspace and real-time information-sharing tool that focuses on assisting the disability health care community to more effectively develop national health policy that supports and improves the employment outcomes of people with disabilities This unique online platform was created by ODEP in FY 20 1 0 in response to the President’ s Open Government initiative and incorporates many Web 2 0 features such as RS S feeds an announcements board a discussion forum and legislative and issue-specific updates as well as social networking and online workgroup capabilities .
No relevant program evaluations or audits were completed in FY 20 1 0 .
Outcome Goal 5 .
1 ―Improve the timeliness accuracy and relevance of information on labor market activity working conditions and price changes in the economy.
BLS revised its performance framework in 20 1 0 For most performance measures 20 1 0 is the baseline year In 20 1 0 BLS reached 1 00 percent of the underlying timeliness accuracy and relevance targets for its Labor Force Statistics Prices and Living Conditions and Productivity and Technology Principal Federal Economic Indicators .
The Office of Compensation and Working Conditions reached 1 00 percent of the underlying timeliness and accuracy targets but missed its relevance target for the number of indexes published (quarterly) for the Employment Cost Index (ECI) program by three indexes (or one percent) .
BLS incorporates seasonal revisions into its estimates once per year in the 3rd quarter.
BLS dropped several series that did not exhibit seasonality.
In addition BLS measured dissemination through the average number of Internet site user sessions each month and exceeded its target of 6 .
Independent evaluations and audits completed in FY 20 1 0 are summarized below.
Under GPRA, performance goals, measures and targets are identified for reporting purposes in the Congressional Budget Justification (CBJ) issued during that fiscal year.
Therefore, DOL is obliged to report PY 2009 and FY 2010 results for measures listed in its FY 2011 Performance Plan, which was published as part of the CBJ in February 2010 (see http://www.dol.gov/dol/budget/).
However, the September 2010 update of the Department’s Strategic Plan had just begun in earnest when the budget and performance plan were taking final form in December 2009.
Changes to the goal structure were minor but many measures were revised, replaced, or removed from the plan.
Because this APR is primarily a planning document that uses historical information to inform future strategies and targets, it is organized around goals and measures selected to represent Departmental goals for the budget year.
The table below lists these performance measures, their targets and results for PY 2009/FY 2010.
Results are not provided for measures that were new this year, i.e., their target was to collect baseline data.
It is organized by the new goal structure, with changes noted to assist cross-reference to the FY 2011 Performance Plan.