Mission: The Department of Labor fosters and promotes the welfare of job seekers, wage earners, and retirees of the U.S. by improving their working conditions, advancing their opportunities for profitable employment, protecting their retirement and health care benefits, helping employers find workers, strengthening collective bargaining, and tracking changes in employment, prices and other national economic measures.
The Department accomplishes this mission through component agencies and offices that administer various statutes and programs.
These programs are carried out through a network of regional offices and smaller field, district, and area offices, as well as through grantees and contractors.
The Department of Labor (DOL) has a strong role to play in helping ensure worker safety and voice, in training workers to achieve skills that will help them find a job, in accurately reporting labor statistics, and in setting policy to support working families.
DOL uses results-based management techniques to oversee and continually improve its programs.
As described in the section below, each DOL agency prepares an annual Operating Plan that details the strategies and resources it will apply to reach goals and objectives at all levels of the organization.
These operating plans seek to balance quantity with quality, establish ambitious targets for continuous improvement of program performance, demonstrate prioritization of resource allocation, and identify evidence supporting our strategies.
Departmental leaders review progress against those operating plans each quarter to monitor progress and hold agencies accountable for implementing the plans, achieving milestones, and making adjustments as needed.
Budget uncertainties and cuts bring pressure to prioritize and to be more productive.
Fortunately, the Department is establishing a culture of continuous improvement; we are constantly assessing whether our efforts are successful, and why – and seeking ways of doing better.
The measures and strategies in this report explain how DOL programs are managed to improve the lives of American workers.
Since the first quarter of Fiscal Year 2010, the Deputy Secretary of Labor has held quarterly program performance meetings with the heads of over a dozen DOL agencies that administer Worker Protection, Employment and Training, Policy, Statistics, and Benefits programs.
Beginning with FY 2011, all agencies have annual Operating Plans that identify output and outcome measures as well as milestones linked to their program performance goals, Agency priority goals and the Department’s strategic goals.
Quarterly reviews focus on analysis of progress against targets in these plans.
Each agency head and senior staff meet in the second month after each quarter with the Deputy Secretary and key DOL management officials such as the Performance Improvement Officer, performance and budget analysts, congressional liaison, and Solicitor’s Office counsel.
Agencies’ narrative explanations and analysis of quarter, year-to-date, and five-year trend data (if available) – prepared with Department staff assistance – are shared with all attendees prior to the meeting.
Discussions focus on implications of the data for strategies (what’s working).
Agencies usually leave the meeting with action items for the next quarter.
The review process has focused Departmental leadership on strategic management of core functions through the use of program performance and budget data.
Identification and discussion of key measures, annual and seasonal targets, and how budgets, workload and strategies affect results have helped communicate priorities and improve performance against benchmarks.
Descriptions of each challenge, progress to date and what remains to be done are summarized in the FY 2012 Agency Financial Report (www.dol.gov/dol/aboutdol/).
The Chief Evaluation Office (CEO) in the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy works closely with agency staff to design, fund, and implement program evaluations.
The results from evaluations inform policy, advance DOL's mission, and improve its performance-based management initiatives in support of the Government Performance and Results Modernization Act of 2010 (GPRMA).
For more information see http://www.dol.gov/asp/evaluation/.
The FY 2012 Summary of Performance and Financial Information includes an assessment by the Secretary of the reliability and completeness of DOL performance data reported under the GPRMA.
The Department satisfies this with Agency Head level attestations that the data do not contain significant limitations that can lead to inaccurate assessments of results – with exceptions noted.
There were no exceptions in FY 2012.
This report satisfies the requirement of GPRMA to provide information on actual performance and progress in achieving goals identified in the Annual Performance Plan (APP).
Measures and targets for FY 2012 were updated in the FY 2011 Annual Performance Report (APR), which was the Department’s FY 2013 Annual Performance Plan.
The FY 2012 APR serves as the FY 2014 APP, updates measures and targets for FY 2013, and establishes targets consistent with the FY 2014 Congressional Budget Justification.
Some measures are dropped or changed between reports.
To present the most current information, the APR will provide complete information for the budget year measures only – in this case, those retained or added in FY 2014.
Complete information for each measure includes actual performance for the five preceding years, if available, plus targets for the most recent year, the current year, and the budget year.
Targets and results for measures dropped or changed are reported for the report year only in the Measures Discontinued section.
The Agencies, Programs and Strategies section of this report introduces each of DOL’s agencies; they are grouped by program type (employment and training, worker protection, etc.).
Each narrative describes agencies, their programs, the Departmental outcome goals they support, and the strategies they are using to reach performance goals.
The Priority and Strategic Goals sections present results and plans organized under the five strategic goals and fourteen outcome goals established in the FY 2011-2016 Strategic Plan.
Strategic goals are general outcomes clearly linked to the Department’s mission.
Outcome goals articulate more specific objectives associated with one or more programs and DOL agencies.
Agency performance goals outline each agency’s contribution to the Department’s objectives.
The Department will track progress toward achieving these goals by using quantifiable performance measures.
Tables and narratives present complete results including brief analyses and summaries of independent program evaluations.
Results and analyses are organized by agency; however, evaluations are presented together at the end of each outcome goal section.
Narratives explain data, summarize the analyses, and provide plans in the performance goal tables, providing important context and details as needed.
Performance goal summary tables list each applicable agency goal, its key indicators, and applicable targets, results, and status (whether or not results reach or exceed the target, indicated by Y or N).
Where “baseline” appears in the target cell for new indicators, no data were available for establishing a numerical target.
If results improve over the prior year but do not reach the target, “I” appears in the status cell.
The last three columns identify what worked, what didn’t work, and plans to improve results.
Where applicable, tables at the end of each outcome goal section summarize findings, recommendations, and actions for relevant evaluations completed during the fiscal year.
The Employment and Training Administration provides employment assistance, labor market information, and job training through the administration of the following programs: programs authorized by the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (WIA) for adults, dislocated workers, youth (including Job Corps), and targeted populations; Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) authorized by the Trade Act of 1974, as amended; Employment Services authorized under the Wagner-Peyser Act; Foreign Labor Certification activities authorized by the Immigration and Nationality Act; the Senior Community Service Employment Program authorized by the Older Americans Act; Apprenticeship programs authorized by the National Apprenticeship Act; and Competitive Grants for Worker Training and Placement in High Growth and Emerging Industry Sectors authorized under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Recovery Act).
The public workforce system has a vital role to play in our knowledge-based economy, directly contributing to our nation’s global competitiveness and economic productivity by providing lifelong learning opportunities and a broad array of services.
The economy’s downturn posed substantial economic and workforce challenges to our nation, but the workforce system is responding to these challenges by becoming more flexible and innovative in order to get workers back to work quickly and support the workforce needs of employers in the recovering economy, particularly in high demand and emerging industry sectors.
The workforce system provides critical services to a broad array of customers at all skill levels.
These services include career counseling and case management and assessments that identify transferable skills.
ETA and the workforce system are committed to continuous improvement and testing and rigorously evaluating new ideas and approaches.
Outcome Goal 1.1 – Increase workers’ incomes and narrow wage and income inequality.
Outcome Goal 1.2 – Assure skills and knowledge that prepare workers to succeed in a knowledgebased economy, including in high-growth and emerging industry sectors like “green” jobs.
Outcome Goal 1.3 – Help workers who are in low-wage jobs or out of the labor market find a path into middle class jobs.
Outcome Goal 1.4 – Help middle-class families remain in the middle class.
Outcome Goal 1.5 – Secure wages and overtime.
Increase training program participants’ acquisition of industry-recognized credentials (see Priority Goals section of this report).
Provide an innovative public workforce system that helps enable future economic growth and advancing shared prosperity for Americans.
Increase services and training for workers in need.
Provide workers with the resources necessary to increase their likelihood of obtaining middle class jobs.
Enhance programs that provide opportunities to particularly vulnerable populations – WIA Youth, Job Corps, and YouthBuild for disadvantaged youth, Indian and Native American and Migrant and Seasonal Farmworkers programs, and services for individuals with disabilities.
Improve the effectiveness of services through innovative funding mechanisms and rigorous research and evaluation.
Expand regional partnerships and collaboration.
Promote sector strategies for high-demand industry sectors, including the nation’s investment in green jobs and health sector jobs as an effort to restart the economy.
Forge meaningful partnerships with other Federal agencies.
Continue to develop a workforce system that embodies a dual customer approach – meeting the needs of both workers and employers.
The Veterans’ Employment and Training Service (VETS) serves America’s veterans and transitioning service members by preparing veterans for meaningful careers, providing employment resources and expertise, and protecting veterans’ employment rights.
VETS helps veterans and transitioning service members obtain positive employment outcomes through services provided at American Job Centers and the Transition Assistance Program (TAP) DOL Employment Workshop at military installations.
Grants are provided to State Workforce Agencies (SWA) to support staff dedicated to serving veterans, specifically those who require special assistance due to disabilities or other significant barriers to employment.
VETS coordinates with the Department of Defense to provide workshops in over 240 locations worldwide to prepare service members for transition to meaningful civilian employment.
VETS also provides funding, through the Homeless Veterans Reintegration Program (HVRP), to organizations that serve veterans with employment barriers that warrant more comprehensive services.
VETS protects the employment and reemployment rights of Veterans and members of the National Guard and Reserve forces under the provisions of the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) in order that they can serve on active duty without harm to their employment status and by assuring that Veterans who seek Federal employment obtain the preferences agencies are required to apply.
Implement the redesigned and improved TAP DOL Employment Workshops (see Priority Goals section of this report).
Support Disabled Veterans’ Outreach Program specialist and Local Veterans’ Employment Representative positions through the Jobs for Veterans State Grants, and improve the quality and effectiveness of services provided.
Evaluate the redesigned curriculum for the Transition Assistant Program (TAP) DOL Employment Workshop and the contract facilitation at all TAP locations.
Provide Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program competitive grants to operators of employment programs that specialize in outreach, supportive services and training for homeless veterans, including homeless female veterans and incarcerated veterans, to assist in their reintegration into the workforce.
Provide training to Federal staff and veterans’ service providers through the National Veterans’ Training Institute.
Collaborate with the Departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs and with state partners and Veterans’ service organizations to implement the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act and Federal Veterans’ Preference enforcement activities.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs ensures that employers doing business with the Federal Government comply with the laws and regulations requiring a fair and diverse workplace, free of discrimination and harassment.
OFCCP also ensures that federal contractors meet contractual equal employment opportunity and affirmative action requirements mandated by the Code of Federal Regulations.
Conducting compliance evaluations and complaint investigations of federal contractors’ and subcontractors’ personnel policies and procedures.
Obtaining conciliation agreements from contractors and subcontractors who are found in violation of regulatory requirements.
Monitoring the progress of those contractors and subcontractors found in violation through periodic compliance reports.
Forming linkage agreements between contractors and community organizations and job training programs to help employers identify and recruit qualified workers.
Recommending enforcement actions to the Solicitor of Labor.
Offering compliance assistance to federal contractors and subcontractors to help them understand the statutory and regulatory requirements and review process.
OFCCP contributes to Outcome Goal 3.1 – Break down barriers to fair and diverse workplaces so that every worker’s contribution is respected.
Increase focus on compensation discrimination cases through a new compensation directive and compliance officer training emphasizing finding complex systemic pay discrimination.
These cases are more resource intensive than individual cases.
Strengthen and clarify federal contractor and subcontractor requirements through regulation reform.
Focus initiatives and litigation on the most persistent and egregious violators.
Implement a stakeholder strategy that reaffirms commitments to equal employment opportunity and affirmative action by building coalitions and collaborative partnerships.
Strengthen compliance evaluations of federal contractors’ and subcontractors’ compensation personnel policies and practices.
Partner with national and community-based advocacy groups to educate workers on their equal employment opportunity rights and employer responsibilities.
Promote and quantify new job opportunities that stem from conciliation agreements.
Expand construction reviews to include long-term construction projects with a focus on improving employment opportunities for women and minorities.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration was established by the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 with the mission to assure, so far as possible, that every working man and woman in the American workplace has safe and healthful working conditions.
OSHA ensures the safety and health of America's workers by setting and enforcing workplace safety and health standards; delivering effective enforcement; providing training, outreach, and education; and encouraging continual improvement in workplace safety and health.
Through these efforts, OSHA aims to reduce the number of worker illnesses, injuries, and fatalities and contribute to the broader goals aimed at promoting economic recovery and the competitiveness of our nation's workers.
OSHA contributes to Outcome Goal 2.1 – Secure safe and healthy workplaces, particularly in high-risk industries.
Reduce worker fatalities and lost time injuries and illnesses for federal workers (see Priority Goals section of this report).
Increase OSHA’s presence in the workplace.
Protect workers in high-hazard occupations.
Strengthen enforcement capabilities, targeting the most egregious and persistent violators.
Protect worker populations that have communication-based vulnerabilities, including Spanish-speaking/non-English speaking workers and disabled workers.
Review and restructure penalties to ensure that penalties imposed are consistent with the seriousness of the violation and act as effective deterrence to violators.
Maintain a strong outreach, education, and technical assistance program.
The Wage and Hour Division is responsible for administering and enforcing a number of laws that establish the minimum standards for wages and working conditions in the United States.
These labor statutes provide basic protections for all workers and while they differ in scope, all of the statutes enforced by WHD are intended to protect and to promote the welfare of the nation’s workforce, to provide opportunities for advancement, and to ensure fair compensation for work performed.
The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) minimum wage provisions and the prevailing wage laws provide a floor for the payment of fair wages, while the FLSA overtime provisions are intended to broaden work opportunities and promote employment.
The Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act and the immigration programs establish working conditions intended both to protect the wages and the safety and health of vulnerable workers and to ensure that the labor force is not displaced by lower-paid foreign or migrant labor.
The prevailing wage programs provide protection to local middle class workers who may be disadvantaged by competition from outside labor who offer their services at wages lower than those in the locality.
The Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) was enacted to help workers balance family and work responsibilities, and the child labor provisions of the FLSA ensure the safe employment of young workers, encourage their educational endeavors, and provide a path to future employment.
Protect the most vulnerable workers in the workplace ― ensure that they are employed in compliance with wage and hour laws.
Promote sustained and corporate-wide compliance among employers ― make certain that employers, including the most persistent violators, are brought into and maintain compliance.
Foster a customer-oriented, quality-driven culture within WHD and boost customer satisfaction among workers seeking WHD services.
Issue prevailing wage determinations that are current and accurate.
In support of the DOL vision, Good Jobs for Everyone, Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA) has a single outcome goal of “improving health benefits and retirement security for all workers.”
EBSA is charged with protecting more than 141 million workers, retirees and their families which are covered by nearly 701,000 private retirement plans, 2.3 million health plans, and similar numbers of other welfare benefit plans which together hold estimated assets of $7.1 trillion.
The retirement and health care benefit security of workers, retirees, and their families are significant factors in the public’s perception of their overall financial security.
EBSA’s mission and programs are pivotal in providing benefit security to the public and increasing their confidence that their retirement, health and other benefits will be there when needed.
EBSA’s mission is carried out in a very complex and evolving economic and regulatory environment where the public’s demands, needs, and perceptions are influenced by many factors.
In order to enhance benefit security and maintain the public confidence in our private sector based benefits system, EBSA administers an integrated program of regulation; compliance assistance and education; civil and criminal enforcement; and, research and analysis.
Continue a multi-faceted enforcement program that effectively targets the most egregious and persistent violators.
Establish a strong regulatory framework supported by an aggressive regulatory agenda.
Play a role in the implementation of health reform legislation.
Provide innovative outreach and education that assists workers to protect their pension and health benefits.
Conduct a well-integrated research program based on evidence and comprehensive analysis.
MSHA protects the safety and health of the nation’s miners through enforcement of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 (Mine Act), as amended by the Mine Improvement and New Emergency Response Act of 2006 (MINER Act).
The mission of MSHA is to prevent death, disease, and injury from mining and to promote safe and healthful workplaces for the nation’s miners through the enactment and enforcement of mandatory safety and health standards, mandated inspections which require four complete inspections annually at active underground mines and two complete inspections annually at active surface mines, and miner training and compliance assistance to operators.
Strategic Goal 2: Ensure workplaces are safe and healthy.
Outcome Goal 2.1: Secure safe and healthy workplaces, particularly in high-risk industries.
Performance Goal MSHA 2.1: Prevent death, disease, and injury from mining and promote safe and healthful workplaces for the Nation’s miners.
Strategic Goal 3: Assure fair and high quality work-life environments.
Outcome Goal 3.3: Ensure worker voice in the workplace.
Performance Goal MSHA 3.3: Improve the timeliness of discrimination complaint investigations.
Department of Labor (DOL) Priority Goal: Reduce the mining fatality rate by 5 percent per year based on a rolling five-year average.
Reduce worker fatalities (see Priority Goals section of this report).
The Office of Labor-Management Standards (OLMS) administers the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959, as amended (LMRDA), and related laws.
These laws primarily establish safeguards for union democracy and union financial integrity and require public disclosure reporting by unions, union officers, union employees, employers, labor consultants and surety companies.
OLMS also administers employee protections under various Federally-sponsored transportation programs that require fair, equitable protective arrangements for transit employees when Federal funds are used to acquire, improve, or operate a transit system.
These arrangements must be approved by the Department of Labor before Federal funds may be released to grantees.
OLMS contributes to Outcome Goal 3.3 – Ensure worker voice in the workplace.
Increase the number of reports filed by employers and consultants who make agreements to persuade employees with regard to their rights to organize and bargain collectively.
Increase the percent of disclosure reports filed electronically.
Improve the timeliness in resolving complaints filed by labor union members that their union violated democratic standards for conducting union officer elections.
Increase the effectiveness of audits by focusing resources on labor unions most likely to be in violation of the law.
Improve the Internet public disclosure service and public access to information reported by unions, union officers, union employees, employers, labor consultants, and surety companies under the Act.
Reduce the number of chronically delinquent filers of Labor Organization Annual Financial Reports.
The Women’s Bureau provides collaborative leadership on policies and activities that impact 72 million women in the labor force; women now comprise close to 50 percent of the workforce.
The Women’s Bureau is the only Federal office exclusively concerned with serving and promoting the interests of women in the workforce.
The Bureau conducts research, projects, outreach and evaluations on issues of importance to working women, and provides information about women in the labor force to stakeholders and customers.
The Bureau also conducts strategic outreach to promote the implementation of policy, practice, and program changes that may lead to positive changes in women’s employment opportunities or conditions.
Areas of focus are to improve services for female veterans; narrow the wage gap and ensure fair compensation; promote employment in the clean energy and “green” industries, Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fields and other emerging, higherpaying, high-demand job sectors; and implement quality work environments through workplace flexibility.
Outcome Goal 3.1 Break down barriers to fair and diverse workplaces and narrow wage and income inequality.
Conduct research and studies on issues concerning women in the workforce.
Provide technical assistance to targeted public and private sector entities and individuals to improve working women’s employment opportunities, economic security, and working conditions.
Build collaborations and relationships with key stakeholders and provide collaborative leadership on data sharing and public awareness efforts related to gender based compensation practices to decrease occupational segregation ― one of the leading causes of income inequality.
Collaborate with other Federal agencies, workforce professionals, non-profits, and women’s organizations to increase awareness of training, employment, and entrepreneurship opportunities in emerging industries and markets including “green” and non-traditional sectors.
Address critical issues associated with women veterans so they may gain economic security for themselves and their families.
Although many American workers with disabilities are educated, trained, willing, and able to work, they remain out of the labor force at a much higher rate than their similarly qualified counterparts without disabilities.
The Office of Disability Employment Policy counters this disparity by working to increase the number and quality of employment opportunities for people with disabilities through the development, evaluation and dissemination of evidenced based policy strategies and effective practices as well as fostering their adoption and implementation within the public and private sectors.
Ultimately, ODEP’s goal is to impact the systems that influence the employment outcomes of people with disabilities.
To realize its systems change goal ODEP: undertakes research to create and validate promising policy strategies and effective practices; collaborates with Federal agencies, private and public sector employers, labor organizations, and other stakeholders to expand physical and programmatic access to One-Stop Career Centers and the workforce system in general; improve employer organizational practices and make workplaces more inclusive; and increase access to the employment supports that are crucial to every worker’s success throughout the employment process, and especially to a job seeker or worker with a disability.
ODEP contributes to Outcome Goal 3.1 – Break down barriers to fair and diverse work places so that every worker’s contribution is respected.
Validate and replicate evidence-based disability employment policy and effective practices.
Build partnerships to develop policy/strategies and to promote the adoption and implementation of disability employment policy/practice.
Collaborate broadly within DOL and with other Federal agencies and private sector organizations to comprehensively address issues and leverage limited resources Provide technical assistance regarding the adoption and implementation of disability employment policy/practice.
Emphasize inclusive planning and universal usability to leverage limited resources and ensure access to more individuals.
Reach out to public and private sector organizations to provide information and technical assistance to dispel misperceptions/broaden understanding of disability and employment issues and to improve employment practices.
The Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB) supports the President’s international agenda on labor matters, carries out international responsibilities for the Secretary of Labor, fulfills mandates from the Congress, and provides oversight and coordination of the Department’s international activities.
ILAB works to improve working conditions and labor standards for workers around the world.
Fostering fair working conditions in the global marketplace is an integral component of the Department of Labor’s strategic goal “Good jobs for everyone”.
The Department recognizes the need to ensure that global markets are governed by fair market rules that protect vulnerable people, including women and children, and provide workers a fair share of their productivity and voice in their work lives.
These objectives will contribute to achieving the Department’s goals for U.S. workers, build the foundation for a sustained recovery of the global economy and contribute to a more balanced pattern of global trade in the future.
Pursuing these objectives will once again position the U.S. as a leader and pace-setter on international labor issues and demonstrate our commitment to assist governments that have the political will to foster better livelihoods and rights for their workforces.
Decent wages and working conditions in countries with which the US trades protect the wages and working conditions of US workers from being undercut by unfair competition.
Increased purchasing power of workers overseas also creates enhanced markets for US exports and jobs.
ILAB contributes to Outcome Goal 1.6: Foster acceptable work conditions and respect for workers’ rights in the global economy to provide workers with a fair share of productivity and protect vulnerable people.
Implement new approaches to counter the root causes of child labor.
Improve the ability of workers in trading partner countries to work in good jobs, receive a fair share of their productivity, and enjoy a voice in their work lives.
Improve worker rights and livelihoods for vulnerable populations.
Improve monitoring and enforcement of trade agreements to protect workers’ rights.
Engage more extensively and substantively with other countries’ labor ministries and with international and regional organizations.
Strengthen and enhance the Department’s participation in US interagency trade and economic policy processes.
The Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs (OWCP) is comprised of four separate compensation programs which provide wage replacement, medical treatment, and vocational rehabilitation benefits and one division providing information technology support services.
The Division of Federal Employees' Compensation Act (DFEC) provides monetary wage-loss and medical compensation to civilian employees of the Federal Government injured at work, and to certain other designated groups.
The Division of Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation (DLHWC) provides similar benefits to injured private sector workers engaged in certain maritime and related employment.
The Division of Coal Mine Workers’ Compensation provides monetary and medical benefits to totally disabled miners suffering from coal mine pneumoconiosis stemming from mine employment, and monetary benefits to their dependent survivors.
The Division of Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation (DEEOIC) provides benefits to employees or survivors of employees of the Department of Energy (DOE), contractors or subcontractors with DOE, who have been diagnosed with cancer due to exposure to radiation or toxic substances.
Major workload activities in OWCP include: claims adjudication, benefit payment, disability case management, assisting in the re-employment of people with disabilities, medical bill processing, information services delivery, benefit fund management, and technical assistance to employers to ensure proper compliance with OWCP procedures and requirements including insurance/self-insurance and payment of benefits.
OWCP outcomes include earlier recovery from injury, shorter time away from work, and reduced lost production days being supported by proactive disability claims management.
OWCP uses early nurse intervention to coordinate medical treatment and provide reemployment assistance in new FECA cases.
Permanently disabled claimants receive vocational rehabilitation assistance.
OWCP provides income support and medical care by ensuring proper claims adjudication and efficient case processing, effective mediation of disputed claims, and accurate and timely payment of benefits.
Timely delivery of compensation payments also ensures that the economic position of workers with injuries will not be jeopardized by extended interruptions in income.
Timely delivery of medical services is ensured through centralized coordination and processing of requests from providers for treatment authorizations.
OWCP has improved customer access to program information through its communications systems to be more responsive to customer service needs.
Reduce lost time injuries and illnesses for federal workers (see Priority Goals section of this report).
Implement improvements in FECA’s disability claims management and return to work assistance activities as recommended in independent evaluations of the program.
Continue proper claims adjudication, effective mediation in disputed claims, efficient case processing, and accurate and timely payment of benefits.
Speed claims reporting and shorten the duration between injury and first payment of benefits by industry employers and insurance carriers in the Longshore program.
Through outreach and other educational activities, improve OWCP stakeholders’ understanding of the program and improve the quality of claims and supporting documentation filed.
Assess OWCP customer services and improve the agency’s efficiency and effectiveness.
Identify and pursue opportunities to evaluate OWCP program performance and results.
Enhance systems and develop integrated IT technology services that improve and support business processes.
Seek reform of the Federal Employees’ Compensation Act.
The federal-state UI program, authorized under the Federal Unemployment Tax act and Title III of the Social Security Act, provides temporary, partial wage replacement for unemployed workers, providing them with income support when suitable work is unavailable.
To be eligible for benefits, unemployed workers must meet eligibility requirements established by state laws that conform to federal law, including that they have worked recently, be involuntarily unemployed, and be able and available for work.
UI contributes to Outcome Goal 4.2 – Ensure income support when work is impossible or unavailable.
Partner with state agencies with a focus on bolstering broad program accountability and facilitating performance improvement nationally.
Enact new strategies to prevent, detect, and recover improper payments.
Develop a national vision on reemployment that will promote and support states’ service delivery to all jobseekers, helping reconnect unemployed workers with jobs.
Extend income support to more categories of unemployed—recent entrants to the workforce, low-wage workers, workers who are upgrading their skills, and workers with family care giving obligations.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) of the Department of Labor (DOL) is the principal Federal agency responsible for measuring labor market activity, working conditions, and price changes in the economy.
Its mission is to collect, analyze, and disseminate essential economic information to support public and private decision-making.
As an independent statistical agency, BLS serves its diverse user communities by providing products and services that are accurate, objective, relevant, timely, and accessible.
BLS serves the general public, the U.S. Congress, other Federal agencies, State and local governments, business, and labor by providing up-to-date, high-quality statistical information.
It produces some of the Nation’s most sensitive and important economic data.
In line with the Interagency Council on Statistical Policy’s (ICSP) Guidelines for Reporting Performance by Statistical Agencies, BLS measures timeliness, accuracy, relevance, dissemination, and mission achievement.
BLS also reports the full cost to produce its data products.
These criteria are common among statistical agencies because these are critical aspects of a statistical program’s performance.
BLS supports Outcome Goal 5.1 – Provide sound and impartial information on labor market activity, working conditions, and price changes in the economy for decision making, including support for the formulation of economic and social policy affecting virtually all Americans.
Recruit, train, and retain a talented and diverse group of individuals who are experts at the production and continuous improvement of BLS products and services, including employees who will support those functions, and who are well prepared to represent the agency and become its future leaders.
The Department of Labor has identified four performance goals that will be a particular focus through FY 2013.
These goals are a subset of those used to regularly monitor and report performance.
Detailed information on measures and progress for these goals is available at Performance.gov.
This report includes measure data for these goals, as well, but the information is organized by contributing agencies’ performance goals under the DOL Strategic Plan structure.
At the end of each goal statement is an italicized reference to the relevant goal numbers in this document.
Reduce worker fatalities.
By September 30, 2013, reduce worker fatalities resulting from common causes by two percent in Occupational Safety and Health Administration-covered workplaces, and worker fatality rates in mining by five percent per year based on a rolling five-year average.
Reduce time lost to injury or illness for federal workers.
Create a model safety and return-to-work program by reducing Federal agency injury rates by at least one percent per year and increasing the share of Federal employees who return to work by two percent per year after sustaining a workplace injury or illness by September 30, 2013.
Improve opportunities for America’s workers to succeed in a knowledge-based economy through industry-recognized credentials.
By September 30, 2013, increase the percent of training program exiters who earn industry-recognized credentials by 10 percent.
Redesign the Transition Assistance Program (TAP) to better support veterans.
By the end of FY 2013, the Transition Assistance Program (TAP), with redesigned and improved curriculum, will be fully implemented at all 188 domestic and 50 international sites.
Per the GPRA Modernization Act requirement to address Cross-Agency Priority Goals in the agency strategic plan, the annual performance plan, and the annual performance report please refer to www.Performance.gov for the agency’s contributions to those goals and progress, where applicable.
The Department of Labor currently contributes to the following CAP Goals: Job Training and Veteran Career Readiness.
Among the three employment measures utilized by ETA, the six- month average earnings measure has been the least impacted by the economic downturn.
Although performance targets for average earnings were reached by all seven programs in FY 2012/PY 2011, the six month average earnings targets for Adult, DW, INAP, and CSEOA were lower than the previous year’s results.
These lower results for these programs could be partially explained by recent data from the National Employment Law Project (2012), which showed low wage jobs have seen the highest recovery rate (58 percent of the recovery growth) growing 2.7 times as fast as middle and higher wage occupations.
The workforce system continues to face significant challenges in helping workers get good jobs, earn good wages, and retain their jobs.
As the economy recovers and job growth returns, the reintegration of millions of unemployed and underemployed workers into jobs that pay familysustaining wages is essential for spreading the benefits of the recovery more broadly.
ETA programs support training in emerging industry sectors (including green jobs) to help workers become more competitive and equip them with the credentials and skills needed to compete in the global labor market.
In FY 2012, ETA provided technical assistance (TA) to the workforce system to improve credential attainment for its customers.
In FY 2013, ETA will continue to emphasize credential attainment to increase individual earning potential.
The PY 2011-2014 targets are based on a methodology developed by DOL for setting national performance targets using regression analysis.
This econometric model uses program results from the prior year, current labor market conditions and individual characteristics to correct for the effects of the business cycle and labor market conditions on the outcomes of employment and training programs, producing targets that objectively reflect the impact of the economic environment on program performance.
ETA expects to update PY 2013 and PY 2014 targets based on more recent program results by April 30, 2013.
For more detailed information on Regression Adjustment Model for Workforce System Program Performance Targets, see U.S. Department of Labor Strategic Plan Fiscal Years 2011-2016 pg.
111-112, available at: http://www.dol.gov/_sec/stratplan/StrategicPlan.pdf.
In FY 2013, the Office of Apprenticeship is planning to issue a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) to update regulations for equal employment opportunity (EEO) in apprenticeship and training, which have not been revised since 1978.
This second phase of regulatory updates will ensure that the Registered Apprenticeship’s EEO regulations are consistent and in alignment with both the current state of EEO law and the final rule governing labor standards for registration of apprenticeship programs published in October 2008.
Through these regulatory updates, ETA will seek to address barriers to fair and diverse work places so that all qualified individuals participating in or seeking entrance to the nation’s labor market have access to training and employment through Registered Apprenticeship.
VETS assesses the performance of the American Job Center system on behalf of veterans served by the Jobs for Veterans State Grants by applying three common measures: the entered employment rate, the employment retention rate, and the six month average earnings of participants.
The annual targets for all veterans were reached for all three performance measures.
The entered employment rate increased by three percentage points, to 51 percent, from the previous year’s result of 48 percent.
The employment retention rate also showed continued improvement from the previous year, increasing from 77 percent to 79 percent.
Finally, the six months average earnings levels improved by more than $500 from the previous year, increasing from $15,619 to $16,129.
Average earnings is the only measure to exceed pre-recession levels, with employment entry and retention still steadily recovering.
VETS has encouraged front-line service delivery staff to respond in a variety of ways to the continuing constraints imposed by economic conditions.
First, veteran jobseekers are encouraged to maintain their active status in the workforce system for longer periods while they continue to seek employment.
Second, VETS has encouraged a refocusing of the responsibilities of both Disabled Veteran Outreach Program (DVOP) specialists and Local Veterans’ Employment Representative (LVER) staff.
DVOP specialists have been encouraged to place greater emphasis on the delivery of intensive services (e.g., counseling, assessment, career guidance and referral to training), which better prepare veteran jobseekers to compete for scarce job openings.
LVER staff members have been encouraged to place greater emphasis on employer outreach, which is intended to expand the number of job openings available with employers who are favorably inclined to hire veterans.
VETS increased the performance targets for this goa for PY 2012 by assuming a positive impact of these strategies and by incrementally improving economic conditions.
VETS also administers the Transition Assistance Program (TAP) DOL Employment Workshop for members of the Armed Forces, and their spouses, who are within 21 months of separation or within 24 months of retirement.
Section 221 of the VOW Act requires participation in the TAP DOL Employment Workshop mandatory for all transitioning service members, with specific exemptions.
This includes, for the first time, mandatory participation of National Guard and Reserve Component members.
VETS coordinates with the Department of Defense (DoD) to project demand for TAP DOL Employment Workshop and has consistently met this demand.
In FY 2013, DoD anticipates an increase in the demand given the drawdown of operations in Iraq and Afghanistan.
DOL maintains close coordination with DoD to ensure demand will be met.
In FY 2010, the Wage and Hour Division (WHD) reengineered its Davis-Bacon wage survey process to begin improving the timeliness of its wage determination rates.
Through the use of this new methodology, WHD was able to increase the number of highway industry wage rates that were three years old or less.
The percentage of building and highway industry rates that are three years old or less were both above 80 percent at the end of FY 2012.
Heavy industry rates lag behind at 67 percent.
In FY 2012, WHD published the results of 18 new wage surveys reducing the average age of building, heavy, and highway industry wage rates to less than 40 months.
Building and highway industry rates are both below 30 months, with heavy industry rates continuing to lag behind in this measure.
Independent evaluations completed in FY 2012 are summarized below.
Through investments in youth education and training programs under the WIA Youth formula program, Job Corps, and YouthBuild grants, the Department worked to ensure that workers get the skills and knowledge needed to prepare them to succeed in a knowledge-based economy, including in high-growth and emerging industry sectors like “green” jobs.
The Job Corps, WIA Youth, and YouthBuild programs exceeded their degree or certificate attainment targets; the Job Corps and WIA Youth programs also met the targets for the placement in employment, education, or training measure.
The PY 2011-2014 targets are based on a methodology developed by DOL for setting national performance targets using regression analysis.
This econometric model uses program results from the prior year, current labor market conditions and individual characteristics to correct for the effects of the business cycle and labor market conditions on the outcomes of employment and training programs, producing targets that objectively reflect the impact of the economic environment on program performance.
ETA expects to update PY 2013 and PY 2014 targets based on more recent program results by Apri 30, 2013.
For more detailed information on Regression Adjustment Model for Workforce System Program Performance Targets, see U.S. Department of Labor Strategic Plan Fiscal Years 2011-2016 pg.
111-112, available at: http://www.dol.gov/_sec/stratplan/StrategicPlan.pdf.
ETA’s Agency Priority Goal also takes an integrated approach across several programs (WIA Adult, WIA Dislocated Workers, WIA Youth, NEG, TAA, Registered Apprenticeship, Job Corps, YouthBuild, High Growth JTI, ARRA High Growth and Emerging Industries, and Green Jobs Innovation Fund) to ensure that program participants have the opportunity to earn industry-recognized credentials that can lead to good jobs.
Job Corps’ first measure includes graduates and former enrollees, but not “uncommitted” – which are those students in the program for less than 60 days or who exit because of the zero tolerance policy.
Due to the long-term nature of YouthBuild program, PY results are program-to-date (cumulative since PY 2008).
Independent evaluations completed in FY 2012 are summarized below.
Through various ETA efforts and improving overall economic conditions, all six programs were able to meet their respective entered employment goals in PY 2011/FY 2012.
While training cannot create jobs, the Department will continue to stress the need to train individuals for jobs and occupations in demand.
For example, the WIA Adults experienced a 15.6 percentage point difference when looking at program exiters who received training services and those who did not; WIA Dislocated Workers experienced 23.6 percentage point difference.
Throughout the year, the program worked to accurately determine which sectors and career opportunities were gaining strength; the vast majority of trainings issued align with BLS high-growth occupations and/or the Occupational Information Network’s (O*Net) “Bright Outlook” occupations list.
Critical investments were also made to further understand promising reemployment approaches such as on-the-job training and career pathways.
Information on these and other effective strategies for reemployment will be shared with the workforce system in the coming year.
Looking forward, determining how to invest precious training funds will remain a top priority for the program in the coming year and throughout the economic recovery.
In response to the Veterans Opportunity to Work (VOW) to Hire Heroes Act of 2011, DOL renewed its commitment to lower veterans’ unemployment and ensure that service members leave the military career-ready.
In the coming program year, ETA will continue to partner with VETS on several key activities to provide the workforce system with guidance on services available to veterans, including Priority of Service.
ETA will also remain focused on assisting participants with entry to career pathways that lead to middle-class jobs and strengthening strategic partnerships with businesses and the education community.
Workforce solutions will continue to be developed within the context of state and regional economies.
DOL will continue to target the placement of workers in high-demand sectors and occupations, and to emphasize occupational training and adult education – especially in green and health care occupations.
Apprenticeships are tied to employment and, therefore, have declined in number with the nation’s widespread job losses over the past few years – especially since a large majority of apprentices are in the construction and manufacturing industries, both of which have been severely affected by the recession.
Reemployment (in suitable jobs) is one of the underlying purposes of the UI program.
Although the UI program does not provide reemployment services directly, many of its payment eligibility provisions, such as work search and Employment Service registration requirements are designed to promote reemployment.
In the year ending June 30,2012 - the latest data available - 62.6 percent of UI claimants were reemployed in the calendar quarter following the quarter in which they received their first UI payment.
This performance is on pace to exceed the FY 2012 target of 56.4 percent, and represents an increase of .6 percentage points from the FY 2011 level.
Notes: UI Data are for claimants who received their first payments between April 2010 and March 2011, who were reemployed between July 2010 and June 2011.The 7-point increase in performance between FY 2011 and 2012 is due to the rise in Extended Benefits (EB) payments.
EB payments rose from $8.0 billion in 2010 to $11.9 billion in 2011 and model results suggest that most of the increase from FY 2011 to FY 2012 resulted from the increase in EB overpayments.
Independent evaluations completed in FY 2012 are summarized below.
It is the Department’s goal to help keep middle-class families in the middle-class.
Over 80 percent of program exiters were still employed nine months after completing services and gaining employment through the WIA Dislocated Worker program, NEGs, and TAA.
During the past year, the Department developed and disseminated career and workforce information to the workforce development system, partner agencies and the public through national electronic tools.
ETA believes that improved workforce information and job assessment tools are critical in creating a match between jobseekers and those employers are willing to hire.
ETA also developed and disseminated O*NET occupational competency profiles, coordinated workforce information grants to states, and provided technical assistance on the analysis and strategic use of labor market information.
At the end of FY 2011, OTAA reported an average processing time (APT) of 61 days; at the end of FY 2012, the Q4 APT was 50 days, which represents an 11-day improvement over the previous year.
OTAA attributes its success in meeting the FY 2012 annual target to: (1) the speed and focus that remaining staff adopted in processing petitions; (2) the implementation of modified standard operating procedures (SOPs); (3) increased investigator training, (4) a decline in petition filings throughout the year, and (5) and the establishment of a special team to focus strictly on reducing current overdue petitions.
In FY 2012, VETS nearly reached its target of 90 percent of Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) investigations completed within 90 days, by ending the year at 89 percent.
The percent of USERRA referrals completed within 60 days exceeded the target of 70 percent by thirteen percentage points (83 percent).
VETS strives to improve its USERRA investigative process.
FY 2012 was a baseline year for implementing a quality measure to evaluate the closed investigation cases.
It resulted in 83 percent of closed investigations meeting the agency’s quality standard.
Independent evaluations completed in FY 2012 are summarized below.
In FY 2012, WHD conducted a nationwide directed enforcement initiative to establish a baseline compliance rate for the residential construction and hotel industries.
In FY 2013, WHD is finalizing these results while implementing lessons learned from a FY 2010 initiative on the janitorial industry.
These initiatives, along with the complaint investigations and local directed initiatives in priority industries, support WHD’s mission to protect vulnerable workers in low wage industries including agriculture.
The complaint investigations allow WHD to fulfill its customer service obligations and determine emerging problems.
The directed enforcement program allows WHD to invest resources in industries likely to have violations where there are vulnerable workers who are not likely to file complaints.
Foreign labor certification programs have as a primary responsibility the review of employer-filed applications requesting the Secretary of Labor’s certification in order to proceed with the employment-based immigration process.
The fundamental determination, by statute, which must be made prior to the granting of labor certification, concerns whether the hiring of a foreign worker will adversely impact the wages and working conditions of U.S. workers, and that no qualified U.S. workers are willing or available to fill a given vacancy.
The Secretary has delegated the responsibilities for the administration of permanent and temporary labor certification programs to the Employment and Training Administration’s (ETA) Office of Foreign Labor Certification (OFLC).
Statutes, regulations, and administrative requirements establish mandatory timeframes within which the OFLC must issue a final determination or take certain actions on employer-filed applications for permanent or temporary labor certification.
In FY 2012, for the permanent labor certification program (PERM), 77 percent of permanent labor certification program applications were resolved within six months of the initial filing date (PERM).
When compared to FY 2010, processing times improved substantially due, in large measure, to the continued implementation of a management plan that resulted in further reductions of the backlog of pending permanent cases by 40 percent.
OFLC has placed a high priority on integrity, so it will audit more of its cases.
As a result of the detailed and time-intensive audit process, OFLC maintains a target of 68 percent for its PERM measure.
Independent evaluations completed in FY 2012 are summarized below.
Relevance: The Office of Inspector General (OIG) audited the Employment and Training Administration’s (ETA) role in the H-2B visa program.
The H-2B non-immigrant program permits employers to hire foreign workers to enter the U.S. to perform temporary non-agricultural services or labor on a one-time, seasonal, peak load, or intermittent basis.
This audit expanded the work OIG completed in a previous report issued September 30, 2011.
During FY 2012, ILAB reported on the nine outcome measures established in FY 2011.
ILAB met or exceeded its targets for four outcome measures this year, and exceeded its FY 2011 performance on another three.
ILAB looks forward to data collected in FY 2013, which will enable ILAB to better examine trends.
In FY 2012, ILAB met or slightly exceeded both outcome goals related to policy positions adopted by other United States Government (USG) agencies and international organizations.
ILAB’s effectiveness in advancing policies to promote employment and protect workers’ rights is reflected in the adoption of 24 policy positions by the USG that reflect DOL priorities.
For example, for only the second time under a Free Trade Agreement, DOL successfully built inter-agency consensus to request Consultations under the Labor Chapter of the US- Bahrain Free Trade Agreement, and issued its recommendation for the request in its public report, published on December 20, 2012.
In addition, DOL built inter-agency consensus to accept submissions under the Labor Chapter of the Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR) related to alleged labor violations in Honduras and the Dominican Republic.
As a result of ILAB’s activities, 36 policy positions that reflect USG international labor interests and priorities were adopted by international fora and countries.
For example, ILAB succeeded in promoting international labor standards in Colombia, where the Colombian Labor Ministry assessed fines up to $1,000,000 on companies in 2012.
ILAB’s engagement was critical in the Korean Government’s drafting of new labor legislation to eliminate discrimination against “fixed term/part-time/dispatched workers” in 2012.
ILAB provided substantial leadership and guidance to the International Labor Organization’s (ILO) Better Work program to promote improvements in the methodology for assessment and advising on factory conditions, particularly on issues that are difficult to monitor and remediate, such as sexual harassment, forced labor and denial of freedom of association.
In FY 2012, ILAB funded model programs to address worker rights through technical assistance in 23 countries with which the United States has trade preference programs.
ILAB supported the Todos y Todas Trabajamos project in five Central American and Caribbean countries which enabled 37,412 workers to better exercise their rights and/or experience improved working conditions.
Under this program, these workers were able to resolve 3,514 cases in conciliation before the Ministries of Labor or labor courts.
In its final evaluation, the project was found to have helped workers reclaim over $4.9 million in benefits that they were due since it the centers started operating in 2008, with over $1 million recouped in 2012.
Over the year, ILAB’s efforts helped 84,089 workers worldwide better exercise their rights or experience better working conditions.
ILAB provided support to improve business compliance and technical capacity of governments, and to protect worker rights, in 8 partner countries, a reduction from 18 in the previous year.
This reflects the Bureau’s strategic decision to reduce the total number of countries with which ILAB engages in policy and technical cooperation, while significantly increasing the intensity and depth of those engagements.
In FY 2012, ILAB awarded approximately $6.5 million in grants to promote workers’ rights, with a more robust emphasis on strengthening trade unions and worker organizations in trade partner countries.
New projects in FY 2012 included building capacity of worker organizations in Colombia, Peru and Haiti, and building capacity of labor inspectorates in Colombia and Haiti.
ILAB also continued its oversight of previously funded Better Work projects in Bangladesh, Cambodia, Haiti, Indonesia, Nicaragua and Vietnam.
Better Work projects monitor conditions in export factories, publish the results in a transparent manner and assist suppliers to comply with labor standards that many buyers and customers.
Under the ILAB-funded Nicaragua Better Work program, more than 28,000 workers have experienced improved livelihoods as a result of ILAB interventions.
In FY 2012, ILAB continued to initiate new projects, and progressed with implementation of those initiated in FY 2011, of innovative child labor elimination programs to provide livelihood services to vulnerable households.
In FY 2012 ILAB also continued to build upon recent efforts to build global capacity to combat child labor.
These new directions added to the education and training services that USDOL-funded projects have long provided to children.
Grantees in 40 countries provided services to combat child labor.
This increased capacity results from actions such as adopting new laws and policies on child labor, implementing new social programs to address the issue, and increasing inspection and enforcement capabilities.
ILAB met or exceeded two of its three outcome goals relating to activities performed by DOL-funded international child labor elimination projects.
Through these projects, ILAB grantees provided education or vocational services to 100,436 children engaged in or at high risk of entering child labor (exceeding its target of 81,181 by 24 percent).
Project activities also led to increased capacity to address child labor in 31 countries, exceeding ILAB’s target by over 50 percent.
Instances of increased capacity included outcomes such as passage of new child labor legislation, training of labor inspectors and other law enforcement officials, and adoption of national action plans to eliminate child labor.
Results from project activities aimed at improving household livelihoods fell short of the target, with projects providing livelihood services to 4,182 households, or – 33 percent below the target of 6,154.
A few projects encountered challenges in meeting targets due to general implementation delays or issues in identifying beneficiaries and matching them with appropriate livelihood services.
Implementation delays were most commonly encountered in projects operating in Africa, particularly in countries experiencing political instability or security issues.
The shortfall in targets for particular projects reflects the uncertain institutional and political environments in which ILAB projects operate, rendering ILAB targets vulnerable to often unpredictable external factors and constraints.
With FY 2012 funding, ILAB awarded almost $60 million in grants to address child labor in countries including Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Ecuador, Indonesia, Liberia, Panama, and Tanzania.
ILAB also funded a project to support efforts by the governments of Brazil and Peru to combat forced labor, including forced child labor.
ILAB also continued its detailed oversight of the substantial portfolio of ongoing ILAB-funded child labor elimination projects.
In FY 2014, ILAB will support the Presidential and Departmental priorities of ensuring protection of worker’s rights internationally through: enforcement of labor commitments under U.S. Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) and Trade Preference Programs, technical assistance programs that monitor and inspect factory conditions in trading partner countries, and through enforcement of international labor standards, with an emphasis on advocacy and technical assistance to address the problem of child labor, as well as using global fora such as the G20 Labor Ministers’ process and the International Labor Organization (ILO) to advance policies aimed at job creation.
In a global labor market, US workers’ livelihoods and interests can too easily be undercut by unfair labor competition.
For this reason, monitoring workers’ rights and livelihoods globally, and enforcing international labor standards and labor provisions of US free trade agreements, is vital.
ILAB’s key target countries in FY 2014 will include as many as feasible of the following: 15 developing countries with which the USG has existing FTAs (Dominican Republic, Central American countries, Colombia, Peru, Panama, Chile, Mexico, Bahrain, Oman, Morocco, and Jordan); other important trade partner countries such as South Korea; selected new negotiating partners such as Vietnam and Malaysia; the member states of the European Union; high priority trade preference countries where labor rights and conditions are a significant concern and the US possesses significant policy tools for engagement such as Haiti, Bangladesh and the Philippines; and countries of US foreign policy interest with significant labor issues and opportunities for engagement present themselves such as Egypt, India, Brazil, China, Burma and Russia.
There were no relevant independent evaluations completed in FY 2012.
In FY 2012, OSHA reached all four targets for DOL Priority Goals to reduce worker fatalities and to reduce lost time injuries and illnesses for federal workers.
For the other four (hazard abatement) measures, methodology has changed since last year; results based on the old method are provided in the Measures Discontinued section.
OSHA is working with the data to develop FY 2014 targets.
In FY 2013, OSHA will focus on continuing to use enforcement, regulation, compliance assistance, and outreach to meet the agency’s priorities of reducing workplace injuries, illnesses, and fatalities.
It is physically impossible for OSHA compliance officers to inspect every workplace every year.
OSHA will therefore focus on prioritizing those issues and areas with the greatest impact from resources invested.
In the enforcement arena, OSHA will concentrate on the identification, creation, and implementation of inspection-emphasis programs that address the most debilitating injuries and the most high-hazard workplaces.
New Local and National Emphasis Programs (LEPs and NEPs) that addressed significant occupational safety or health risk to workers in the construction industry were a feature of OSHA activities in FY2012 and will continue to be developed in FY2013.
Another example was a noise NEP developed after reviewing best practices for noise reduction in the workplace, personal protective equipment, hearing conservation programs, and engineering controls feedback gathered during the Noise Stakeholder Meeting.
New programs dealing with isocyanates and nursing/residential care facilities are examples of programs begun in FY2012 and being prepared for roll-out in FY2013.
Other areas identified from complaints, incidents, and professional journals will serve as a basis for new initiatives in FY2013.
NEPs historically have been critical in supporting the Secretary’s goal of securing safe and healthy workplaces and in reducing fatalities associated with the leading causes of death.
OSHA uses its Site Specific Targeting (SST) program to target high-hazard workplaces for unannounced inspections, and its Severe Violators Enforcement Program (SVEP) to focus its enforcement efforts on significant hazards and violations.
By concentrating on uncovering systemic problems, whether in multiple worksites owned by the same employer or across entire industries, OSHA will be able to magnify its effectiveness.
Rooting out systemic problems can eventually make a huge difference in the lives of tens of thousands of workers.
OSHA will face greater than normal challenges in FY2013 as it balances its obligations to the safety and health of the working public with the limitations imposed on it due to budgetary issues.
Strategic leveraging of resources through the careful apportioning of personnel and the targeting of employers and industries where workers are in the most danger of getting hurt, sick or killed by occupational hazards will be crucial to accomplishing OSHA’s mission and continuing to reach performance indicator targets.
In FY 2012, MSHA achieved its DOL Priority Goal to reduce mining fatalities.
The five-year rolling average of fatal injuries per 200,000 hours worked fell by eight percent, exceeding the target of 5 percent.
Mining fatality and injury rates fell to an all-time low in 2011.
The fatal injury rate for mining as a whole was 0.0114 per 200,000 hours worked, and the all-injury rate was 2.73 per 200,000 hours worked, down from 0.0234 and 2.81, respectively, in 2010.
A preliminary review of data for FY 2012 indicates that final figures for FY 2012 will show a continuing downward trend in both fatal and non-fatal injuries in mining.
In the year ahead, MSHA will continue to develop and implement new ways to make enforcement more effective, less predictable, and more strategic, with the goal of continuing this positive trend.
In 2012, 35 miners died in workrelated accidents at the nation's mines.
There were 19 coal mining and 16 metal/nonmetal mining fatalities last year – the lowest number of mining deaths since statistics were first recorded in 1910.
Of the 35 fatalities reported, 4 occurred at surface coal mines, 12 at surface metal/nonmetal mines, 15 at underground coal mines and 4 at underground metal/nonmetal mines.
Mining deaths are preventable.
In order to prevent mine deaths, operators must have in place effective safety and health management programs that are constantly evaluated, find-and-fix programs to identify and eliminate mine hazards, and training for all mining personnel.
These efforts will continue in FY 2013.
In FY 2012, MSHA expanded the Rules to Live By initiatives by implementing the ‘Rules to Live By III – Common Mining Deaths,’ which highlights eight coal and six metal and nonmetal standards cited as a result of at least five mining accidents and resulting in at least five fatalities during the 10-year period from January 1, 2001, to December 31, 2010.
An analysis of accident reports and enforcement data for underground coal mines led MSHA to determine that the same types of violations of health or safety standards are found by MSHA inspectors in underground coal mines every year, and that these violations present some of the most unsafe conditions for coal miners.
These repeated violations expose miners to unnecessary safety and health risks that should be found and corrected by mine operators.
In April 2012, MSHA published a final rule to address examinations of work areas in underground coal mines.
Section 303(d) of the Mine Act requires operators to conduct examinations for violations of mandatory health or safety standard in areas where miners work or travel.
The rule will increase the identification and correction of unsafe conditions in mines earlier, removing many of the conditions that could lead to danger, and improve protection for miners in underground coal mines.
MSHA’s potential pattern of violations (PPOV) process focused on chronic violators that have failed to improve compliance in response to increased inspections and other enforcement actions.
In FY 2012, MSHA published a proposed rule to revise the existing regulation for POV.
MSHA determined that the existing regulation did not adequately achieve the intent of the Mine Act, and that the POV provision should be used to address operators who have demonstrated a disregard for the safety and health of miners.
The new rule will simplify the existing POV criteria, improve consistency in applying the POV criteria, and more adequately achieve the statutory intent.
It would also encourage chronic violators to comply with the Mine Act and MSHA’s safety and health standards.
MSHA met its FY 2012 target to survey 100 percent of coal mines for noise.
MSHA continued to work with National Institute for Occupation Safety and Health (NIOSH) to require the implementation of proven noise controls in areas where the Agency determined that miners were exposed to excessive noise concentrations.
MSHA met its FY 2012 target to survey 100 percent of coal mines for respirable dust each quarter.
The average concentration of dust in underground coal mines fell to all-time low in FY 2011 at 0.73; the lowest ever recorded in the history of dust sampling.
MSHA continued its emphasis through the following: required mine operators to implement dust control parameters proven to be effective in controlling respirable dust; enhanced enforcement with emphasis on operator compliance with the approved dust control parameters at targeted mines by MSHA’s Special Dust Emphasis teams and by individual districts; trained enforcement personnel and meetings with mine operators on lessons learned from the special inspections conducted by the national Special Dust Emphasis Teams to stress the importance of maintaining dust control parameters on a daily basis, and worked with NIOSH to jointly evaluate the use of supplemental dust scrubbers as a means of respirable dust control in various mining systems.
MSHA met its FY 2012 target to increase the percent of Metal and Nonmetal mines conducting their sampling.
For FY 2012, our goal was to demonstrate that 34 percent of MNM mine operators are conducting their own surveys/samples for airborne contaminants (focusing on silica dust) and noise.
We know that effective surveys and sampling focus attention on the need to reduce exposures to noise and dust, as well as other air contaminants.
To demonstrate this, MSHA required the MNM Districts to conduct health enforcement at 20 percent of their mines in each of the next five years.
The assumption is that 85 percent of those mines (34 percent of all mines) will be doing their own surveying.
Over the five-year period beginning in FY 2011, we expect Districts to conduct noise and dust sampling at an additional 20 percent of their mines annually.
Over each of the next three years, we will move steadily toward a five-year goal of 85 percent of MNM mine operators that will be conducting their own surveys.
Districts are already conducting noise surveys and compliance with sampling requirements under the noise standard will be easy to determine.
The implementation of the enhanced enforcement initiative will facilitate assessing survey requirements for dust with respect to 30 CFR 56/57.5002 - the metal and nonmetal regulations pertaining to exposure monitoring.
At the end of FY 2012, MSHA collected data from each District and calculated the overall statistic to arrive at the annual result.
Based on the quantitative analysis, MSHA determined that 48 percent of mines are conducting their own sampling, thereby exceeding the annual target by 41 percent.
MSHA met its FY 2012 target to increase the percent of Metal and Nonmetal mines receiving comprehensive noise inspections.
Twenty-one percent of the metal and nonmetal mines inspected during the second half of the fiscal year included monitoring for noise overexposure, more than double the fourth quarter of 2011 target.
In FY 2012, MSHA sampled 31 percent of MNM mines for noise, thereby exceeding the annual target by 55 percent.
MSHA is currently updating policies and procedures and developing inspector refresher training.
MSHA is also planning a stakeholder meeting to discuss noise hazards in MNM mines as well as MSHA expectations with respect to compliance with the noise standard.
MSHA has analyzed inspection data from 2007 to present and will provide information to the Districts to facilitate their planning for inspections.
This information includes noise distribution by mine, by equipment/task, and by commodity.
MSHA is also collecting and analyzing information regarding hearing loss reported under Part 50 reporting requirements.
Independent evaluations completed in FY 2012 are summarized below.
In FY 2012 OFCCP continued its commitment to an aggressive posture of Active Case Enforcement that supports the agency’s three main strategies of effective enforcement, outreach to workers, and regulatory reform.
To capture activities in support of these strategies, OFCCP increased the number of Operating Plan performance measures from six in FY 2011 to 19 in FY 2012 and collected data on additional measures to be reported in FY 2013.
OFCCP initiated a strategic approach to balancing quantity and quality in FY 2012, and results show that the agency is working towards finding this balance.
OFCCP initiated its comprehensive strategy in FY 2011 by laying the foundation for embedding sustainable organizational change through the initiation of comprehensive regulatory reform, expanded scope of enforcement, unprecedented outreach to workers and vulnerable populations, redesign of quality assurance monitoring, on-boarding and training of hundreds of new compliance officers, and structural reorganization across the agency at many levels.
Enforcement – The FY 2012 enforcement targets were set at levels that would enable compliance officers to balance quantity and quality by maintaining an aggressive audit posture while enforcing disciplined case management that reduces the number of aged cases, resulting in fewer case closures with deficiencies and promoting effective enforcement through case triaging.
Balancing quantity and quality was a major operational shift and cultural change for the organization that can only be fully realized over time.
Outreach/Education – As emphasized in FY 2011, Regions are shifting outreach efforts and resources to target community-based organizations that reach vulnerable workers most at risk of discrimination.
Again, in FY 2012, OFCCP significantly changed how outreach is conducted and tasked the Regional offices with developing regional outreach strategic plans and assessments of relationships with worker-focused community-based organizations.
OFCCP also will evaluate event quality moving forward and modify outreach efforts accordingly.
Regulatory Agenda – OFCCP continues to actively pursue its regulatory agenda and made significant progress during FY 2012.
During this FY the agency published the Section 503 Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM), drafted a Final Rule for Vietnam Era Veterans’ Readjustment Assistance Act (VEVRAA), and submitted the Construction NPRM for OMB’s review before it is formally submitted to OIRA.
Additionally, OFCCP’s final rescission of the Interpretative Standards and the Voluntary Guidelines entered Departmental clearance, and the NPRM for the compensation data collection tool is expected to enter Departmental clearance this FY.
The regulatory “look back” of OFCCP’s gender discrimination guidelines is concluded, and an NPRM for gender discrimination also should enter Departmental clearance later in the fiscal year.
Finally, the agency’s rulemaking will be complemented by new directives, and the revision and rescission of obsolete directives.
Sources: OFEIS system data.
In FY 2012, the Women’s Bureau (Bureau) published three outreach tools: A Guide to Women’s Equal Pay Rights, An Employer’s Guide to Equal Pay, and a series of fact sheets developed with the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
The Bureau worked with more than 141 collaborators across the country to conduct outreach, provide public education and disseminate its resources.
The Bureau also developed an online curriculum to accompany its publication Trauma-Informed Care for Women Veterans Experiencing Homelessness: A Guide for Service Providers.
Both tools were used to provide technical assistance to more than 355 collaborators including workforce development professionals, DOL sister agencies, social service providers, and faith-based and other neighborhood partnership organizations.
In addition, the Bureau an online curriculum to accompany its publication Why Green Is your Color: A Woman’s Guide to a Sustainable Career.
The Bureau provided technical assistance to 335 collaborating organizations.
Both tools were used with workforce development professionals, community colleges, and women’s organizations to provide information on the range of green jobs, education and job training opportunities.
The Bureau, in collaboration with the Office of the Chief Evaluator, commissioned a study to be done on the Workforce Investment Act, (WIA) program.
Lastly, the Bureau worked with more than 80 collaborators including, employers, colleges and universities, advocacy organizations, and DOL agencies to expand knowledge and promote workplace policies and programs.
Through investments in its Technical Assistance Centers and projects that develop and evaluate promising strategies and practices, ODEP seeks to change the systems that impact the employment of people with disabilities.
To this end, ODEP implemented initiatives which increased the capacity of states to implement Employment First; provided information and training to change the perceptions of employers regarding hiring people with disabilities; and, in partnership with the Employment and Training Administration, the Disability Employment Initiative implements strategies designed to increase access to and use of American Job Center services by all customers, including those with disabilities.
ODEP exceeded each of its three performance targets for FY 2012.
There were no relevant independent evaluations completed in FY 2012.
In FY 2012, WHD resolved 76.45 percent of its FMLA investigations within the fiscal year.
Timely resolution of FMLA complaints is particularly critical for those complainants that have been terminated from their job or are at risk of termination or retaliation.
In FY 2012, WHD reengineered its FMLA enforcement policies to ensure a more comprehensive approach to compliance, guided by the results of the FY 2011 FMLA customer service survey.
WHD continued its work with the Chief Evaluation Officer on the ongoing survey of FMLA leave needs and usage, the results of which wil help WHD better assess its regulatory priorities and establish measures for determining compliance with the law.
WHD also proposed new FMLA regulations to implement changes in the statute related to military leave and flight attendants.
In FY 2013, WHD is implementing an enforcement strategy that will expand WHD’s responses to FMLA complaints including more on-site investigations and policy reviews.
These efforts will be balanced against timely resolution of complaints.
There were no relevant independent evaluations completed in FY 2012.
In FY 2008, OLMS established baselines for its three priority measures: the elapsed number of days to resolve union officer election complaints, the percent of electronically filed reports, and the percent of targeted audits that result in criminal cases.
These measures and their targets were established to promote OLMS effectiveness and efficiency, and to increase union financial integrity, democracy, and labor-management transparency.
These are major tenets of the Department’s goal to Ensure Worker Voice in the Workplace.
The increased complexity of union financial transactions continues to be a major challenge.
By identifying anomalies in union financial reports and using other targeting measures, OLMS strives to more effectively identify unions where criminal activity may be present.
OLMS has become more successful in this area, exceeding its financial integrity performance goal for three consecutive years – culminating with a “fallout” rate of 13.81 percent in FY 2012.
Although this result was a small decrease from the FY 2011 result of 14.80 percent, OLMS still exceeded the annual target of 13.75 percent.
Fallouts occur when OLMS performs compliance audits of unions and discover possible criminal activity that results in the opening of a criminal investigation.
As a means to continue this improvement, OLMS established a work group that identified targeting methods and “red flags” that may indicate criminal activity.
By instituting risk-based audit targeting models, fewer audits can be undertaken while maintaining a level number of criminal cases (and also increasing the percentage of audits that result in the opening of a criminal case).
OLMS has invested in new technology to facilitate the electronic filing of union financial reports.
During FY 2010, OLMS implemented a new, webbased system for the electronic filing of Form LM-2 union annual reports, similar to the systems OLMS previously implemented for its Form LM-3 and LM-4 union filers.
In FY 2012, the availability of electronic Forms LM-2, LM-3, and LM-4 coupled with outreach efforts coordinated through OLMS’ district offices, resulted in OLMS exceeding its annual goal – as 37.8 percent of all files were returned electronically.
In January 2013, OLMS made the Form LM-30 available as an electronic form; this extends the availability of electronic filing to an additional 1,000 filers.
In passing the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA) in 1959, Congress established a 60-day deadline for court filing of an election complaint.
Quicker resolution of election complaints ensures quicker restoration of democratic voice and a democratically operated union In FY 2008, OLMS began tracking elapsed days, with 92 elapsed days as the baseline.
OLMS has improved on this result in each subsequent year.
In FY 2012, OLMS reduced the days elapsed per case to 71 days against a target of 76 days.
OLMS continues to examine new methods for reducing its elapsed days further.
In FY 2012, both the team-based approach for handling election cases and early Office of the Solicitor involvement in cases that may result in litigation aided in reducing the days elapsed per case.
In FY 2011, OLMS began tracking three additional measures.
For these three measures, OLMS intends to reduce the number of chronically delinquent filers of labor organization financial reports, increase the number of LM-10 and LM-20 persuader reports filed, and increase its web site satisfaction index score.
Baselines for these measures were established in FY 2010 and as such, FY 2011 was the first year comparative results were reported.
In FY 2010, OLMS determined there were 2,070 chronically delinquent filers, unions that have not filed a required financial report on time each of the past three years.
Because timely filing is a basic tenet of financial transparency, OLMS determined that reducing the number of these chronically delinquent unions was important to this goal.
For FY 2012, OLMS established a target of 1,870 chronically delinquent.
OLMS exceeded this target, ending the year with 1,711 chronically delinquent filers.
For FY 2013, OLMS will expand its efforts to reduce this number by identifying, in a more timely manner, those unions that were reported as chronically delinquent in FY 2012, and, in addition, those unions that have been delinquent the past two filings (one year short of meeting the definition of chronically delinquent).
OLMS will target these “at-risk” unions in FY 2013 and offer compliance assistance to these and existing chronically delinquent filers in an effort to avoid another untimely filing.
OLMS also believes outreach will positively impact electronic filing, as OLMS will urge these delinquent unions to use the electronic filing system.
In FY 2013-14, OLMS will undergo an evaluation of its targeting efforts, with the goal of measuring responses to different outreach efforts.
Under the LMRDA, companies and outside agents/consultants are required to file an LM-10 or LM-20 when they arrange for services that are designed to influence or persuade employees in a union representation election.
For FY 2011, OLMS established a goal of obtaining 545 persuader reports – efforts to obtain these reports generated 692 reports, many of which were submitted for prior years.
For FY 2012, OLMS had a goal of 615 reports.
OLMS efforts resulted in the submission of 890 LM-10 and LM-20 persuader reports – 198 above the target for this measure.
As in FY 2011, many of the FY 2012 submissions were delinquent reports for past years from filers who were unaware that these reports were required.
OLMS expects that in time, most delinquent reports will be filed and subsequent filings will be for the current year only.
Should this occur, OLMS would expect that the number of filings will level off.
One major effort under this initiative is to cross-match LM-10 and LM-20 reports – since both the company and the persuader are required to file a report for the same set of services.
A secondary effort is an educational effort that informs potential filers as to the requirements under the LMRDA.
The final measure is customer satisfaction with the OLMS web site.
OLMS established an index baseline of 58 in FY 2010 and a goal to increase the index score to 60 in FY 2012.
This goal was exceeded as the OLMS customer satisfaction index score in FY 2012 was 64.
OLMS will continue to analyze the customer satisfaction surveys to identify areas where improvements to the web site can be implemented, improvements expected to increase the customer satisfaction score.
Sources: The OLMS Case Data System and the OLMS Electronic Labor Organization Reports System (e.LORS).
The OLMS Case Data System, an internal case management database.
The Customer Satisfaction Score is based upon the American Customer Satisfaction Index; collected by Foresee, Inc., the index is based upon user responses to an OLMS web site customer satisfaction survey.
Data for Union Officer Election Investigations - Elapsed Days is collected in an internal dataset and based upon opening and closing dates for all processed election cases.
Notes: Measures with [p] in the target cells are “contextual,” i.e., they are important for management purposes but not useful for judging Agency performance.
The [p] indicates the number is a projection, not a target.
Status (Y, N, or I) does not apply.
MSHA’s Office of Assessments, Accountability, Special Enforcement and Investigations (OAASEI), formerly the Office of Assessments, oversees MSHA’s program to protect miners from discrimination when they exercise their right to report health and safety hazards without fear of retaliation.
MSHA completed 197 discrimination case investigations in FY 2012, completing 168 cases (85 percent) within 60 days.
MSHA resolved 85 temporary reinstatement requests in FY 2012, completing 67 reviews (80 percent) within 20 days.
Both targets (85 percent and 70 percent, respectively) were reached.
A key component of this Administration is the increased attention to the enforcement of the anti-discrimination provisions contained in the 1977 Act.
This was reinforced by the tragedy at the Upper Big Branch (UBB) mine.
For the four years prior to the disaster, no one working at UBB had filed a hazard complaint, even though post-disaster investigations documented long-standing problems at that mine.
MSHA has distributed materials directly to miners and has beefed up its special investigations staff to work on claims of retaliation.
In 2011, MSHA updated its Miners’ Rights Handbook and developed new training tools, which are available online.
In FY 2012, the Agency, working with the Department of Labor, filed 39 requests for temporary reinstatement, more than double any previous year, with the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission on behalf of miners who submitted complaints of discrimination in the form of a suspension, layoff, discharge or other adverse action.
Additionally, the department filed 27 complaints alleging mine safety discrimination during 2012.
Sources: Discrimination Investigations are tracked in a stand-alone database (Privacy Act Systems of Records - DOL/MSHA-10) into which enforcement and Office of Assessments personnel record applicable discrimination investigation information (dates, milestones, outcomes etc).
The system is located on a server on MSHA’s segment of the DOL network.
Independent evaluations completed in FY 2012 are summarized below.
Outcome Goal 4.1―Facilitate return to work for workers experiencing workplace injuries or illnesses who are able to work.
OWCP supports the Secretary of Labor’s vision of good jobs for everyone through the achievement of Strategic Outcome Goal 4.1 - Facilitate return to work for workers experiencing workplace injuries or illnesses who are able to work.
Return to work is most successful through early identification of work injury or illness, prompt development of case information, and efficient provision of assistance services that will support recovery and return to work.
Achievement of this is measured by the Division of Federal Employees’ Compensation (DFEC) using two key indicators: disability duration, measured as lost production days (LPD), and the percentage of injured workers successfully returned to employment.
DFEC uses contract nurses to initiate contact with claimants, employing agencies and medical providers during the Continuation of Pay (COP) period.
The COP nurse advises injured workers and assesses their conditions; confirms return-to-work status; obtains a treatment plan from the treating physician; and then files a report with recommendations to DFEC claims staff.
Often cases are referred on to a Field Nurse for additional services including securing authorization for medical treatment, coordination of physicians, and facilitation with employing agencies for return to work.
DFEC uses its data and communications systems to improve information exchanges with employers and claimants.
If claimants remain out of work for extended periods, DFEC continues regular monitoring to identify cases when medical conditions improve and provide vocational rehabilitation and job placement services as soon as it is feasible.
DFEC return to work efforts especially support Administration initiatives such as Executive Order 13548 to increase Federal employment of injured workers and workers with disabilities, and the four-year (FY 2011 – FY 2014) Presidential “Protecting Our Workers and Ensuring Reemployment” (POWER) initiative, jointly directed by OWCP and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
Of the seven government-wide performance goals established by POWER, DFEC is responsible for four.
Increase the percent of Wage-loss Claims filed by Federal employers within 7 days to 64 percent.
Achievement of these goals in FY 2012 was due to a combination of earlier identification and delivery of services to new injury cases, Disability Management process and coordination improvements, and effective use of the POWER initiative to focus Federal agencies on performance results.
Increase the share of Federal employees that return to work within two years of entering FECA’s Disability Management program – POWER’s four-year target is to increase the overall share of cases that are returned to work by the 14 largest Executive Branch agencies.
From FY 2009 to FY 2012, the percentage of injured workers receiving FECA disability management services, and returning to work within two years of injury, increased from 85.8 percent to 91.5 percent.
To improve agency outcomes, DFEC established the POWER Return-to-Work (RTW) Council with the 14 largest Federal agencies as a forum to review performance results, share best practices, and set challenging individual agency goals.
DFEC completed a study in September 2012 with DOL’s Office of Disability Employment Policy to identify successful injured worker reemployment and disability hiring best practices being used in the Federal Government that could be exported to other Federal agencies.
Study findings continue to be shared through the POWER RTW Council.
The feasibility of implementing best practice approaches or mitigating job placement obstacles will be tested as DFEC works with individual agencies on implementation.
Reduce Government-wide Lost Production Day (LPD) rates – Under POWER, individual Executive Branch agencies are directed to reduce LPD rates (per 100 employees) by 1 percent per year through FY 2014.
In FY 2012, the Government-wide average LPD rate was 34.8 days, exceeding the annual target of 35.1 days and the FY 2011 result of 33.8 days.
The 2.7 percent increase was partially due to agencies that continue to experience higher than average lost production days due to the hazards of their missions and occupational reemployment challenges.
DFEC’s strategy is to use more surgical approaches in working with those agencies.
Timely submission of Notices of Injury and Wage-Loss Claims – The ability of DFEC to promptly initiate intervention and return to work services is improved if Federal employers are timely in the submission of injury reports and wage-loss claims.
Earlier receipt of these forms also enables DFEC to begin claims adjudication and payment processing sooner.
For these reasons, POWER includes two additional goals to improve timely submission.
In FY 2012, Federal agencies filed 85.5 percent of Notices of Injury within 14 days.
Agencies also filed 75 percent of wage-loss claims within 7 days.
Both results exceeded the established targets.
Fourteen agencies are using Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) systems to report injuries electronically.
Most of these agencies made immediate significant gains in timeliness subsequent to adoption of EDI.
To expand electronic filing capability to all agencies, DFEC developed a web-based capability, the Employees’ Compensation and Operations Portal (ECOMP), and is offering this electronic submission capability to all Federal employing agencies to further cut the time of delivery.
Notes: In FY 2011, the first two measures in this table were worded differently: "Percent of injured federal workers coming under FECA Disability Management that are reemployed by (non-Postal) federal agencies" and "Government-wide LPD rate in non-Postal government agencies."
Independent evaluations completed in FY 2012 are summarized below.
OWCP effectively supports Strategic Outcome Goal 4.2 by promptly and accurately processing claims to determine entitlement and establish liability for payment, and timely delivering benefits, thereby shortening the duration of income interruptions.
Increase the timeliness of First Reports of Injury and First Payment of Compensation – The Division of Longshore and Harbor Workers’ Compensation met all its four FY 2012 targets for performance indicators which measure the timeliness of case actions by employers and insurance carriers.
Injury report timeliness in FY 2012 for DBA cases was 85 percent within 30 days against a goal of 80 percent.
First payment timeliness in FY 2012 for DBA cases was 63 percent within 30 days against a goal of 60 percent within 30 days.
Injury report timeliness in FY 2012 for non-DBA cases was 86 percent within 30 days against a goal of 85 percent.
First payment timeliness in FY 2012 for non-DBA cases was 85 percent within 30 days against a goal of 85 percent.
Longshore will continue to work with employers and carriers to improve performance gains achieved in these areas.
Program strategies include a combination of communicating program expectations/requirements; formal publication of employer/carrier performance results; provision of education and assistance and improved communication and information sharing between the parties.
In FY 2012 the new performance measures aimed at facilitating the prompt delivery of benefits to injured workers and their families tracked performance for informal dispute resolution timeliness.
These measures reflect district office dispute resolution effectiveness and productivity and allow the program to use internal performance strategies to impact performance.
Improved timeliness in district office resolution will result in more prompt benefit delivery with a direct and positive impact on the program’s mission to provide income support.
Black Lung Claims Decision Timeliness – The performance priority for the Black Lung Program is to reduce the average time it takes to process Black Lung claims.
The Black Lung Program did not meet its claims processing goal of reducing the average time to render a Proposed Decision and Order (PDO).
Against a target of 240 days, results were 262 days.
On a quarterly basis, results were 260 days for the first quarter, 270 days for the second and third quarters, and 247 days for the fourth quarter.
The improvement in average timeliness during the 4th quarter is primarily attributable to reductions in backlogs of aged PDO inventories caused by provisions in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) which, although it had increased workload volumes after enactment, also enhanced claimants’ eligibility.
During FY 2012, the percentage of aged pending PDOs decreased from 62 percent of all pending PDOs in the 1st quarter to 11% in the 4th quarter.
247 days in FY 2014.
In order to reach these targets and reduce the impact of income loss suffered by disabled coal miners, the program will employ strategies to reduce the time necessary for development of medical evidence associated with the claim and on a monthly basis will identify aged cases as a workload priority to district/regional office management.
Program data shows that 61 percent of the overall average claims processing time involves the time required to complete the activities involved with the development of medical evidence for claims.
These activities include: authorization of medical testing, medical examinations, evaluation of medical reports, follow-up work with physicians, and re-testing (if necessary).
Reducing the amount of time necessary to complete these activities contributes to shorter overall average claims processing time.
To monitor the timeliness of these activities the program established a baseline in FY 2012 to measure the average amount of time necessary to complete development of medical evidence involved with claims.
Results for this new measure will be reported in FY 2013.
The program will improve performance for this measure by working with several large-volume clinics and diagnostic physicians to streamline exam notification and scheduling procedures and by closely monitoring the scheduling of medical examinations to determine which doctors have exams scheduled beyond critical timeliness thresholds.
When the case control system indicates that a doctor is being overscheduled, the claimant will be scheduled with the second doctor selected in claim documentation.
Timely Adjudication in EEOICPA Claims – The Division of Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation (DEEOIC) provides timely claims adjudication and benefit delivery.
In FY 2012, the Energy program reached its initial processing performance targets for average days under Part B with a result of 92 days against a target of 98 days, and for Part E with an average of 104 days against a target of 120 days.
The goal for Final Decisions was achieved with a result of 93 percent against a target of 92 percent.
In FY 2012, DEEOIC established baselines and targets for two new goals to measure the overall time to make claims decisions, from intake to final decisions.
The new goals combine Part B and Part E results and account for the various actions a case may require, including dose reconstruction or oral hearing.
These measures will provide a more transparent view of the claims process, including time spent in case development outside of DEEOIC at NIOSH.
Several initiatives during FY 2012 were aimed at further reducing processing times in DEEOIC.
The Energy Compensation System (ECS) was deployed in the beginning of the year resulting in a major change in DEEOIC’s systems and the way the program will manage cases technologically.
A new District Medical Consultant/Second opinion contract changed the way case referrals are made from the district and Final Adjudication Branch (FAB) offices – a significant portion of the program’s development process.
Deployment of a new electronic method of sharing information with the Department of Energy (DOE) for verification of employment and other records also improved program timeliness.
These initiatives are expected to continue to impact the program in a positive way during FY 2013.
First Payment Timeliness – Making timely payments to unemployed workers is critical to fulfilling the UI system’s key statutory objective of making full payment of unemployment compensation "when due."
Performance was slightly below the FY 2012 target of 85.7 percent; 82.9 percent of first payments were made within 14/21 days.
The decrease in first payment timeliness is directly due to declines in performance in Indiana (-4.7 pct. Pts.), Kentucky (-7.9), Mississippi (-5.1), and Tennessee (-5.1), resulting from staff turnover and lack of trained staff for making claim eligibility determinations; IT system issues; and backlogs in claims and adjudication units.
Additionally, based on anecdotal information from some states, reduction in administrative funding resulting from lower workloads from the temporary federal programs (emergency unemployment compensation) have caused states to lay off staff associated with claims-taking activities.
The performance of this measure may have been also impacted due to these staffing shortages.
ETA will continue to provide intensive technical assistance and monitoring on underperforming states selected to participate in the "At Risk" project.
Detection of Overpayments – Establish for recovery at least 52.3 percent of the amount of estimated overpayments that states can detect and recover; 64.9 percent of overpayments were detected for recovery in FY 2012.
Ensuring that benefits are paid only to those who meet eligibility requirements and that erroneous payments are detected and recovered is critical to the integrity of any benefit payment program.
Establish Tax Accounts Promptly – 86.
9 percent of the UI tax liability determinations for new employers will be made within 90 days of the end of the quarter in which employers become liable.
Promptly enrolling new employers in the UI program is key to fulfilling major program objectives of supporting the timely payment of taxes – which fund UI benefits – and making timely and accurate eligibility determinations based on employerreported wages.
In FY 2012, 88.7 percent of determinations were made timely, an increase of 1.5 percentage points from the year before; 33 states improved their performance.
Sources: Payment Timeliness: ETA 9050 and 9050p reports; Detect Overpayments: Benefit Accuracy Measurement (BAM) program and ETA 227 report.
Tax liability determinations: ETA 581 report.
Independent evaluations completed in FY 2012 are summarized below.
During FY 2012, EBSA’s program continued to be significantly impacted by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) which impacted both the workload and regulatory priorities of the Agency.
With respect to the enforcement program, EBSA processed 318 criminal investigations, a 50 percent increase from FY 2008 (212).
Additionally, EBSA made significant progress in closing Sample Investigation Program (SIP) cases and collecting interim data.
The key element of the initial phase of the multi-year SIP is the investigation of a random-sample of plans that will lead to measuring overall compliance with Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA).
The Office of Outreach, Education and Assistance provided superior participant assistance by responding to 99 percent of all written inquiries within 30 days of receipt and responding to over 99 percent of telephone inquiries by the close of the next business day.
Total inquiry volume for the fiscal year exceeded 239,000.
Benefit recoveries achieved by the participant assistance program contributed more than $260 million to EBSA’s overal monetary results of over $1.2 billion2.
This informal resolution of complaints without utilizing the more resource intensive investigative process enables EBSA to direct its investigative assets to more egregious and wide-spread violations of ERISA.
Benefit Advisors play a critical role in EBSA’s overall enforcement program.
When they receive a complaint from a participant that indicates a fiduciary breach by the employer or a problem that impacts all or several participants in the plan, the Advisor makes a referral to the enforcement staff for possible investigation.
Referrals from Benefits Advisors in FY 2012 resulted in 814 enforcement cases being opened.
The Agency also conducted outreach and education programs designed to educate plan participants and officials regarding their rights and responsibilities under ERISA.
These activities are a critical component of our efforts to enhance the benefit security of America’s workers, retirees and their families.
We believe that retirement, health and other benefits will be more secure if plan officials are more knowledgeable and therefore in a better position to be in compliance.
In addition, better informed plan participants are more able to ensure they receive all the benefits to which they are entitled under their plan as well as bring potential violations to the attention of EBSA.
EBSA completed 772 ACA outreach activities reaching over 21,000 individuals, conducted seven health law workshops, held 891 rapid response workshops for dislocated workers, distributed over 506,000 educational publications, and hosted over 5.8 million visitors on the Agency’s website.
In FY 2013, EBSA will report baseline compliance measure data based on full set of investigative results that builds on 2012 interim baseline data.
This broad-based composite measure will provide information related to compliance in the plan community.
EBSA also will provide an assessment of how best to estimate a recidivism rate or impact measure.
In addition, EBSA will continue to measure the level of customer satisfaction with our Participant Assistance Program.
Independent evaluations and audits completed in FY 2012 are summarized below.
Outcome Goal 5.1―Provide sound and impartial information on labor market activity, working conditions, and price changes in the economy for decision making, including support for the formulation of economic and social policy affecting virtually all Americans.
In FY 2012, BLS reached 100 percent of the underlying timeliness, accuracy and relevance targets for its Labor Force Statistics, Compensation and Working Conditions, and Productivity and Technology Principal Federal Economic Indicators.
Prices and Cost of Living reached 100 percent of its underlying timeliness and accuracy targets, but missed its relevance target for the Indexes published monthly measure for the Producer Price Index (PPI) program.
PPI released fewer indexes than planned because the 2012 North American Industry Classification System combined more indexes than originally projected.
BLS adjusted its FY 2013 target accordingly.
In addition, BLS measured dissemination through the Average number of Internet site user sessions each month, and exceeded its target of 6.9 million in FY 2012 by reaching 8.1 million user sessions.
Finally, in FY 2012, BLS exceeded its target of 75 by achieving a score of 77 on the American Customer Satisfaction Index that measures customer satisfaction with its full Web site.
There were no relevant independent evaluations completed in FY 2012.
Because this APR is primarily a planning document that uses historical information to inform future strategies and targets, it is organized around goals and measures selected to represent Departmental goals for the budget year (FY 2014).
Under GPRA, performance goals, measures and targets are identified for reporting purposes in the Congressional Budget Justification (CBJ) issued during that fiscal year.
Therefore, DOL is obliged to report PY 2011 and FY 2012 results for measures listed in its FY 2013 Performance Plan, which was published as part of the FY 2013 CBJ in February 2012 (see www.dol.gov/dol/budget/).
Some measures have since been revised, replaced, or discontinued.
The table below lists these performance measures, their targets and results for PY 2011/FY 2012.
Results are not provided for measures that were new this year, i.e., their target was to collect baseline data.