Mission: The Department of Labor fosters and promotes the welfare of job seekers, wage earners, and retirees of the U.S. by improving their working conditions, advancing their opportunities for profitable employment, protecting their retirement and health care benefits, helping employers find workers, strengthening collective bargaining, and tracking changes in employment, prices and other national economic measures.
This report explains how DOL manages programs to improve the lives of American workers.
It also satisfies the requirement of GPRMA to provide information on actual performance and progress in achieving goals identified in the Annual Performance Plan (APP).
Measures and targets for FY 2013 were updated in the FY 2012 Annual Performance Report (APR), which was the Department’s FY 2014 Annual Performance Plan.
The FY 2013 APR serves as the FY 2015 APP, updates measures and targets for FY 2014, and establishes targets consistent with the FY 2015 Congressional Budget Justification.
FY 2013 was an exceptional year for the Department.
DOL made significant progress toward its goals and objectives, and in the process, improved the lives of working families across the country.
This year, the largest percentage in the past five years of workers exiting Labor Department job training programs got industry-recognized credentials.
DOL expanded eligibility for the Trade Adjustment Assistance to thousands more workers forced out of their jobs by international trade, and we are doing the best job, ever, of processing these applications.
The Department achieved the lowest fatality rate for miners in the United States, ever, in FY 2013.
The number of miners who died in workplace accidents was the lowest, ever.
DOL also conducted the largest number of whistleblower investigations, ever.
In FY 2013, DOL conducted the largest number of directed Davis-Bacon investigations in Wage and Hour history, and focused those investigations and resources on workplaces with violations more effectively than ever before.
And DOL did the best job, ever, of targeting the very small number of union officers and staff who embezzle funds or engage in fraud.
The Department processed workers compensation claims for longshore workers and energy employees at the fastest clip, ever.
Also in FY 2013, DOL conducted the largest number of pension and health plan investigations over the past five years.
Some measures are dropped or changed between reports.
To present the most current information, the APR provides complete information for the budget year measures only – in this case, those retained or added in FY 2015 – including actual performance for the five preceding years, if available, plus targets for the most recent year, the current year, and the budget year.
Targets and results for measures dropped or changed are in the Measures Discontinued section.
The Agencies, Programs and Strategies section of this report introduces each of DOL’s agencies, grouped by program type (employment and training, worker protection, etc.).
Each narrative describes agencies and their programs and identifies the Departmental goals and objectives they support with strategies for improving performance and effectiveness.
The Strategic Goals sections present results and plans organized by the structure laid out in the DOL FY 2014-2018 Strategic Plan (see http://www.dol.gov/dol/aboutdol/).
The plan includes five strategic goals (general outcomes clearly linked to the Department’s mission), ten strategic objectives that articulate more specific goals associated with one or more programs and DOL agencies, and 19 agency performance goals that outline each agency’s contribution to the Department’s objectives.
Within each strategic objective section, narratives for each contributing agency explain the data, summarize the analyses, provide plans, and provide important context and details as needed to interpret the data and brief summary analyses that follow in tabular form.
These performance goal summary tables list each applicable agency goal, its key indicators, and applicable targets, results, and status (whether or not results reach or exceed the target, indicated by Y or N).
Where “baseline” appears in the target cell for new indicators, no data were available for establishing a numerical target.
If results improve over the prior year but do not reach the target, “I” appears in the status cell.
The last three columns identify what worked, what didn’t work, and plans to improve results.
Budget uncertainties and cuts bring pressure to prioritize and to be more productive.
To address this challenge and continually improve its programs, DOL uses results-based, data-driven management techniques; we are constantly assessing whether our efforts are successful, and why – and seeking ways of doing better.
Each DOL agency prepares an annual Operating Plan that details the strategies and resources it will apply to reach goals and objectives at all levels of the organization.
These operating plans seek to balance quantity with quality, establish ambitious targets for continuous improvement of program performance, demonstrate prioritization of resource allocation, and identify evidence supporting our strategies.
Departmental leaders review progress against those operating plans each quarter to monitor progress and hold agencies accountable for implementing the plans, achieving milestones, and making adjustments as needed.
Agency heads and senior staff meet each quarter with the Deputy Secretary and the Performance Improvement Officer.
Agencies’ submit narrative explanations and analysis of quarter, year-todate, and five-year trend data (if available) – prepared with Department staff assistance – for discussion at the meeting.
Discussions focus on implications of the data for strategies (what’s working).
Agencies usually leave the meeting with action items for the next quarter.
The review process has focused Departmental leadership on strategic management of core functions through the use of program performance and budget data.
Identification and discussion of key measures, annual and seasonal targets, and how budgets, workload and strategies affect results have helped communicate priorities and improve performance against benchmarks.
This system has proven effective in driving improvements.
In FY 2013, results for 74% of the measures in the quarterly review surpassed the average of the previous five years’ results.
Descriptions of each challenge, progress to date and what remains to be done are summarized in the FY 2013 Agency Financial Report (www.dol.gov/dol/aboutdol/).
The Chief Evaluation Office (CEO) in the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy works closely with agency staff to design, fund, and implement program evaluations.
The results from evaluations inform policy, advance DOL's mission, and improve its performance-based management initiatives in support of the Government Performance and Results Modernization Act of 2010 (GPRMA).
For more information see http://www.dol.gov/asp/evaluation/.
The FY 2013 Summary of Performance and Financial Information includes an assessment by the Secretary of the reliability and completeness of DOL performance data reported under the GPRMA.
The Department satisfies this with Agency Head level attestations that the data do not contain significant limitations that can lead to inaccurate assessments of results.
The Employment and Training Administration provides employment assistance, labor market information, and job training through the administration of the following programs: programs authorized by the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (WIA) for adults, dislocated workers, youth (including Job Corps), and targeted populations; Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) authorized by the Trade Act of 1974, as amended; Employment Services authorized under the Wagner-Peyser Act; Foreign Labor Certification activities authorized by the Immigration and Nationality Act; the Senior Community Service Employment Program authorized by the Older Americans Act; Apprenticeship programs authorized by the National Apprenticeship Act; and Competitive Grants for Worker Training and Placement in High Growth and Emerging Industry Sectors authorized under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Recovery Act).
The public workforce system has a vital role to play in our knowledge-based economy, directly contributing to our nation’s global competitiveness and economic productivity by providing lifelong learning opportunities and a broad array of services.
The economy’s downturn posed substantial economic and workforce challenges to our nation, but the workforce system is responding to these challenges by becoming more flexible and innovative in order to get workers back to work quickly and support the workforce needs of employers in the recovering economy, particularly in high demand and emerging industry sectors.
The workforce system provides critical services to a broad array of customers at all skill levels.
These services include career counseling and case management and assessments that identify transferable skills.
ETA and the workforce system are committed to continuous improvement and testing and rigorously evaluating new ideas and approaches.
Increase training program participants’ acquisition of industry-recognized credentials (see Priority Goals section of this report).
Provide an innovative public workforce system that helps enable future economic growth and advancing shared prosperity for Americans.
Increase services and training for workers in need.
Provide workers with the resources necessary to increase their likelihood of obtaining middle class jobs.
Enhance programs that provide opportunities to particularly vulnerable populations – WIA Youth, Job Corps, and YouthBuild for disadvantaged youth, Indian and Native American and Migrant and Seasonal Farmworkers programs, and services for individuals with disabilities.
Improve the effectiveness of services through innovative funding mechanisms and rigorous research and evaluation.
Expand regional partnerships and collaboration.
Promote sector strategies for high-demand industry sectors, including the nation’s investment in green jobs and health sector jobs as an effort to restart the economy.
Forge meaningful partnerships with other Federal agencies.
Continue to develop a workforce system that embodies a dual customer approach – meeting the needs of both workers and employers.
The Veterans’ Employment and Training Service (VETS) serves America’s veterans and transitioning service members by preparing veterans for meaningful careers, providing employment resources and expertise, and protecting veterans’ employment rights.
VETS helps veterans and transitioning service members obtain positive employment outcomes through services provided at American Job Centers and the Transition Assistance Program (TAP) DOL Employment Workshop at military installations.
Grants are provided to State Workforce Agencies (SWA) to support staff dedicated to serving veterans, specifically those who require special assistance due to disabilities or other significant barriers to employment.
VETS coordinates with the Department of Defense to provide workshops in at military installations worldwide to prepare service members for transition to meaningful civilian employment.
VETS also provides funding, through the Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program (HVRP), to organizations that serve veterans experiencing homelessness, who warrant more comprehensive services.
VETS protects the employment and reemployment rights of veterans and members of the National Guard and Reserve forces under the provisions of the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) in order that they can serve on active duty without harm to their employment status and by assuring that veterans who seek Federal employment obtain the preferences agencies are required to apply.
Increase the rate of intensive services provided to veterans with significant barriers to employment.
Support Disabled Veterans’ Outreach Program specialist and Local Veterans’ Employment Representative positions through the Jobs for Veterans State Grants, and improve the quality and effectiveness of services provided.
Assess the contract facilitation of TAP DOL Employment Workshop sites.
Provide Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program competitive grants to operators of employment programs that specialize in outreach, supportive services and training for homeless veterans, including homeless female veterans and incarcerated veterans, to assist in their reintegration into the workforce.
Provide training to Federal staff and veterans’ service providers through the National Veterans’ Training Institute.
Collaborate with the Departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs and with state partners and Veterans’ service organizations to implement the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act and Federal Veterans’ Preference enforcement activities.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs requires that employers doing business with the Federal Government comply with the laws and regulations requiring a fair and diverse workplace, free of discrimination and harassment.
OFCCP also requires that federal contractors meet contractual equal employment opportunity and affirmative action requirements mandated by the Code of Federal Regulations.
Conducting compliance evaluations and complaint investigations of federal contractors’ and subcontractors’ personnel policies and procedures.
Obtaining conciliation agreements from contractors and subcontractors who are found in violation of regulatory requirements.
Monitoring the progress of those contractors and subcontractors found in violation through periodic compliance reports.
Forming linkage agreements between contractors and community organizations and job training programs to help employers identify and recruit qualified workers.
Recommending enforcement actions to the Solicitor of Labor.
Offering compliance assistance to federal contractors and subcontractors to help them understand the statutory and regulatory requirements and review process.
OFCCP contributes to Strategic Objective 3.1 – Break down barriers to fair and diverse work places and narrow wage and income inequality.
Increase focus on compensation discrimination cases through a new compensation directive and compliance officer training emphasizing finding complex systemic pay discrimination.
These cases are more resource intensive than individual cases.
Strengthen and clarify federal contractor and subcontractor requirements through regulation reform.
Focus initiatives and litigation on the most persistent and egregious violators.
Implement a stakeholder strategy that reaffirms commitments to equal employment opportunity and affirmative action by building coalitions and collaborative partnerships.
Strengthen compliance evaluations of federal contractors’ and subcontractors’ compensation personnel policies and practices.
Partner with national and community-based advocacy groups to educate workers on their equal employment opportunity rights and employer responsibilities.
Promote and quantify new job opportunities that stem from conciliation agreements.
Expand construction reviews to include long-term construction projects with a focus on improving employment opportunities for women and minorities.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration was established by the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 with the mission to assure, so far as possible, that every working man and woman in the American workplace has safe and healthful working conditions.
OSHA promotes the safety and health of America's workers by setting and enforcing workplace safety and health standards; delivering effective enforcement; providing training, outreach, and education; and encouraging continual improvement in workplace safety and health.
Through these efforts, OSHA aims to reduce the number of worker illnesses, injuries, and fatalities and contribute to the broader goals aimed at promoting economic recovery and the competitiveness of our nation's workers.
OSHA contributes to Strategic Objective 2.1 – Secure safe and healthy workplaces, particularly in high-risk industries.
Increase OSHA’s presence in the workplace.
Strengthen enforcement capabilities by gathering more high-quality data and utilizing it to create programs targeting the most egregious and persistent violators.
Protect workers in high-hazard occupations.
Maintain a strong outreach, education, and technical assistance program.
Protect vulnerable worker populations, such as those in temporary work roles, those with communication-based vulnerabilities (particularly Spanish-speaking/non-English speaking workers), and disabled workers.
Continuously monitor penalties imposed for consistency with the seriousness of the violation and effective deterrence to violators.
OSHA also contributes to Strategic Objective 3.2 – Protect employees’ rights to file health and safety complaints and prevent discrimination against workers who report hazards.
Administer and enforce twenty-two whistleblower protection statutes that protect workers who speak out to report perceived violations of the law.
Educate workers and employers about their whistleblower rights through targeted outreach efforts, including efforts targeted to hard-to-reach worker populations and specific industries.
Improve customer service to whistleblower investigation parties by refining whistleblower investigation processes and encouraging the timely resolution of disputes.
Strengthen and expand training of whistleblower investigators so that investigations are accurately and consistently conducted.
The Wage and Hour Division is responsible for administering and enforcing a number of laws that establish the minimum standards for wages and working conditions in the United States.
These labor statutes provide basic protections for all workers and while they differ in scope, all of the statutes enforced by WHD are intended to protect and to promote the welfare of the nation’s workforce, to provide opportunities for advancement, and to promote fair compensation for work performed.
The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) minimum wage provisions and the prevailing wage laws provide a floor for the payment of fair wages, while the FLSA overtime provisions are intended to broaden work opportunities and promote employment.
The Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act and the immigration programs establish working conditions intended both to protect the wages and the safety and health of vulnerable workers and to provide that the labor force is not displaced by lower-paid foreign or migrant labor.
The prevailing wage programs provide protection to local middle class workers who may be disadvantaged by competition from outside labor who offer their services at wages lower than those in the locality.
The Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) was enacted to help workers balance family and work responsibilities, and the child labor provisions of the FLSA promotes the safe employment of young workers, encourage their educational endeavors, and provide a path to future employment.
Protect the most vulnerable workers in the workplace ― provide that they are employed in compliance with wage and hour laws.
Promote sustained and corporate-wide compliance among employers ― make certain that employers, including the most persistent violators, are brought into and maintain compliance.
Foster a customer-oriented, quality-driven culture within WHD and boost customer satisfaction among workers seeking WHD services.
Issue prevailing wage determinations that are current and accurate.
In support of the Secretary’s vision, Promoting and Protecting Opportunity, Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA) has a single outcome goal of “improving health benefits and retirement security for all workers.”
EBSA is charged with protecting more than 141 million workers, retirees and their families which are covered by an estimated 684,000 private retirement plans, 2.4 million health plans and a similar number of other employee welfare plans which together hold $7.8 trillion in assets.
The retirement and health care benefit security of workers, retirees, and their families are significant factors in the public’s perception of their overall financial security.
EBSA’s mission and programs are pivotal in providing benefit security to the public and increasing their confidence that their retirement, health and other benefits will be there when needed.
EBSA’s mission is carried out in a very complex and evolving economic and regulatory environment where the public’s demands, needs, and perceptions are influenced by many factors.
In order to enhance benefit security and maintain the public confidence in our private sector based benefits system, EBSA administers an integrated program of regulation; compliance assistance and education; civil and criminal enforcement; and, research and analysis.
EBSA contributes to Strategic Objective 4.2 – Improve health benefits and retirement security for all workers.
Continue a multi-faceted enforcement program that effectively targets the most egregious and persistent violators.
Establish a strong regulatory framework supported by an aggressive regulatory agenda.
Play a role in the implementation of health reform legislation.
Provide innovative outreach and education that assists workers to protect their pension and health benefits.
Conduct a well-integrated research program based on evidence and comprehensive analysis.
Concentrate resources on areas that have the greatest impact on the protection of plan assets and participants’ benefits through the Major Case Enforcement Initiative.
MSHA protects the safety and health of the nation’s miners through enforcement of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 (Mine Act), as amended by the Mine Improvement and New Emergency Response Act of 2006 (MINER Act).
The mission of MSHA is to prevent death, disease, and injury from mining and to promote safe and healthful workplaces for the nation’s miners through the enactment and enforcement of mandatory safety and health standards, mandated inspections which require four complete inspections annually at active underground mines and two complete inspections annually at active surface mines, and miner training and compliance assistance to operators.
Outcome Goal 2.1: Secure safe and healthy workplaces, particularly in high-risk industries.
Performance Goal MSHA 2.1: Prevent death, disease, and injury from mining and promote safe and healthful workplaces for the Nation’s miners.
Strategic Goal 3: Promote fair and high-quality work environments.
Outcome Goal 3.2: Protect workers’ rights.
Performance Goal MSHA 3.2: Protect miners from discrimination.
Reduce worker fatalities (see Priority Goals section of this report).
The Office of Labor-Management Standards (OLMS) administers the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959, as amended (LMRDA), and related laws.
These laws primarily establish safeguards for union democracy and union financial integrity and require public disclosure reporting by unions, union officers, union employees, employers, labor consultants and surety companies.
OLMS also administers employee protections under various Federally-sponsored transportation programs that require fair, equitable protective arrangements for transit employees when Federal funds are used to acquire, improve, or operate a transit system.
These arrangements must be approved by the Department of Labor before Federal funds may be released to grantees.
OLMS contributes to Strategic Objective 3.2 – Protect workers’ rights.
Increase the number of reports filed by employers and consultants who make agreements to persuade employees with regard to their rights to organize and bargain collectively.
Increase the percent of disclosure reports filed electronically.
Improve the timeliness in resolving complaints filed by labor union members that their union violated democratic standards for conducting union officer elections.
Increase the effectiveness of audits by focusing resources on labor unions most likely to be in violation of the law.
Improve the Internet public disclosure service and public access to information reported by unions, union officers, union employees, employers, labor consultants, and surety companies under the Act.
Reduce the number of chronically delinquent filers of Labor Organization Annual Financial Reports.
The Women’s Bureau provides collaborative leadership on policies and activities that impact 72 million women in the labor force; women now comprise close to 60 percent of the workforce.
The Women’s Bureau is the only Federal office exclusively concerned with serving and promoting the interests of women in the workforce.
The Bureau conducts research, projects, and evaluations on issues of importance to working women, and provides information about women in the labor force to stakeholders and customers.
The Bureau promotes the implementation of policy, practice, and program changes that may reduce barriers to women’s access to and retention in better jobs and ensure their fair treatment in the workplace.
The Bureau promotes policies and strategies to increase women’s participation in non-traditional, high-growth, and higher-paying jobs, such as those in the technology, manufacturing, and transportation sectors; and educates workers on their rights and employers on their legal obligation to ensure equal pay.
The Bureau works collaboratively with national, state, and local organizations, governments, and employers, providing technical assistance and resources to assist in the implementation of public policy, programs, initiatives, and workplace practices and solutions.
Strategic Objective 3.1 Break down barriers to fair and diverse workplaces and narrow wage and income inequality.
Conduct research, economic analysis, and evaluation on issues concerning women in the workforce to inform policy and program change.
Promote implementation of policies and programs, including public policy, programs, initiatives, and workplace practices and solutions, and enhance public education and raise awareness of key issues.
Provide technical assistance to targeted public and private sector entities and individuals to improve working women’s employment opportunities, economic security, and working conditions.
Build collaborations and relationships with key stakeholders and provide collaborative leadership on data sharing and public awareness efforts related to gender-based compensation practices and decreasing occupational segregation ― one of the leading causes of income inequality.
Collaborate with other Federal agencies, workforce professionals, non-profits, and women’s organizations to increase awareness of training, employment, and entrepreneurship opportunities in in-demand industries and non-traditional sectors.
Although many American workers with disabilities are educated, trained, willing, and able to work, they remain out of the labor force at a much higher rate than their similarly qualified counterparts without disabilities.
The Office of Disability Employment Policy counters this disparity by working to increase the number and quality of employment opportunities for people with disabilities through the development, evaluation and dissemination of evidenced based policy strategies and effective practices as well as fostering their adoption and implementation within the public and private sectors.
Ultimately, ODEP’s goal is to impact the systems that influence the employment outcomes of people with disabilities.
To realize its systems change goal ODEP: undertakes research to create and validate promising policy strategies and effective practices; collaborates with Federal agencies, private and public sector employers, labor organizations, and other stakeholders to expand physical and programmatic access to America’s Job Centers and the workforce system in general; improve employer organizational practices and make workplaces more inclusive; and increase access to the employment supports that are crucial to every worker’s success throughout the employment process, and especially to a job seeker or worker with a disability.
ODEP contributes to Strategic Objective Goal 3.1 – Break down barriers to fair and diverse workplaces and narrow wage and income inequality.
Conduct research & analysis that identifies/validates effective disability employment policy/strategies.
Validate and replicate evidence-based disability employment policy and effective practices.
Build partnerships to develop policy/strategies and to promote the adoption and implementation of disability employment policy/practice.
Collaborate broadly within DOL and with other Federal agencies and private sector organizations to comprehensively address issues and leverage limited resources Provide technical assistance regarding the adoption and implementation of disability employment policy/practice.
Emphasize inclusive planning and universal usability to leverage limited resources and ensure access to more individuals.
Reach out to public and private sector organizations to provide information and technical assistance to dispel misperceptions/broaden understanding of disability and employment issues and to improve employment practices.
The Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB) supports the President’s international agenda on labor matters, carries out international responsibilities for the Secretary of Labor, fulfills Congressional mandates, and provides oversight and coordination of the Department’s international activities.
ILAB works to improve working conditions and labor standards for workers around the world.
ILAB uses all available international channels to improve livelihoods and working conditions, protect workers’ ability to exercise their rights, and address the workplace exploitation of children and other vulnerable groups.
The Department believes that global markets must be governed by fair market rules that protect vulnerable people, including women and children, and provide workers a fair share of their productivity and voice in their work lives.
These objectives will contribute to achieving the Department’s goals for U.S. workers, build the foundation for a sustained recovery of the global economy and contribute to a more balanced pattern of global trade in the future.
Pursuing these objectives will once again position the U.S. as a leader and pace-setter on international labor issues and demonstrate our commitment to assist governments that have the political will to foster better livelihoods and rights for their workforces.
Decent wages and working conditions in countries with which the US trades protect the wages and working conditions of US workers from being undercut by unfair competition.
Improved livelihoods and more inclusive economic growth leads to increased purchasing power of workers overseas, which in turn expands markets for US exports and fosters US job creation.
To these ends, ILAB works closely with other USG agencies to formulate international economic, trade and labor policies - including labor aspects of trade and investment agreements, bilateral diplomacy and security policy; leads the USG engagement on labor matters with foreign governments and multilateral organizations; and makes grants for technical assistance to promote labor standards and acceptable conditions of work for workers and to contribute to the elimination of child labor; and conducts research and reporting on international labor issues.
ILAB’s work contributes to DOL’s Strategic Goal 1 – Prepare workers for better jobs, and Strategic Objective 1.3 – Advance workers’ rights, acceptable work conditions, and livelihoods, particularly for the world’s vulnerable populations.
Implement new approaches to counter the root causes of child labor.
Improve the ability of workers in trading partner countries to work in good jobs, receive a fair share of their productivity, and enjoy a voice in their work lives.
Improve worker rights and livelihoods for vulnerable populations.
Improve monitoring and enforcement of trade agreements to protect workers’ rights.
Engage more extensively and substantively with other countries’ labor ministries and with international and regional organizations.
Strengthen and enhance the Department’s participation in US interagency trade and economic policy processes.
The mission of the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs (OWCP) is to protect the interests of workers who are injured or become ill on the job, their families and their employers by making timely, appropriate, and accurate decisions on claims, providing prompt payment of benefits and helping injured workers return to gainful work as early as is feasible.
The OWCP implements four Federal workers’ compensation statutes providing monetary, medical, and return-to-work benefits for work-related injuries and illnesses for Federal employees, Coal mine workers, Department of Energy (DOE) employees and its predecessor agencies, Longshore and Harbor workers, contractors serving overseas and certain other designated employee groups, and responsibly administers the benefit funds authorized for these purposes.
The Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA) program provides wage-loss compensation, medical treatment, return-to-work assistance and vocational rehabilitation to civilian employees of the Federal Government injured at work and to certain other designated groups.
In FY 2013, FECA processed 113,782 new claims, serviced 239,000 claimants and paid out approximately $2.9 billion in claims.
The Return to Work rate was 92 percent, the highest rate to date.
The Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act (LHWCA) program oversees the delivery of benefits by private sector employers and insurance carriers to injured workers engaged in certain maritime and related employment.
Longshore also administers the provisions of the Defense Base Act (DBA) which covers civilian contractors working overseas.
In FY 2013, Longshore created 28,189 new injury claims and oversaw the payment of $1.35 billion in benefits to 58,850 claimants.
The Black Lung Benefits Act provides monetary compensation and medical benefits to totally disabled miners suffering from coal mine pneumoconiosis (black lung disease) stemming from mine employment, and monetary benefits to their dependent survivors.
In FY 2013, the Division of Coal Mine Workers Compensation issued 4,760 Proposed Decision and Orders, paid $344.7 million in monthly compensation and medical benefits to 41,400 beneficiaries, and monitored benefit payments and medical treatment provided by selfinsured coal mine operators or their insurance carriers to an additional 4,700 beneficiaries.
The Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation Program Act (EEOICPA) provides compensation and medical benefits to employees or survivors of employees of the DOE contractors or subcontractors with DOE, who have been diagnosed with cancer due to exposure to radiation or toxic substances.
In FY 2013, Energy processed 16,050 claims for 34,340 claimants and paid out over $1.2 billion in claims including compensation and medical benefits.
OWCP’s mission aligns with the Secretary’s vision of promoting and protecting opportunity; it also supports DOL Strategic Goal 4 – Secure retirement, health, and other employee benefits and, for those not working, provide income security and Strategic Objective 4.1 – Provide income support when work is impossible or unavailable and facilitate return to work.
Major OWCP workload activities include: claims adjudication, benefit payment, disability case management, assisting in the re-employment of people with disabilities, medical bill processing, information services delivery, benefit fund management, and providing technical and compliance assistance to employers regarding OWCP procedures and requirements including insurance/selfinsurance and payment of benefits.
OWCP outcomes include prompt receipt of compensation and medical benefits, and injured workers’ recovery from injury or illness and their return to employment.
OWCP provides income support and medical care by ensuring proper claims adjudication and efficient case processing, effective mediation of disputed claims, and accurate and timely payment of benefits.
Timely delivery of compensation payments minimizes interruption to income resulting from being out of work due to injury or illness.
Centralized coordination and processing of requests from providers for treatment authorizations speeds the delivery of medical services.
OWCP uses early nurse intervention to coordinate medical treatment and provide reemployment assistance in new FECA cases.
Permanently disabled claimants receive vocational rehabilitation assistance.
OWCP has improved customer access to program information through its communications systems to be more responsive to customer service needs.
Provide timely and high quality review and adjudication of claims and early resolution of claims issues.
Deliver or provide for the delivery of benefit payments for injured workers and their families in an accurate and timely manner.
Assist claimants in obtaining timely treatment and vocational rehabilitation, and help them return to gainful work as soon as they are able.
Promote and foster understanding and awareness of OWCP programs, priorities, initiatives, and results through effective external communications, outreach, public education, and cooperation with our customers, stakeholders, and partners.
Continue to assess the quality and effectiveness of OWCP customer services.
Identify and pursue opportunities to evaluate OWCP program performance (timeliness and quality) and results.
Enhance OWCP’s operations, infrastructure, and governance through effective planning, management, and oversight.
Develop, promulgate and implement clear and useful policies, regulations and procedures.
Create and foster the highest quality work environment for all of our employees through leadership, communications, and collaboration; recruitment, development, recognition, and retention.
The federal-state UI program, authorized under the Federal Unemployment Tax act and Title III of the Social Security Act, provides temporary, partial wage replacement for unemployed workers, providing them with income support when suitable work is unavailable.
To be eligible for benefits, unemployed workers must meet eligibility requirements established by state laws that conform to federal law, including that they have worked recently, be involuntarily unemployed, and be able and available for work.
UI contributes to Strategic Objective 4.1 – provide income support when work is impossible or unavailable and facilitate return to work.
Partner with state agencies with a focus on bolstering broad program accountability and facilitating performance improvement nationally.
Enact new strategies to prevent, detect, and recover improper payments that states can adopt and provide appropriate technical assistance.
Implement a national vision on reemployment that will promote and support states’ service delivery to all jobseekers, helping reconnect unemployed workers with jobs.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) of the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL) is the principal Federal statistical agency responsible for measuring labor market activity, working conditions, and price changes in the economy.
Its mission is to collect, analyze, and disseminate essential economic information to support public and private decision-making.
Like all Federal statistical agencies, BLS executes its statistical mission with independence, serving its users by providing products and services that are accurate, objective, relevant, timely, and accessible.
Policies and decisions based on BLS data affect virtually all Americans, and the wide range of BLS data products is necessary to fulfill the diverse needs of a broad customer base.
BLS serves the general public, the U.S. Congress, other Federal agencies, State and local governments, business, and labor by providing up-to-date, high-quality statistical information.
It produces some of the Nation’s most sensitive and important economic data.
In line with the Interagency Council on Statistical Policy’s Guidelines for Reporting Performance by Statistical Agencies, BLS measures accuracy, timeliness, relevance, dissemination, and mission achievement.
BLS also reports the full cost to produce its data products.
These six criteria are common among statistical agencies because these are critical aspects of a statistical program’s performance.
Common concepts underlying the specifics of measuring and reporting on statistical agency performance help to inform decision-makers about the performance of statistical agencies.
BLS strategies support these six performance criteria.
BLS supports Strategic Objective 5.1 – Provide sound and impartial information on labor market activity, working conditions, and price changes in the economy for decision making, including support for the formulation of economic and social policy affecting virtually all Americans.
6. Recruit, train, and retain a talented, innovative, and diverse group of individuals who are experts in the production and continuous improvement of its products and services, including employees who will support those functions, and who are well prepared to represent the agency and become its future leaders.
BLS performance measures that support Strategic Objective Goal 5.1 are available in the 2015 Congressional Budget Justification in the Cross-Cutting Measures and Detailed Workload and Performance Tables.
The Department of Labor has identified three performance goals that will be a particular focus through FY 2015.
These goals are a subset of those used to regularly monitor and report performance.
Detailed information on measures and progress for these goals is available at Performance.gov.
This report includes measure data for these goals, as well, but the information is organized by contributing agencies’ performance goals under the DOL Strategic Plan structure.
At the end of each goal statement is an italicized reference to the relevant goal numbers in this document.
Worker safety.
By September 30, 2015, increase the number of abated workplace hazards associated with falls, through inspections at workplaces covered by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and reduce worker fatality rates in mining by five percent per year based on a rolling five-year average.
Industry-recognized credentials.
By September 30, 2015, increase the percentage of training program completers who attain industry-recognized credentials by 10 percent.
Intensive services to veterans.
By September 30, 2015, increase the percent of participants who receive intensive services by Disabled Veterans Opportunity Program specialists up to 75 percent.
DOL also contributed to the Job Training and Veteran Career Readiness Cross-Agency Priority (CAP) Goals.
Please refer to www.Performance.gov for more information.
The workforce system continues to face significant challenges in helping workers get good jobs, earn good wages, and retain their jobs.
As the economy recovers and job growth returns, the reintegration of millions of unemployed and underemployed workers into jobs that pay familysustaining wages is essential for spreading the benefits of the recovery more broadly.
ETA programs2 support training in emerging industry sectors to help workers become more competitive and equip them with the credentials and skills needed to compete in the global labor market.
In FY 2013, ETA provided technical assistance (TA) to the workforce system to improve credential attainment for its customers.
In FY 2014, ETA will continue to emphasize credential attainment to increase individual earning potential.
FY 2014-2015 targets have been adjusted based on a regression model that accounts for the effect of unemployment rates on program performance outcomes and OMB’s assumptions about future economic conditions.
In the next few months, these targets will be updated based on more recent program results.
Although news from the past program year showed that the economy began adding jobs, demand far outpaced supply.
The inverse statistical correlation of local unemployment rates and entered employment rates for participants of publicly-funded workforce programs has long been established.
In fact, through various ETA efforts and improving overall economic conditions, entered employment rates for those who received training in WIA Adult and Dislocated Worker programs increased in PY 2012/FY 2013.
It is the Department’s goal to increase the average earnings of individuals served through the Workforce Investment Act, Trade Adjustment Assistance, and Senior Community Service Employment Programs.
In PY 2012, Over 75 percent of exiters were still employed nine months after completing program services and gaining employment through the WIA Adult, WIA Dislocated Worker, NEG, INA and NFJ programs.
In the coming program year, ETA is testing new ideas and approaches in employment and training to address needs that were amplified during the recession, such as the necessity of adult learners to participate in training while still earning an income, aligning Federal, state and local workforce, education and economic development systems to meet employer demand, strengthening participation of employers, labor, and philanthropic partners in program design and delivery, and the evolution of education and training methods to include technology-based methods.
The WIA Federal-State-local partnership has demonstrated enormous potential for developing and testing alternative service strategies.
ETA will propose, and will continue testing through programs like the Workforce Innovation Fund, alternative strategies in the WIA Adult, Dislocated Worker, and Youth Programs to encourage collaboration across program silos to better serve participants’ needs.
Approaches for the WIA Adult and Dislocated Worker programs include testing training and reemployment services, especially for vulnerable populations, and evaluating practices that have shown promise over the past decade, such as apprenticeships, on-the-job training, and regional and sector strategies.
Sources: WIA Adult - Annual State WIA performance reports (ETA-9091) and quarterly reports (ETA-9090).
Dislocated Worker - Annual State WIA performance reports (ETA-9091) and quarterly reports (ETA-9090).
INAP - Grantee Records.
MSF- WIA Standard Participant Record (WIASPR) and Program Status Summary Reports (ETA-9095).
VETS assesses the performance of the American Job Center system on behalf of veterans served by the Jobs for Veterans State Grants (JVSG) by tracking the services provided to participants and participants’ employment outcomes.
Over the past two fiscal years, VETS federal staff have provided monitoring, oversight, and technical assistance to State Workforce Agencies (SWAs) to aggressively increase the rate of intensive services provided to JVSG participants.
Intensive services include comprehensive and specialized assessments of skill levels and needs, development of an individual employment plan, group and individual career counseling and planning, and short-term skills development (such as interview and communication skills).
Since FY 2009, intensive service rates have increased from 20% to nearly 40%.
In FY 2014, VETS will continue to work with SWAs to improve employment outcomes for veterans and the rates of intensive services provided to JVSG participants.
The Department will release guidance which clarifies that only veterans with significant barriers to employment, or other veteran populations specified by the Secretary, may be referred to the JVSG program.
The guidance will also outline the statutorily-mandated responsibilities of Disabled Veterans’ Outreach Program (DVOP) specialists to provide intensive services to veterans, and of Local Veterans’ Employment Representative (LVER) staff to conduct outreach activities to local businesses and employers.
VETS federal staff will conduct formal audits of American Job Centers to enforce compliance with JVSG policies and provide technical assistance to states, where appropriate.
VETS also reports on the average earnings of participants, six months after exit from the program.
This measure provides an indicator of the quality of employment that JVSG participants retain after program participation.
The average earnings metric has continued to improve with economic conditions, and in FY 2013, exceeded those results prior to the economic recession.
This measure is tracked for all veterans and for the subset of post-9/11 Era veterans, or those who served after September 1, 2001.
VETS uses this information to compare veteran populations and determine the types of services that veterans may need to successfully transition into the civilian workforce.
For example, the average earnings of post-9/11 Era veterans, served by JVSG, are lower than all veterans.
This is partially due to lack of attachment to, or experience in, the civilian workforce and inability to translate military skills and knowledge into civilian occupations.
Beginning in January 2013, 100% of Transition Assistance Program (TAP) DOL Employment Workshop sites implemented new curriculum and transitioned to contract facilitation.
In FY 2014, VETS implemented a standardized assessment tool to measure the delivery of Employment Workshop by contract facilitators.
VETS staff conduct on site assessments, using the tool to rate instructors on 10 elements.
The score, as well as any identified weaknesses or best practices are communicated to VETS leadership and the facilitation contractor.
VETS conducts compliance investigations under the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA).
Beginning in FY 2012, VETS implemented a metric to assess the quality of USERRA investigations.
Each quarter, a sampling of closed cases is reviewed by experienced USERRA investigators.
The results of this measure have remained consistent over the past two years, with cases receiving an average score of 83.4%.
VETS is committed to continuous improvement of its USERRA program, and will experiment with process improvements in FY 2014.
This includes developing a smaller, dedicated group of investigators in one of the agency’s six regions, who will handle all USERRA investigations for that region.
Through investments in youth education and training programs under the WIA Youth formula program, Job Corps, YouthBuild, Trade Adjustment Assistance Community College and Career (TAACCCT) grants, the Department worked to increase the number of participants earning industry-recognized credentials.
The Apprenticeship, Job Corps, WIA Youth, and YouthBuild programs exceeded their degree or certificate attainment targets in PY 2012, while the Job Corps attained its target for the placement in employment, education, or training measure by showing significant gains over the previous two program years.
The FY 2013-2015 targets are based on a methodology developed by DOL for setting national performance targets using regression analysis.
This econometric model uses program results from the prior year, current labor market conditions and individual characteristics to correct for the effects of the business cycle and labor market conditions on the outcomes of employment and training programs, producing targets that objectively reflect the impact of the economic environment on program performance.
In PY 2012, DOL funded and began to enroll participants in the Face Forward grant program.
Face Forward” conveys the idea of youth leaving their past transgressions behind and looking forward towards a promising future.
Through diversion and/or record expungement strategies, these grants give youth a chance to succeed in the workplace and to avoid the stigma of a juvenile record.
The Face Forward grants offer organizations the opportunity to develop programs that address this issue while developing the skills and opportunity youth need to move forward successfully in the workforce.
ETA promotes increased partnerships and collaboration with sponsors of Registered Apprenticeship (including employers) and the workforce and education systems.
The 2012 evaluation of Registered Apprenticeship found that the net benefits for completers of an apprenticeship program were approximately $250,000 while the net social benefits were over $50,000.
Therefore, ETA promotes greater partnerships with WIA and a framework for quality preapprenticeship programs to provide a pathway into Registered Apprenticeship.
Additionally, ETA and VETS will coordinate so that service members and veterans receive credit for military training and experience to shorten the duration of apprenticeships.
ETA is also collaborating with the Department of Education to increase the articulation of an apprenticeship completion certificate to college credit.
Sources: Apprenticeship – Registered Apprenticeship Partners Information Data System (RAPIDS).
YouthBuild – grantees’ quarterly reports.
Job Corps – Job Corps Management Information System.
WIA Youth – Annual State WIA performance reports (ETA-9091).
APG: State/Grantee Quarterly Reports.
During FY 2013, ILAB reported on nine outcome measures established in FY 2011.
ILAB met or exceeded its targets for all four outcome measures this year, and exceeded its FY 2012 performance on three measures.
For FY 2014, ILAB will refine its performance measures to more accurately capture the effectiveness of its work.
Some of the refined measures will be sufficiently similar to previous measures to allow ILAB to continue to examine trends in performance over a multi-year period.
In FY 2013, ILAB exceeded its outcome goal related to policy positions adopted by countries and international organizations.
As a result of ILAB’s activities, 45 policy positions that reflect USG international labor interests and priorities were adopted by international fora and countries.
Examples of FY 2013 accomplishments include ILAB’s close working relationship with the Government of Colombia to carry out reforms to implement the Action Plan Related to Labor Rights; extensive bilateral and multilateral engagement on eliminating child labor in the cocoa sector leading to the adoption of the Regional Action Plan on Child Labor by the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS); and ILAB’s continued engagement in the region leading to the Government of Nigeria’s first-ever National Plan of Action on Child Labor.
ILAB also provided substantial leadership and guidance to the International Labor Organization’s (ILO) Better Work program to promote improvements in the methodology for assessment and advising on factory conditions, particularly on issues that are difficult to monitor and remediate, such as sexual harassment, forced labor and denial of freedom of association.
In FY 2014, ILAB will develop new policy-related measures.
In FY 2013, ILAB reduced its grant funding from $66.375 million to $62.358 million owing to sequestration, but met or substantially exceeded its targets for grant funded projects.
ILAB designed projects that integrated the purposes of worker rights and child labor projects so as to optimize the impact of grant funding.
ILAB was attentive to ensuring sufficient regional coverage, sufficient resources for ILAB high priority initiatives and countries, and ILAB support for US foreign policy priorities.
ILAB will continue to enhance its effectiveness and results without an increase in program resources by deepening and expanding its use of an integrated model of program design.
In recent years, ILAB has made grants of between $56 million and $60 million for child labor eradication, and approximately $6,500,000 for other worker rights initiatives.
With the resources requested for grants in FY 2015, ILAB will carry further its recent approach of funding child labor projects include elements that simultaneously promote broader worker rights and livelihoods.
The integrated efforts undertaken will be in countries where child labor is prevalent, where the political and institutional context offers particular opportunities for the effective application of an integrated approach, and where the adoption of an integrated approach will be of benefit to both child labor eradication and worker rights goals.
This is expected to allow ILAB to increase performance on three outcome indicators without diminution in others.
In FY 2013, ILAB-funded model programs to address worker rights through technical assistance and provided support to improve business compliance and technical capacity of governments and to protect worker rights, in 20 countries, an increase of 12 from the previous year.
This technical assistance entailed working closely with governments, multilateral and regional organizations, and business and workers’ organizations.
In FY 2013, ILAB initiated new projects, implemented innovative child labor elimination programs to provide livelihood services to vulnerable households, continued efforts to build global capacity to combat child labor, and maintained oversight and program management of projects initiated in previous fiscal years.
Working through grantees in 40 countries, ILAB provided education or vocational services to 90,217 children engaged in or at high risk of entering child labor (exceeding its target of 67,077 by 34 percent) and helped increase capacity to address child labor in 29 countries.
Instances of increased capacity included outcomes such as passage of new child labor legislation, training of labor inspectors and other law enforcement officials, and adoption of national action plans to eliminate child labor.
In FY 2013, OSHA reached all four targets for DOL Priority Goals to reduce worker fatalities and to reduce lost time injuries and illnesses for federal workers.
OSHA reached all of the targets for the other measures as well.
In FY 2014, OSHA will focus on continuing to use enforcement, regulation, compliance assistance, and outreach to meet the agency’s priorities of reducing workplace injuries, illnesses, and fatalities.
The number of workplaces in the US makes it impossible for OSHA compliance officers to inspect more than a fraction of them in a year, so OSHA must strategically prioritize its resources to target those issues and areas which will yield the greatest impact.
The agency will selectively and strategically develop and update publications and webpages, translate existing materials into Spanish and other languages, and develop low literacy resources to fill gaps in outreach materials related to these agency and Departmental priorities.
OSHA will continue to seek out and establish Alliances, partnerships, and other cooperative relationships with organizations to better reach small businesses and workers within priority industries and populations.
In the enforcement arena, OSHA will continue to tailor its programmed and unprogrammed inspection programs to most effectively meet its mandate of securing safe and healthy workplaces.
Unprogrammed inspections, primarily complaints, are a vital part of OSHA’s work; properly screening complaints and responding in a timely manner is one of the most effective ways to target dangerous workplaces.
OSHA is therefore working in FY 2014 to analyze how the method of complaint delivery affects handling, and to proactively improve its responsiveness for the digital age, OSHA wil implement e-signatures for its electronic (web-based) complaints.
Programmed inspections are based on analyses of workplaces risks and statistics; they allow OSHA to create data-driven emphasis programs to address the workplaces, practices, and substances which pose the greatest risk of debilitating injuries, illnesses, or death.
Examples of programs OSHA will emphasize in 2014 are National and Local Emphasis Programs (LEPs and NEPs) and the Severe Violators Enforcement Program (SVEP).
Emphasis programs allow OSHA to target specific practices, substances, or even industries which are identified as especially risky.
NEPs have historically been critical in supporting the Secretary’s goal of securing safe and healthy workplaces, and in FY 2014 OSHA will continue to analyze enforcement data, complaints, incidents, and other information/studies.
CSAs and SVEP are tools OSHA uses to target establishments which require improvement across a number of locations (CSAs) or are particularly recalcitrant (SVEP).
In FY 2014 OSHA will continue to utilize CSAs to maximize the impact and scope of OSHA’s enforcement actions and resources, and SVEP to target high-risk workplaces.
OSHA is also working on a number of strategic developments in FY 2014 to improve workplace safety.
One is to shift its workforce to place an increased emphasis on Industrial Hygiene (IH) inspectors.
Additionally, OSHA is working on a new system for measuring inspection activity and managing resource allocation; the system is being trialed in FY 2014 and will be evaluated after year-end to analyze its strengths and weakness.
Finally, OSHA is proposing to amend its recordkeeping regulations to add requirements for the electronic submission of injury and illness information employers are already required to keep under OSHA's regulations for recording and reporting occupational injuries and illnesses.
This will allow OSHA to acquire a much larger database of timely, establishment-specific information about injuries and illnesses in the workplace and help OSHA use its resources more effectively by enabling OSHA to identify the workplaces where workers are at greatest risk.
In FY 2013, MSHA achieved its DOL Priority Goal to reduce mining fatalities.
The five-year rolling average of fatal injuries per 200,000 hours worked fell by six percent, exceeding the target of five percent.
Preliminary data show that both the number of mining fatalities and the fatal injury rate fell to the lowest levels in mining history in FY 2013.
There were 33 total mining fatalities and .0104 mining fatalities per 200,000 hours worked, down from 44 fatalities and .0133 fatalities per 200,000 hours worked in FY 2012.
In the year ahead, MSHA will continue to develop and implement new ways to make enforcement more effective, less predictable, and more strategic, with the goal of continuing this positive trend.
Mining deaths are preventable.
In order to prevent mine deaths, operators must have in place effective safety and health management programs that are constantly evaluated, find-and-fix programs to identify and eliminate mine hazards, and training for all mining personnel.
MSHA has undertaken a number of measures to prevent mining deaths: increased monitoring and strategic enforcement through impact inspections at mines with troubling compliance histories; instituted a more robust Pattern of Violations (POV) program; special initiatives such as "Rules to Live By," which focuses attention on the most common causes of mining deaths; and outreach efforts such as "Safety Pro in a Box," which provides guidance to the metal/nonmetal mining industry on best practices and compliance responsibilities.
These efforts will continue in FY 2014.
MSHA’s potential pattern of violations (PPOV) process focused on chronic violators that have failed to improve compliance in response to increased inspections and other enforcement actions.
In FY 2013, MSHA published a final rule to revise the existing regulation for POV.
MSHA determined that the existing regulation did not adequately achieve the intent of the Mine Act, and that the POV provision should be used to address operators who have demonstrated a disregard for the safety and health of miners.
The new rule simplified the existing POV criteria, improved consistency in applying the POV criteria, and more adequately achieved the statutory intent.
It would also encourage chronic violators to comply with the Mine Act and MSHA’s safety and health standards.
Four coal mining operations were put on notice of a pattern of violations of mandatory health or safety standards under Section 104(e) of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 during the first screening under the new rule.
MSHA launched a new online tool for the mining industry which enables mine operators who implement a corrective action to determine if their mine is successfully reducing its significant and substantial (S&S) violations.
The S&S Rate Calculator is an enhancement to the two-year-old Pattern of Violations Monitoring Tool that allows mine operators, miners, and stakeholders to measure a mine’s performance against MSHA’s specific screening criteria for violations.
For the sixth consecutive year, MSHA achieved its annual goal of completing 100 percent of mandatory inspections at all underground and surface coal mines and MNM mines in FY 2013.
As a result of the training notifications coal operators must provide, MSHA completed 856 approved instructor evaluations in FY 2013, the most ever in a fiscal year.
In FY 2014, MSHA will continue to monitor approved instructors that provide health and safety training to miners.
MSHA will place special emphasis on evaluation of contract instructors.
MSHA met its target to conduct comprehensive noise inspections at MNM.
In FY 2013, MSHA sampled 17.6 percent of MNM mines for noise, thereby exceeding the annual target.
MSHA emphasized the hazardous effects of diesel exhaust and diesel particulate matter and offered best practices on engineering and administrative controls.
MSHA also offered guidance on hazardous communication (Hazcom) programs related to OSHA’s recently published standard.
MSHA discussed these topics during a stakeholder meeting in FY 2013 and published related materials on its website.
MSHA will conduct education and outreach to clarify its MNM health standards and has created an occupational health working group to advise the Assistant Secretary on MSHA’s occupational health agenda.
In FY 2014, MSHA revised this measure to include all health-related issues in addition to noise.
MSHA expects to conduct comprehensive health inspections at 10% of MNM mines in FY 2014.
MSHA met the target for three of its four FY 2013 targets to complete roof control and ventilation mine plan reviews in a timely manner.
Effective approaches to reducing the risk of injury and disease among miners include ensuring that mine operator plans effectively anticipate and control the hazards inherent to the underground mining environment.
To address findings in the Upper Big Branch Internal Review Report, MSHA recently revised policies and procedures related to ventilation plan reviews and published a new roof control plan review handbook.
In FY 2014, MSHA combined these four measures into one composite measure to monitor results.
In FY 2013, MSHA initiated investigations for all 103(g) imminent danger complaints within one day of receipt.
Informed miners are an essential element in maintaining a safe and healthful environment in all mines, at all times.
The Mine Act gives miners the right to be a full stakeholder in their own health and safety.
MSHA will continue to give these complaints the highest priority in FY 2014.
In FY 2013 OFCCP continued its commitment to an aggressive posture of Active Case Enforcement that supports the agency’s three main strategies of effective enforcement, outreach to workers, and regulatory reform.
To capture activities in support of these strategies, OFCCP increased the number of performance measures from six in FY 2011 to 19 in FY 2012 to 27 in FY 2013 and collected data on additional measures to be reported in FY 2014.
OFCCP continued its strategic approach to balancing quantity and quality in FY 2013, and results show that the agency continues to progress towards finding this balance.
OFCCP initiated its comprehensive strategy in FY 2011 by laying the foundation for embedding sustainable organizational change through the initiation of comprehensive regulatory reform, expanded scope of enforcement, unprecedented outreach to workers and vulnerable populations, redesign of quality assurance monitoring, on-boarding and training of hundreds of new compliance officers, and structural reorganization across the agency at many levels.
Enforcement – The FY 2013 enforcement targets were set at levels that would enable compliance officers to balance quantity and quality by maintaining an aggressive audit posture while enforcing disciplined case management that reduces the number of aged cases, resulting in fewer case closures with deficiencies and promoting effective enforcement through case triaging.
Balancing quantity and quality is a major operational shift and cultural change for the organization that can only be fully realized over time.
Outreach/Education – In FY 2013 OFCCP continued its worker-centric outreach strategy by identifying key populations most at risk of employment discrimination and engaging community-based organizations who served those populations.
OFCCP emphasized the importance of quality events and meaningful relationships with community-based organizations and began to collect relevant data to analyze the agency’s outreach effectiveness.
Also in FY 2013, the Chief Evaluation Office developed a formative evaluation design report to examine OFCCP’s outreach processes’ relationship building efforts, affording OFCCP the ability to improve its outreach program design and performance.
Regulatory Agenda – OFCCP completed two major rulemakings in FY 2013 with the announcement in August 2013 of new Section 503 and VEVRAA regulations.
These regulations, published in the Federal Register in September 2013, provide new job opportunities and protection from discrimination in employment for individuals with disabilities and America’s veterans.
The effective date for both of these regulations is March 24, 2014.
OFCCP, concentrating on issuing additional regulatory and subregulatory guidance, finalized a Memorandum of Understanding with the General Services Administration in June 2013 that supports better enforcement in the construction industry.
A revised Federal Contract Compliance Manual (FCCM) was published on OFCCP’s Web site on August 23, 2013 updating the procedures that govern the completion of compliance evaluations.
In September 2013 the agency concluded an 18 month long project that involved reviewing all existing agency policy directives to determine whether they were still relevant, should be rescinded, or should be revised.
This comprehensive review resulted in the rescission of more than 130 directives.
In FY 2013, the Bureau worked closely with the Veterans’ Training and Employment Services (VETS) to plan and implement a Women Veterans Employment Program within the U.S. Department of Labor and improve employment serves for women veterans.
The Bureau continued working with the National Equal Pay Task Force as a leading advocate for equal pay for women, and was the lead in drafting the report Fifty Years After the Equal Pay Act: Assessing the Past, Taking Stock of the Future.
The Bureau also conducted a gender analysis as part of the Department’s Worker Rights: Access, Assertion, and Knowledge (WRAAK) survey, which focused on women workers’ experiences with wage and hour and safety violations in the workplace, and access to education materials on workers’ rights.
The Bureau collaborated with the Chief Evaluation Office to fund a multi-year demonstration project to test promising strategies that will improve outcomes for youth who are disconnected from work, school, and sometimes family.
The Bureau began collaborating with the Employment and Training Administration on a five-year study to design, implement, and evaluate a demonstration pilot focused on assessing strategies for overcoming barriers encountered by individuals desiring employment in nontraditional occupations.
In FY 2014, the Bureau will conduct research to identify successful models and promising practices for overcoming barriers to women’s recruitment, advancement, and retention in higher-paying jobs in the transportation, manufacturing, and technology sectors.
In conjunction with the 50th anniversary of President Kennedy’s Commission on the Status of Women’s American Women report, the Bureau plans to complete a series of policy and research papers addressing key issues facing women in today’s labor force, such as pay secrecy, occupational segregation and the gender wage gap, paid leave, work-life balance, effective scheduling for hourly workers, and family responsibilities discrimination.
The Bureau will also conduct research on challenges facing women veterans and their employers and policy options that may improve hiring and retention for women veterans.
The Bureau will develop materials and educate women workers on their rights and employers on their responsibilities to ensure safe and fair workplaces in FYs 2014 and 2015.
The Bureau will conduct a Working Women Survey in order to identify women’s current employment issues and challenges and barriers to economic security.
The survey will provide the Bureau with information that can be used to develop a research and policy agenda to better serve working women.
The Bureau will identify and promote a variety of promising policies and practices that address these key issues, and will work with selected collaborators to advance and support their implementation and to increase education and awareness.
The Bureau is collecting baseline data on the percent of collaborators implementing recommended policies/strategies.
Beginning in FY 2010, through the Disability Employment Initiative (DEI), ODEP developed strategies designed to increase access to and use of America’s Job Centers services by all customers, including adults and youth with disabilities.
These strategies include promoting the use of Ticket to Work program through their participation as Employment Networks.
In FY 2014, ODEP and ETA will expand the DEI model to include career pathways for youth and those workers with significant disabilities.
ODEP will also implement an initiative to help people with disabilities acquire industry recognized credentials through innovative partnerships with community colleges and provide technical assistance to private employers and to State and Federal agencies regarding the hiring, retention, and advancement of persons with disabilities.
In FY 2013, OLMS exceeded all six of its performance goals.
These six performance goals include three priority measures established in FY 2008 and three additional measures established in FY 2011.
In FY 2008, OLMS established baselines for its three priority measures: the elapsed number of days to resolve union officer election complaints, the percent of electronically filed reports, and the percent of targeted audits that result in criminal cases.
These measures and their targets were established to promote OLMS effectiveness and efficiency, and to increase union financial integrity, democracy, and labor-management transparency.
These are major tenets of the Department’s goal to Protect workers’ rights.
OLMS strives to more effectively identify unions where criminal activity may be present by identifying anomalies in union financial reports and using other targeting strategies.
OLMS has become more successful in this area, exceeding its financial integrity performance goal for four consecutive years – culminating with a “fallout” rate of 20.97 percent in FY 2013.
This result was a significant increase from the FY 2012 result of 13.81 percent.
Fallouts occur when OLMS performs compliance audits of unions and discover possible criminal activity that results in the opening of a criminal investigation.
As a means to continue this improvement, OLMS established a work group that identified targeting methods and “red flags” that may indicate criminal activity.
By instituting risk-based audit targeting models, fewer audits can be undertaken while maintaining a level number of criminal cases (and also increasing the percentage of audits that result in the opening of a criminal case).
OLMS has invested in new technology to facilitate the electronic filing of union financial reports.
Between FY 2010 and FY 2012, OLMS implemented a web-based system for the electronic filing of Form LM-2, LM-3, and LM-4 union annual reports.
In FY 2013, the availability of these electronic forms as well as a new electronic form for the LM-30 coupled with outreach efforts coordinated through OLMS’ district offices, resulted in OLMS exceeding its FY 2013 goal of 34.5 percent as 42.4 percent of all files were returned electronically.
Electronic filing is now available to over two-thirds of those people and entities required to file reports under the LMRDA.
In passing the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA) in 1959, Congress established a 60-day deadline for court filing of an election complaint.
Quicker resolution of election complaints accelerates restoration of democratic voice and a democratically operated union.
In FY 2008, OLMS began tracking elapsed days, with 92 elapsed days as the baseline.
OLMS has improved on this result in each subsequent year.
2013, OLMS reduced the days elapsed per case to 71 days against a target of 75 days.
OLMS continues to fine-tune methods for further reducing its elapsed days including finding new ways to utilize a team-based approach for handling election cases (when resources permit) and engaging earlyinvolvement with the Office of the Solicitor in cases that may result in litigation.
In FY 2011, OLMS began tracking three additional measures.
For these three measures, OLMS intends to reduce the number of chronically delinquent filers of labor organization financial reports, increase the number of LM-10 and LM-20 persuader reports filed, and increase its web site satisfaction index score with baselines for these measures were established in FY 2010.
In FY 2010, OLMS determined there were 2,070 chronically delinquent filers, unions that have not filed a required financial report on time each of the prior three years.
Because timely filing is a basic tenet of financial transparency, OLMS determined that reducing the number of these chronically delinquent unions was important to this goal.
For FY 2013, OLMS established a target of 1,770 chronically delinquent filers.
OLMS exceeded this target, ending the year with 1,226 chronically delinquent filers.
In FY 2013, OLMS expanded its efforts to reduce this number by identifying, in a more timely manner, those unions that were already chronically delinquent in FY 2012, and, in addition, those unions that have been delinquent the past two filings (one year short of meeting the definition of chronically delinquent).
OLMS targeted these “at-risk” unions in FY 2013, offering compliance assistance to these and existing chronically delinquent filers in an effort to avoid another untimely filing.
Under the LMRDA, companies and outside agents/consultants are required to file an LM-10 or LM-20 when they arrange for services that are designed to influence or persuade employees in a union representation election.
For FY 2011, OLMS established a goal of obtaining 545 persuader reports.
For FY 2013, OLMS had a goal of 690 reports.
OLMS efforts resulted in the submission of 880 LM-10 and LM-20 persuader reports – 190 above the target for this measure.
As in FY 2011 and FY 2012, many of the FY 2013 submissions were delinquent reports for past years from filers who were unaware that these reports were required.
OLMS expects that in time, most delinquent reports will be filed and subsequent filings will be for the current year only.
Should this occur, OLMS would expect that the number of filings will level off.
One major effort under this initiative is to cross-match LM-10 and LM-20 reports – since both the company and the persuader are required to file a report for the same set of services.
A secondary effort is an educational effort that informs potential filers as to the requirements under the LMRDA.
The final measure is customer satisfaction with the OLMS web site.
OLMS established an index baseline of 58 in FY 2010 and a goal to increase the index score to 61 in FY 2013.
This goal was exceeded as the OLMS customer satisfaction index score in FY 2012 was 64.
OLMS will continue to analyze the customer satisfaction surveys to identify areas where improvements to the web site can be implemented, improvements expected to increase the customer satisfaction score.
OSHA supports Strategic Objective 3.2 by administering and enforcing twenty-two whistleblower protection statutes that protect workers who speak out to report perceived violations of the law.
Principally, this includes Section 11(c) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSH Act), which prohibits employers from discriminating against employees who bring workplace hazards to the attention of the employer or the Agency.
The additional twenty-one whistleblower protection provisions protect workers in a variety of industries who speak out against unsafe and/or unlawful behavior, including violations of airline, commercial motor carrier, consumer product, environmental, financial reform, food safety, health insurance reform, motor vehicle safety, nuclear, pipeline, public transportation agency, railroad, maritime, and securities laws.
Over the last 16 years, OSHA’s whistleblower enforcement responsibilities have doubled, and the number of new whistleblower cases filed with the agency has steadily increased each year, from about 1,900 new cases filed in 1997, to over 2,900 new cases filed in FY 2013.
In response to the growing demand for whistleblower investigations, OSHA has recently made several impactful changes to its whistleblower protection programs, including elevating the program to a stand-alone Directorate, establishing the Whistleblower Protection Advisory Committee, and creating an internal steering committee to guide policymaking and future planning.
In FY2014, OSHA will focus on improving the whistleblower protection programs’ investigative functions so that whistleblower investigations are completed with maximal efficiency and quality.
For example, OSHA will implement a new reporting structure in all regional whistleblower programs to strengthen caseload management and oversight of field investigations.
Additionally, to encourage timely and equitable resolution of disputes, OSHA will expand the availability of its Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) program, in which OSHA experts assist whistleblower parties to discuss resolving their disputes via voluntary settlement agreements.
To further the thorough and accurate completion of whistleblower investigations, OSHA also plans to enhance and expand upon the core whistleblower training courses that are available to its whistleblower staff.
OSHA has two new performance measures for tracking the effectiveness of OSHA’s whistleblower enforcement efforts.
The first measure, Average Age of Pending Whistleblower Investigations, monitors the program’s efforts to reduce its backlog of pending whistleblower investigations by tracking the age of cases that are pending a determination from the Agency.
Measuring this data will help OSHA ascertain that regional whistleblower programs are efficiently prioritizing and completing whistleblower investigations, and will further OSHA’s customer service goals by highlighting the importance of completing investigations in a timely fashion.
The second measure, Average Days to Complete New Complaint Screening Process, tracks OSHA’s efforts to provide attentive customer service to new complaint filers.
By measuring the average time that it takes for OSHA to determine if a new whistleblower complaint is appropriate for investigation; this measure will provide a meaningful measurement of the OSHA’s responsiveness to new complainants.
As OSHA continues its efforts to improve the whistleblower protection programs, OSHA will be able to provide more quality investigations to more workers, which will help the Agency to reassure workers that voicing concerns will not leave them susceptible to retaliation and discrimination.
Without this assurance, OSHA cannot realize its goal of providing safe, healthy and fair workplaces to American workers.
MSHA has also taken a number of actions to give miners a better voice in the workplace on their own safety and health.
In addition to swiftly responding to safety and health complaints by miners, MSHA, in conjunction with DOL, filed more 105 (c) discrimination complaints during fiscal year and calendar year 2013 on behalf of miners than any time in history, and sought the second highest number of temporary reinstatements of miners to their jobs in 2013.
In FY 2013, MSHA developed and issued a Miners’ Representative Guide designed to further improve and educate everyone in understanding the roles, rights, and responsibilities of miners’ representatives.
This Guide is a supplement to the Guide to Miners Rights and Responsibilities.
MSHA’s Office of Assessments, Accountability, Special Enforcement and Investigations (OAASEI), formerly the Office of Assessments, oversees MSHA’s program to protect miners from discrimination when they exercise their right to report health and safety hazards without fear of retaliation.
MSHA completed 226 discrimination case investigations in FY 2013, completing 172 cases (76 percent) within 60 days.
MSHA resolved 115 temporary reinstatement requests in FY 2013, completing 83 reviews (72 percent) within 20 days.
Both targets (75 percent and 70 percent, respectively) were reached.
A key component of this Administration is the increased attention to the enforcement of the anti-discrimination provisions contained in the 1977 Act.
This was reinforced by the tragedy at the Upper Big Branch (UBB) mine.
For the four years prior to the disaster, no one working at UBB had filed a hazard complaint, even though post-disaster investigations documented long-standing problems at that mine.
MSHA has distributed materials directly to miners and has beefed up its special investigations staff to work on claims of retaliation.
In 2011, MSHA updated its Miners’ Rights Handbook and developed new training tools, which are available online.
In FY 2013, the Agency, working with the Department of Labor, filed 34 requests for temporary reinstatement, the second highest number on record, with the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission on behalf of miners who submitted complaints of discrimination in the form of a suspension, layoff, discharge or other adverse action.
Additionally, the department filed 58 complaints alleging mine safety discrimination during 2013.
The 58 discrimination complaints DOL filed on behalf of miners in FY 2013 was an all-time record, doubling the previous record of 29 in FY 2011.
To assess whether quality investigations are conducted, MSHA will perform a headquarters review of all discrimination investigations conducted by its enforcement personnel.
In FY 2013, WHD resolved 72.66 percent of its FMLA investigations within the fiscal year and baselined the percent of no violation investigations with a result of 39.74 percent.
In FY 2013, WHD implemented an enforcement strategy that expanded WHD’s responses to FMLA complaints including more on-site investigations and policy reviews which is more strategic and provides greater ability to secure corporate-wide compliance.
These efforts will be balanced against timely resolution of complaints.
WHD relies on a balanced set of measures to evaluate the implementation of its strategic enforcement approach to compliance.
These measures capture data on productivity, prioritization, and quality.
Over the last three years, WHD has shifted its resources from complaint-based to directed enforcement to promote compliance on behalf of workers in certain industries or program areas.
By better integrating the directed and complaint investigations, WHD maximizes limited enforcement resources towards the goal of improving compliance at the industry-level and reaching the greatest number of vulnerable workers.
In FY 2013, WHD increased the percent of directed investigations to 44 percent while continuing to reduce the no violation rate for both complaint and directed investigations.
The no violation rate is one indication of whether WHD is selecting the right employers for investigation.
These results show the gap between complaint and directed investigations narrowing, which demonstrates that WHD directed investigations are nearly as accurate as a complaint in identifying employers with violations.
Also importantly, directed investigations reach workers that are least likely to complain.
The FY 2013 results show an average age non-residential construction DBRA wage rates of 42 months, which is short of the targeted 36 months and an increase from the number of highway surveys that are most current of all the construction types.
WHD has subsequently implemented process changes and is refining its methods for selecting surveys for updates.
WHD expects to see a reduction in the average age as a result of these efforts in FY 2014.
Foreign labor certification programs have as a primary responsibility the review of employer-filed applications requesting the Secretary of Labor’s certification in order to proceed with the employment-based immigration process.
The fundamental determination, by statute, which must be made prior to the granting of labor certification, concerns whether the hiring of a foreign worker will adversely impact the wages and working conditions of U.S. workers, and that no qualified U.S. workers are willing or available to fill a given vacancy.
The Secretary has delegated the responsibilities for the administration of permanent and temporary labor certification programs to the Employment and Training Administration’s (ETA) Office of Foreign Labor Certification (OFLC).
Statutes, regulations, and administrative requirements establish mandatory timeframes within which the OFLC must issue a final determination or take certain actions on employer-filed applications for permanent or temporary labor certification.
OFLC places a high priority on processing employer applications for jobs where there are either statutory or regulatory required processing times.
A key and long standing challenge within the foreign labor certification programs has been balancing program integrity activities (and the impact of those efforts) on overall case processing times and the generation of case backlogs.
This balancing is affected by available staff resources for processing, the merits of the applications submitted, and the volume of applications filed within a given year.
Eligible U.S. employers will continue to have access to foreign workers when qualified domestic workers are not available.
These goals align OWCP with the Secretary’s vision of Promoting and Protecting Opportunity and the strategic objectives of the Department of Labor (DOL).
OWCP supports Department of Labor Strategic Goal 4: “Secure retirement, health, and other employee benefits and, for those not working, provide income security” and Strategic Objective 4.1, Provide income support when work is impossible or unavailable and facilitate return to work.
Income Support is provided by OWCP through the prompt and accurate adjudication of claims and payment of benefits.
Ongoing maintenance of cases receiving long-term benefits, which includes regular reviews to confirm entitlement and payment accuracy, promotes the integrity of OWCP’s benefit delivery.
OWCP performance measures also focus on expediting the receipt of new claims from employers to avoid up-front delays in claims processing.
OWCP sets performance standards that seek to balance production demands with expected quality levels while ensuring that benefits and services are timely and accurately delivered to workers.
Return to Work is most successful through early identification of work injury or illness, prompt development of case information, and efficient provision of assistance services that will support recovery and return to work.
In particular, OWCP uses Disability Management strategies in the FECA program to assist Federal workers with injury recovery and with returning to work.
OWCP uses contract nurses to make early contact and coordinate among claimants, employing agencies and medical providers.
The nurse advises injured workers and assesses their conditions; confirms return-to-work status; obtains a treatment plan from the treating physician; and works with employing agencies for return to work.
If claimants remain out of work for extended periods, OWCP continues regular monitoring to identify cases when medical conditions improve and provide vocational rehabilitation and job placement services as soon as it is feasible.
In addition, OWCP has upgraded data and communications systems to improve claims filing and other information exchanges with employers and claimants.
Disability Management relies upon the engagement of Federal employers to share and employ proven return to work best practices.
Two Government-wide initiatives have focused Federal employers on Return to Work.
These include Executive Order 13548 to increase Federal employment of injured workers and workers with disabilities, and the four-year (FY 2011 – FY 2014) Presidential “Protecting Our Workers and Ensuring Reemployment” (POWER) initiative, jointly directed by OWCP and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
Of the seven government-wide performance goals established by POWER, OWCP is responsible for four.
Increase the percent of Wage-loss Claims filed by Federal employers within 5 business days to 75.7 percent.
Increase the share of Federal employees that return to work within two years of entering FECA’s Disability Management program – OWCP measures the performance of 14 of the largest Executive Branch agencies to improve return-to-work rates.
These agencies were also formed into the POWER Return to Work Council by OWCP as a forum to regularly review performance results, share best practices, and set challenging individual agency goals.
In early FY 2013, DFEC shared the results of an independent study to identify successful injured worker reemployment and disability hiring best practices being used in the Federal Government that could be exported to other Federal agencies.
From FY 2009 to FY 2013, the percentage of injured workers receiving FECA disability management services, and returning to work within two years of injury, increased from 85.8 percent to 91.9 percent.
While the FY 2013 result was an improvement over previous years, the annual target for FY 2013 was not met.
Budgetary factors may have affected agencies’ reemployment efforts this past year, but an ongoing performance improvement challenge remains with certain Federal agencies with employees in more hazardous missions or having other occupational reemployment challenges.
To improve RTW numbers, OWCP is exploring the use of more surgical strategies aimed toward those agencies.
Reduce Government-wide Lost Production Day (LPD) rates – Under POWER, Executive Branch agencies are directed to reduce LPD rates (per 100 employees) by 1 percent per year through FY 2014.
LPD rates provide an index reflecting the overall incidence and severity of workplace injuries and the duration of lost time in the first year following occurrence of injury or illness.
RTW rates reflect the effectiveness of DFEC to assist with recovery and return to work and the Federal agencies to reemploy their injured workers.
In FY 2013, the Government-wide average LPD rate was reduced further to 34.6 days, exceeding the target of 34.7 days.
Timely submission of Notices of Injury and Wage-Loss Claims – The ability of OWCP to promptly initiate intervention and return to work services is improved if Federal employers are timely in the submission of injury reports and wage-loss claims.
Earlier receipt of these forms also enables OWCP to begin claims adjudication and payment processing sooner.
POWER goals emphasize prompt filing of claims and the use of technology to facilitate the filing process.
Several Federal agencies with Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) capability made immediate significant gains in timeliness subsequent to their adoption of EDI.
To expand electronic filing capability to all agencies, OWCP developed a web-based capability, the Employees’ Compensation and Operations Portal (ECOMP), and continues to offer this electronic submission capability to all Federal employing agencies to further cut the time of delivery.
In FY 2013, Federal agencies improved by filing 86.9 percent of Notices of Injury within 10 business days and 79.9 percent of wage-loss claims within 5 business days.
Increase the timeliness of First Reports of Injury and First Payment of Compensation – OWCP emphasizes the performance of Longshore and Harbor Workers’ employers using four performance measures to confirm that injury reports and first payment of benefits are timely filed and first payments of compensation benefits are made promptly.
Longshore improvement strategies include a combination of engaging with employers by communicating expectations/requirements; formally publishing performance results; and providing education and technical assistance.
Improved communications and information sharing between the parties are also essential to dispute resolution.
Timely resolution of disputed issues minimizes interruptions to benefit processing and facilitates more timely return to work of those injured workers.
OWCP met all four of its Longshore program targets.
Injury report timeliness in FY 2013 for DBA cases was 85 percent within 30 days against a goal of 83 percent.
First payment timeliness in FY 2013 for DBA cases was 67 percent within 30 days against a goal of 62 percent within 30 days.
Injury report timeliness in FY 2013 for non-DBA cases was 86 percent within 30 days against a goal of 85 percent.
First payment timeliness in FY 2013 for non-DBA cases was 87 percent within 30 days against a goal of 85 percent.
Black Lung Claims Decision Timeliness – OWCP exceeded the FY 2013 performance targets for the Black Lung Program.
Proposed Decision and Order (PDO) processing times were reduced by 13 percent to 221 days.
The average time in days for the Development of Medical Evidence was reduced by 17 percent to 83 days.
In FY 2013, claims received increased to 6,420 compared to 5,368 claims filed in FY 2012.
This increase is attributable to the economy and mine closures and is having some impact on claims processing time.
Black Lung Program improvement strategies will include continuing to engage coal mine operators directly to emphasize claims filing timeliness and converting new case files to electronic form to improve processing efficiency.
The annual result for the Development of Medical Evidence was better than anticipated.
A major contributing factor for this performance improvement is the Black Lung Programs’ work with several large-volume clinics and diagnostic physicians to streamline exam notification and scheduling procedures.
However, the increase in the number of claims received in FY 2013 is also having an impact on this performance measure.
5) working with the Health Resource and Services Administration of HHS (HRSA) to encourage, where possible, the inclusion of medical scheduling timeliness standards in the awarding of grants to clinics partially funded by HRSA.
Timely Adjudication in EEOICPA Claims – OWCP’s Division of Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation (DEEOIC) provides timely claims adjudication and benefit delivery.
In FY 2013, DEEOIC tracked performance for two new goals to measure the overall time to process claims, from intake to final decision.
The performance measurements combine Part B and Part E results and account for the various actions a case may require, including time for dose reconstruction or oral hearing.
These measures provide a more transparent view of the claims process, including time spent in case development outside of DEEOIC at NIOSH.
Average time to process cases sent to NIOSH when a hearing was held was reduced by 100 days compared to FY 2012 to 452 day against a target of 550 days.
Average time to process cases sent to NIOSH when a hearing was not held was reduced to 320 days against a target of 325 days.
Several initiatives during FY 2013 were aimed at further reducing processing times in DEEOIC.
The Energy Compensation System (ECS) continues to be refined and updated and enhances the way the program manages cases technologically.
Deployment of an electronic method of sharing information with the Department of Energy (DOE) for verification of employment and other records also improved program timeliness.
DEEOIC is imaging documents through the OWCP Imaging System (OIS).
Imaging of documents allows for ease of transferring files between offices, reductions in storage of claims files, and easier portability of case files.
These initiatives are expected to continue to impact the program in a positive way in FY 2014 - 2015.
The Federal role in UI is to set broad policy for the program, establish performance measures and standards, provide technical assistance to States, monitor State performance, promote conformity and compliance of State laws and operations with Federal law, and fund the administration of State and Federal UI programs.
While State laws must meet minimum Federal requirements to participate in the Federal-State UI program, States have broad discretion in establishing eligibility requirements.
Facilitate Claimant Reemployment – Percent of UI claimants reemployed by the end of the first quarter after quarter in which they received first payment: The majority of states met their Acceptable Level of Performance (ALP) for the PY ending December 2012, and the U.S. UI reemployment rate met the target, as of the third quarter of FY 2013, the most recent data available.
For the quarter ending December 2012, 18 states did not meet their state ALP; States failing to achieve their state ALP were required to develop a corrective action plan as part of their FY 2014 SQSP submission.
Detect Overpayments – Percent of the amount of estimated overpayments that States detect established for recovery: Performance exceeded the target for the fourth consecutive FY.
However, 18 states did not meet the ALP.
Additionally, the rate decrease from the previous FY reflects in part the diminished effect on the measure of the inclusion of Extended Benefits (EB) overpayments in the ETA 227 data and the decrease in EB outlays for FY 2013.
States failing to meet the 50 percent overpayment detection ALP were required to develop a corrective action plan as part of their FY 2014 State Quality Service Plan submission.
Percent of Employer Liability Determinations Made Promptly – Percentage of determinations about UI tax liability of new employers made within 90 days of the end of the first quarter they became liable: Performance exceeded the target and half of the states improved performance over the previous FY; only one state did not meet the ALP for this measure.
States failing to meet the 70 percent ALP were required to develop a corrective action plan as part of their FY 2014 SQSP submission.
The TAA Program provides training, income support, job search allowances, relocation allowances, and employment and case management services that expand opportunities for employment and prosperity for trade-affected workers who are threatened to lose their jobs, have lost their jobs, or a significant amount of their wages is reduced due to the impact of international trade.
New provisions for TAA benefits and services under the 2009 and 2011 amendments are reflected in improved outcomes from 2011 onward for the Entered Employment Rate.
Annual goals for the Employment Retention Rate were met or exceeded in all years in the last five years, and exceeded the goal by more than 7 percent in the two most recent fiscal years.
During FY 2013, EBSA continued its work on implementing and enforcing the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), which has had a significant impact on the Agency’s workload and regulatory priorities.
In FY 2013, EBSA conducted more pension and health plan investigations than in any other of the past five years.
In an ongoing effort to improve performance and learn from past experience, EBSA is also conducting a study of recent years’ enforcement efforts to establish a baseline for development of a scoring system that could be utilized to assign weights to enforcement results, both monetary and non-monetary.
Our aim is to develop more sophisticated measures that look at more than the raw number of cases “closed with results.”
Cases are not identical units.
They vary in significance to the agency, the participants, and the broader public interests that the agency serves.
The agency’s measures should reflect this reality.
Accordingly, EBSA is working on more sophisticated measures than simple counts of closed cases.
As a related matter, EBSA has also developed a “Major Case” initiative to focus more enforcement resources on cases that have significant impact on participants and beneficiaries and plan assets, such as service provider investigations.
The Major Case Enforcement Priority was initiated in FY 2013.
In FY 2014, EBSA will devote 10% of investigative time to major cases.
This shift and increase in enforcement resources to major cases that require more resources and take more investigative time to complete impacts EBSA’s ability to close the same number of investigations as in prior years, even with an increase in enforcement resources.
As the agency increases its focus on major cases, however, we expect to have larger recoveries and the ability to obtain more systemic relief that would benefit many more participants than under our current approach.
Additionally, EBSA made significant progress in closing Sample Investigation Program (SIP) cases.
The SIP gives EBSA a broad measure of the rate of baseline employee benefit plan compliance with the civil provisions of Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA).
The preliminary SIP results indicate an overall non-compliance rate of 70.5% (margin of error of +/- 6% at a 95% confidence level) including any and all violations of ERISA without regard to the seriousness or pervasiveness of the violations.
A minor reporting or paper violation that caused no injury and had little importance to plan participants is treated the same as a violation that imperils hundreds of millions of dollars.
As a result, the bare baseline statistic does not provide a strong measure of whether the plan universe is in substantial compliance with ERISA’s obligations.
Accordingly, in FY 2014, EBSA plans to develop measures that better capture the significance of the ERISA violations detected, as it re-evaluates closed SIP cases.
With this additional information, EBSA will re-estimate the baseline SIP estimates in a way that yields more useful information.
The Office of Outreach, Education and Assistance provided superior participant assistance by responding to 99 percent of all written inquiries within 30 days of receipt and responding to over 99 percent of telephone inquiries by the close of the next business day.
Total inquiry volume for the fiscal year exceeded 236,000.
This informal resolution of complaints without utilizing the more resource intensive investigative process enables EBSA to direct its investigative assets to more egregious and wide-spread violations of ERISA.
In addition, the Participant Assistance Program plays a critical role in EBSA’s overall enforcement program.
When EBSA’s Participant Assistance Program receives an inquiry or complaint from a participant that upon further analysis indicates a potential fiduciary breach or a problem that impacts all or several participants in the plan, that inquiry is referred to the enforcement staff for possible investigation.
Referrals from the Participant Assistance Program in FY 2013 resulted in 775 enforcement cases being opened.
In FY 2013, EBSA exceeded its customer satisfaction target of 69% by two points to achieve a 71% customer satisfaction rating.
This is the highest level in the history of the study.
EBSA will continue this study with The Gallup Organization to evaluate our world class Participant Assistance Program in FY 2014 as it reaches for a target of 72%.
The Agency also conducted outreach and education programs designed to educate plan participants and officials regarding their rights and responsibilities under ERISA.
These activities are a critical component of our efforts to enhance the benefit security of America’s workers, retirees and their families.
EBSA believes that retirement, health and other benefits will be more secure if plan officials are more knowledgeable and therefore in a better position to be in compliance.
In addition, better informed plan participants receive more of the benefits to which they are entitled under their plan and bring potential violations to the attention of EBSA.
EBSA completed 909 ACA outreach activities reaching over 30,000 individuals, held 849 rapid response workshops for dislocated workers, distributed over 373,000 educational publications, and hosted over 10 million visitors on the Agency’s website.
Strategic Objective 5.1 – Provide sound and impartial information on labor market activity, working conditions, and price changes in the economy for decision making, including support for the formulation of economic and social policy affecting virtually all Americans.
In FY 2013, BLS reached 100 percent of the underlying timeliness, accuracy, and relevance targets for its Principal Federal Economic Indicators.
In addition, BLS measured dissemination through the Average number of Internet site user sessions each month, and exceeded its target of 7.8 million in FY 2013 by hosting 8.8 million user sessions.
Finally, in FY 2013, BLS exceeded its target of 75 by achieving a score of 77 on the American Customer Satisfaction Index, which measures customer satisfaction with its full Web site.
Notes: BLS revised its performance framework in 2014.
Cross-cutting measures are new beginning in FY 2014.
The FY 2009 - 2013 results are shown for comparative purposes only.
Because this APR is primarily a planning document that uses historical information to inform future strategies and targets, it is organized around goals and measures selected to represent Departmental goals for the budget year (FY 2015).
Under GPRA, performance goals, measures and targets are identified for reporting purposes in the Congressional Budget Justification (CBJ) issued during that fiscal year.
Therefore, DOL is obliged to report PY 2012 and FY 2013 results for measures listed in its FY 2014 Performance Plan, which was published as part of the FY 2014 CBJ in April 2013 (see www.dol.gov/dol/budget/).
Some measures have since been revised, replaced, or discontinued – many due to the update of the Department’s Strategic Plan.
The table below lists these performance measures, their targets and results for PY 2012/FY 2013 – organized by the Outcome Goal they supported in the FY 2014 CBJ.
Results are not provided for measures that were new this year, i.e., their target was to collect baseline data.