Mission: To foster, promote, and develop the welfare of the wage earners, job seekers, and retirees of the United States; improve working conditions; advance opportunities for profitable employment; and assure work-related benefits and rights.
Agencies that directly support Departmental goals and objectives in this report are grouped by program type in the following table.
The column on the right indicates, for each agency, which Strategic Objectives include performance measures in this report.
Brief descriptions of each agency and the programs they administer, organized by program type, follow this Overview.
This report explains how DOL manages programs to improve the lives of American workers.
It also satisfies the requirement of the Government Performance and Results Modernization Act of 2010 (GPRMA) to provide information on actual performance and progress in achieving goals identified in the Annual Performance Plan (APP).
Measures and targets for FY 2014 were updated in the FY 2013 Annual Performance Report (APR), which was the Department’s FY 2015 Annual Performance Plan.
The FY 2014 APR serves as the FY 2016 APP, updates measures and targets for FY 2015, and establishes targets consistent with the FY 2016 Congressional Budget Justification.
Some measures are dropped or changed between reports.
To present the most current information, the APR provides complete information for the budget year measures only – in this case, those retained or added in FY 2016 – including actual performance for the five preceding years, if available, plus targets for the most recent year, the current year, and the budget year.
Targets and results for measures dropped or changed are in the Measures Discontinued section.
The Strategic Goals sections present results and plans organized by the structure laid out in the DOL FY 2014-2018 Strategic Plan (see http://www.dol.gov/dol/aboutdol/).
The plan includes five strategic goals (general outcomes clearly linked to the Department’s mission), ten strategic objectives that articulate more specific goals associated with one or more programs and DOL agencies, and 19 performance goals that outline agency contributions to the objectives.
Within each strategic objective section, narratives for each contributing agency explain the data, summarize the analyses, provide plans, and provide important context and details as needed to interpret the data and brief summary analyses that follow in tabular form.
These performance goal summary tables list each applicable agency goal, its key indicators, and applicable targets, results, and status (whether or not results reach or exceed the target, indicated by Y or N).
Where “baseline” appears in the target cell for new indicators, no data were available for establishing a numerical target.
If results improve over the prior year but do not reach the target, “I” appears in the status cell.
The last three columns identify what worked, what didn’t work, and plans to improve results.
Budget uncertainties and cuts bring pressure to prioritize and to be more productive.
To address this challenge and continually improve its programs, DOL uses results-based, data-driven management techniques.
DOL constantly assesses whether efforts are successful, and why – and seeks ways of doing better.
Each DOL agency prepares an annual Operating Plan that details the strategies and resources it will apply to reach goals and objectives at all levels of the organization.
These operating plans seek to balance quantity with quality, establish ambitious targets for continuous improvement of program performance, demonstrate prioritization of resource allocation, and identify evidence supporting our strategies.
Departmental leaders review progress against those operating plans each quarter to monitor progress and hold agencies accountable for implementing the plans, achieving milestones, and making adjustments as needed.
Agency heads and senior staff meet each quarter with the Deputy Secretary and the Performance Improvement Officer.
Agencies’ submit narrative explanations and analysis of quarter and yearto-date data – prepared with Department staff assistance – for discussion at the meeting.
Discussions focus on implications of the data for strategies (what’s working).
Agencies usually leave the meeting with action items for the next quarter.
The review process has focused Departmental leadership on strategic management of core functions through the use of program performance and budget data.
Identification and discussion of key measures, annual and seasonal targets, and how budgets, workload and strategies affect results have helped communicate priorities and improve performance against benchmarks.
Descriptions of each challenge, progress to date and what remains to be done are summarized in the FY 2014 Agency Financial Report (www.dol.gov/dol/aboutdol/).
The Chief Evaluation Office (CEO) in the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy works closely with agency staff to design, fund, and implement program evaluations.
The results from evaluations inform policy, advance DOL's mission, and improve its performance-based management initiatives in support of GPRMA.
For more information see http://www.dol.gov/asp/evaluation/.
The FY 2014 Summary of Performance and Financial Information includes an assessment by the Secretary of the reliability and completeness of DOL performance data reported under the GPRMA.
The Department satisfies this requirement with Agency Head-level attestations that the data do not contain significant limitations that can lead to inaccurate assessments of results.
The Employment and Training Administration provides employment assistance, labor market information, and job training through the administration of the following programs: programs authorized by the Workforce Investment and Opportunity Act of 2014 (WIOA) for adults, dislocated workers, youth (including Job Corps), and targeted populations; Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) authorized by the Trade Act of 1974, as amended; Employment Services authorized under the Wagner-Peyser Act; Foreign Labor Certification activities authorized by the Immigration and Nationality Act; the Senior Community Service Employment Program authorized by the Older Americans Act; Apprenticeship programs authorized by the National Apprenticeship Act; and Competitive Grants for Worker Training and Placement in High Growth and Emerging Industry Sectors authorized under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Recovery Act).
The public workforce system has a vital role to play in our knowledge-based economy, directly contributing to our nation’s global competitiveness and economic productivity by providing lifelong learning opportunities and a broad array of services.
The economy’s downturn posed substantial economic and workforce challenges to our nation, but the workforce system is responding to these challenges by becoming more flexible and innovative in order to get workers back to work quickly and support the workforce needs of employers in the recovering economy, particularly in high demand and emerging industry sectors.
The workforce system provides critical services to a broad array of customers at all skill levels.
These services include career counseling and case management and assessments that identify transferable skills.
ETA and the workforce system are committed to continuous improvement and testing and rigorously evaluating new ideas and approaches.
The Veterans’ Employment and Training Service serves America’s veterans and transitioning service members by preparing veterans for meaningful careers, providing employment resources and expertise, and protecting veterans’ employment rights.
VETS helps veterans and transitioning service members obtain positive employment outcomes through the Jobs for Veterans State Grants (JVSG) program provided at American Job Centers and the Transition Assistance Program (TAP) DOL Employment Workshop at military installations.
JVSG grants are provided to State Workforce Agencies (SWA) to support staff dedicated to serving veterans, especially those who require special assistance due to disabilities or other significant barriers to employment.
VETS coordinates with the Department of Defense to provide workshops at military installations worldwide to prepare service members for transition to meaningful civilian employment.
Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program (HVRP), to organizations that serve veterans experiencing homelessness.
VETS protects the employment and reemployment rights of veterans and members of the National Guard and Reserve forces under the provisions of the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) in order that they can serve on active duty without harm to their employment status.
VETS also assures that veterans who seek Federal employment obtain the preferences agencies are required to apply.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs requires that employers doing business with the Federal Government comply with the laws and regulations requiring a fair and diverse workplace, free of discrimination and harassment.
OFCCP also requires that Federal contractors meet contractual equal employment opportunity and affirmative action requirements.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration was established by the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 with the mission to assure, so far as possible, that every working man and woman in the American workplace has safe and healthful working conditions.
OSHA ensures the safety and health of America's workers by setting and enforcing workplace safety and health standards; delivering effective enforcement; providing training, outreach, and education; and encouraging continual improvement in workplace safety and health.
Through these efforts, OSHA aims to reduce the number of worker illnesses, injuries, and fatalities and contribute to the broader goals aimed at promoting economic recovery and the competitiveness of our nation's workers.
The Wage and Hour Division is responsible for administering and enforcing a number of laws that establish the minimum standards for wages and working conditions in the United States.
These labor statutes provide basic protections for all workers and while they differ in scope, all of the statutes enforced by WHD are intended to protect and to promote the welfare of the nation’s workforce, to provide opportunities for advancement, and to promote fair compensation for work performed.
The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) minimum wage provisions and the prevailing wage laws provide a floor for the payment of fair wages, while the FLSA overtime provisions are intended to broaden work opportunities and promote employment.
The Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act and the immigration programs establish working conditions intended both to protect the wages and the safety and health of vulnerable workers and to provide that the labor force is not displaced by lower-paid foreign or migrant labor.
The prevailing wage programs provide protection to local middle class workers who may be disadvantaged by competition from outside labor who offer their services at wages lower than those in the locality.
In support of the Secretary’s vision, Promoting and Protecting Opportunity, EBSA has a single outcome goal of “improving health benefits and retirement security for all workers.”
EBSA is charged with protecting more than 142 million workers, retirees and their families which are covered by nearly 677,000 private retirement plans, 2.4 million health plans, and similar numbers of other welfare benefit plans which together hold estimated assets of $8.5 trillion.
The retirement and health care benefit security of workers, retirees and their families are significant factors in the public’s perception of their overall financial security.
EBSA’s mission and programs are pivotal in providing benefit security to the public and increasing their confidence that their retirement, health and other benefits will be there when needed.
EBSA’s mission is carried out in a very complex and evolving economic and regulatory environment where the public’s demands, needs and perceptions are influenced by many factors.
In order to enhance benefit security and maintain the public confidence in our private sector based benefits system, EBSA administers an integrated program of regulation; compliance assistance and education; civil and criminal enforcement; and, research and analysis.
MSHA protects the safety and health of the nation’s miners through enforcement of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 (Mine Act), as amended by the Mine Improvement and New Emergency Response Act of 2006 (MINER Act).
The mission of MSHA is to prevent death, disease, and injury from mining and to promote safe and healthful workplaces for the nation’s miners through the enactment and enforcement of mandatory safety and health standards; mandated inspections, which require four complete inspections annually at active underground mines and two complete inspections annually at active surface mines; and miner training and compliance assistance to operators.
The Office of Labor-Management Standards administers the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959, as amended (LMRDA), and related laws.
These laws primarily establish safeguards for union democracy and union financial integrity and require public disclosure reporting by unions, union officers, union employees, employers, labor consultants and surety companies.
OLMS also administers employee protections under various Federally-sponsored transportation programs that require fair and, equitable protective arrangements for transit employees when Federal funds are used to acquire, improve, or operate a transit system.
These arrangements must be approved by the Department of Labor before Federal funds may be released to grantees.
The Women’s Bureau provides collaborative leadership on policies and activities that impact 72 million women in the labor force; women now comprise close to 50 percent of the workforce.
The Women’s Bureau is the only Federal office exclusively concerned with serving and promoting the interests of women in the workforce.
The Bureau conducts research, projects, and evaluations on issues of importance to working women, and provides information about women in the labor force to stakeholders and customers.
The Bureau promotes the implementation of policy, practice, and program changes that may reduce barriers to women’s access to and retention in better jobs and ensure their fair treatment in the workplace.
The Bureau promotes policies and strategies to increase women’s participation in non-traditional, high-growth, and higher-paying jobs, such as those in the technology, manufacturing, and transportation sectors; and educates workers on their rights and employers on their legal obligation to ensure equal pay.
The Bureau works collaboratively with national, state, and local organizations, governments, and employers, providing technical assistance and resources to assist in the implementation of public policy, programs, initiatives, and workplace practices and solutions.
Although many American workers with disabilities are educated, trained, willing, and able to work, they remain out of the labor force at a much higher rate than their similarly qualified counterparts without disabilities.
The Office of Disability Employment Policy provides national leadership by developing and influencing policies and practices to increase the number and quality of employment opportunities for people with disabilities.
This is done through promoting the adoption and implementation of ODEP policy strategies and effective practices.
Ultimately, ODEP’s goal is to impact the systems that influence the employment outcomes of people with disabilities.
To realize its systems change goal ODEP: undertakes research to create and validate promising policy strategies and effective practices; collaborates with Federal agencies, private and public sector employers, labor organizations, and other stakeholders to expand physical and programmatic access to American Job Centers and the workforce system in general; improve employer organizational practices and make workplaces more inclusive; and increase access to the employment supports that are crucial to every worker’s success throughout the employment process, and especially to a job seeker or worker with a disability.
The Bureau of International Labor Affairs leads the U.S. Department of Labor’s efforts to ensure that workers around the world are treated fairly and are able to share in the benefits of the global economy.
ILAB’s mission is to improve global working conditions, raise living standards, protect workers’ ability to exercise their rights, and address workplace exploitation of children and other vulnerable populations.
ILAB leads the U.S. Government’s representation on labor and employment issues in regional and multilateral institutions as well as bilateral engagements and works closely with other agencies to develop and implement international economic, trade, and labor policies.
ILAB’s mission advances the Department of Labor’s domestic priorities by supporting the creation and retention of good jobs at home through its efforts to level the global playing field through promotion and protection of workers’ rights around the world.
The Department believes that global markets must be governed by fair market rules that protect the most vulnerable populations, including women and children, and provide workers a fair share of economic prosperity and voice in their work lives.
These objectives will contribute to achieving the Department’s goals for U.S. workers, build the foundation for inclusive economic growth, and contribute to a more balanced pattern of global trade.
Pursuing these objectives will continue to position the U.S. as a leader on international labor issues and further demonstrate our commitment to assist governments that have the political will to foster better livelihoods and rights for their workers.
To these ends, ILAB works closely with other Federal agencies to develop and implement international economic, trade, and labor policies, including labor provisions of trade agreements; engagement on diplomatic and security issues related to labor and employment in bilateral and multilateral for a as well as through international organizations; grants for technical assistance to promote labor standards and acceptable conditions of work for workers and to contribute to the elimination of the worst forms of child labor; and research and reporting on international labor issues.
The mission of the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs is to protect the interests of workers who are injured or become ill on the job, their families and their employers by making timely, appropriate, and accurate decisions on claims, providing prompt payment of benefits and helping injured workers return to gainful work as early as is feasible.
OWCP implements four Federal workers’ compensation statutes providing monetary, medical, and return-to-work benefits for work-related injuries and illnesses to Federal employees, coal mine workers, nuclear weapons workers, longshore and harbor workers, contractors serving overseas and certain other designated employee groups.
The agency adjudicates claims and responsibly administers the benefit funds authorized for these purposes.
The Federal-state UI program, authorized under the Federal Unemployment Tax Act and Title III of the Social Security Act, provides temporary, partial wage replacement for unemployed workers, providing them with income support when suitable work is unavailable.
To be eligible for benefits, unemployed workers must meet eligibility requirements established by state laws that conform to Federal law, including that they have worked recently, be involuntarily unemployed, and be able and available for work.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics of the U.S. Department of Labor is the principal Federal statistical agency responsible for measuring labor market activity, working conditions, and price changes in the economy.
Its mission is to collect, analyze, and disseminate essential economic information to support the public and private decision-making that forms the basis of our democratic, free-enterprise system.
Like all Federal statistical agencies, BLS executes its statistical mission with independence, serving its users by providing products and services that are accurate, objective, relevant, timely, and accessible.
Policies and decisions based on BLS data affect virtually all Americans, and the wide range of BLS data products is necessary to fulfill the diverse needs of a broad customer base.
BLS serves the general public, the U.S. Congress, other Federal agencies, State and local governments, business, and labor by providing up-to-date, high-quality statistical information.
It produces some of the Nation’s most timely, sensitive and important economic data and measures of economic conditions.
In line with the Interagency Council on Statistical Policy’s Guidelines for Reporting Performance by Statistical Agencies, BLS measures accuracy, timeliness, relevance, dissemination, and mission achievement.
BLS also reports the full cost to produce its data products.
These six criteria are common among statistical agencies because they represent critical aspects of a statistical program’s performance.
Using these common concepts as a basis for measuring and reporting on statistical agency outcomes helps to inform decision-makers more consistently about the performance of statistical agencies.
Performance measures that support Strategic Objective 5.1 are available in the 2016 Congressional Budget Justification in the Cross-Cutting Measures and Detailed Workload and Performance Tables.
The Department of Labor has identified three performance goals that will be a particular focus through FY 2015.
These goals are a subset of those used to regularly monitor and report performance.
Detailed information on measures and progress for these goals is available at Performance.gov.
This report includes measure data for these goals, as well, but the information is organized by contributing agencies’ performance goals under the DOL Strategic Plan structure.
At the end of each goal statement is an italicized reference to the relevant goal numbers in this document.
Worker safety.
By September 30, 2015, increase the number of abated workplace hazards associated with falls, through inspections at workplaces covered by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and reduce worker fatality rates in mining by five percent per year based on a rolling five-year average.
Industry-recognized credentials.
By September 30, 2015, increase the percentage of training program completers who attain industry-recognized credentials by 10 percent.
Intensive services to veterans.
By September 30, 2015, increase the percent of participants who receive intensive services by Disabled Veterans Opportunity Program specialists up to 75 percent, with a focus on improving employment outcomes for veterans.
DOL also contributed to the Job Training and Veteran Career Readiness Cross-Agency Priority (CAP) Goals.
Please refer to www.Performance.gov for more information.
The Cuts, Consolidations and Savings volume of the President’s Budget identifies lowerpriority program activities, as required under the GPRA Modernization Act, 31 U.S.C. 1115(b)(10).
The public can access the volume at: http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/budget.
The Government Performance and Results Act Modernization Act requires that federal agencies report to Congress on “unmet goals” annually.
Annually, agency leaders should review progress on each of the agency’s strategic objectives established by the agency Strategic Plans and updated annually in the Annual Performance Plan.
These reviews should inform strategic decision-making, budget formulation, and near-term agency actions, as well as preparation of the Annual Performance Plan and Annual Performance Report.
This document summarizes findings of the Department of Labor’s first Strategic Review of our ten Strategic Objectives.
Strategic Objective 1.1 Advance employment opportunities for US workers in 21st century demand sectors and occupations using proven training models through increased employer engagement and partnerships.
Employment and Training Administration and Veterans’ Employment and Training Services programs that support this objective include Workforce Investment Act (WIA) Adult, Dislocated Worker, National Emergency Grants, Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker, Indian and Native American, Trade Adjustment Assistance, Community Service Employment for Older Americans, Jobs for Veterans State Grants, and Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program.
The Department’s funding for the above programs goes to a range of states, localities, and other entities, with varying employment and training delivery strategies designed to meet the needs of the target group being served.
DOL provides leadership for these programs through technical assistance, policy guidance, and grants administration.
Evaluations indicate some success of ETA and VETS programs in meeting employment and training needs of workers and businesses and some of them have demonstrated positive trends over the past four years3.
In addition, the Department has faced issues with the reliability of the performance data it collects4.
Many job seekers continue to face challenges in finding employment opportunities because jobs now require a higher level of education and credential attainment, pointing to the need for different training strategies that focus on the attainment of industry-recognized credentials5.
For this reason, the Department is emphasizing the importance of such credentials in its training programs, as well as the involvement of employers in the design of training programs to ensure they confer skills employers’ value.
Another barrier to addressing this objective is limited training funds relative to the number of job seekers.
As a result, only a small fraction of exiters from these programs do so having received training.
To address this, the 2016 Budget includes increases in funding for the Youth and Adult formula grant programs and the Employment Service.
Increased funding for the Employment Service will help ensure that citizens will receive more intensive service in American Job Centers.
The Budget also proposes a $16 billion High Growth Sector Training Fund, which will double the number of Americans who receive training through the workforce system.
The recently enacted Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA), which supersedes WIA, requires the development of common performance measures and a unified State plan, which require unprecedented cross-agency collaboration and should improve performance on this strategic objective.
WIOA also requires local boards and state workforce agencies as well as federal agencies to conduct evaluations in order to continuously improve the workforce development system and its outcomes.
In addition, last year the Administration created a jobdriven checklist that incorporates evidence-based approaches and best practices and directed agencies with training grants to use the checklist to improve programs’ employment outcomes and connection to employers.
The Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program, for example, is adding requirements to its grant agreements (e.g., a focus on Job-Driven Training in alignment with the Vice President's initiative) and adding performance measures to gauge the success of its grantees in getting participants into good jobs.
Where evidence supports a particular approach, grantees are encouraged – and for some competitive grant programs, required – to adopt it.
In addition, the Administration is seeking to expand the use of models that have been shown to produce positive employment outcomes.
For example, the 2016 President’s Budget provides new funding to support registered apprentices.
Several studies indicate that completion of registered apprenticeship programs leads to higher employment rates and wages.
Reemployment and Eligibility Assessments and Reemployment Services (REA/RES) within the Unemployment Insurance Budget.
This increase is directly supported by a 2011 IMPAQ study which found that the receipt of REA/RES in Nevada led to shorter claimant UI duration and savings to the UI Trust Fund.
Strategic Objective 1.2 – Provide marketable skills and knowledge to increase workers’ income and help them overcome barriers to the middle class through partnerships among business, education, labor, community organizations, and the workforce system.
Employment and Training Administration programs that support this objective include Registered Apprenticeship, Workforce Investment Act (WIA) Youth, Job Corps, YouthBuild, Trade Adjustment Assistance Community College and Career Training (TAACCCT) Grant, Reintegration of Ex-Offenders, and Face Forward.
In addition, the six month average earnings for completers of apprenticeship programs increased from $20,335 in FY 2010 to $24,160 in FY 2014.
The FY 2016 President’s Budget includes $50 million for new grants to states, industry, and community-based organizations for development of new partnerships to support expansion of the apprenticeship model.
ETA is leveraging Registered Apprenticeship’s success by promoting partnerships with WIA programs and, in FY 2014, formed a Registered Apprenticeship College Consortium (RACC) to provide college credit for completion of a Registered Apprenticeship program.
Other ETA programs have also demonstrated success in increasing workers’ skills and knowledge through partnerships, particularly through targeted technical assistance (TA) efforts.
The percent of WIA Youth participants who earn a diploma, GED, or certificate by the end of the third quarter after exit increased from 60 percent in PY 2010 to 67 percent in PY 2013.
In the Job Corps programs, the percent of participants who earn a diploma, GED, or certificate by the end of the third quarter after exit increased from 64 percent in PY 2010 to almost 67 percent in PY 2013.
In response to challenges identified by the Department’s Office of Inspector General (OIG), Job Corps is refining its processes for planning, requirements determination, budgeting, procurement and evaluation to improve oversight.
As noted in the discussion of Strategic Objective 1.1, higher levels of education and credential attainment are critical for today’s job seekers, and resources for training are limited.
This result was achieved by guiding state formula grants to place greater emphasis on credentials, designing grant competitions, where applicable, to specifically promote credential attainment; and providing technical assistance and training to grantees on resources and strategies for increasing the attainment of industry recognized credentials.
For example, ETA updated electronic tools to include information on credentials related to each occupation – from short-term certificates, apprenticeship, to licensure and certifications – and the quality or value of specific certifications.
To address the serious needs of low-income youth and long-term unemployed Americans, the FY 2016 President’s Budget request includes $287 million for a permanent Reemployment Service and Eligibility Assessment program targeting recipients of unemployment benefits identified as those most likely to exhaust their benefits as well as all transitioning veterans receiving Unemployment Compensation for Ex-Military (UCX) benefits designed to provide them with intensive reemployment services, speed their return to work, and prevent long term unemployment.
The FY 2016 Budget also contains a Unemployment Insurance (UI) reform proposal that also includes funding to support “connection to work” strategies for UI claimants, and $3 billion for Youth Jobs Plus, which will fund summer and year-round job opportunities for 600,000 youth as well as innovation grants aimed at improving skills and career options for disadvantaged youth.
Strategic Objective 1.3 Advance workers’ rights, acceptable work conditions, and livelihoods, particularly for the world’s vulnerable populations.
The Bureau of International Labor Affairs supports this objective.
In FY 2014, working through grantees in 60 countries, ILAB provided education or vocational services to 75,205 children engaged in or at high risk of entering child labor (exceeding its target of 66,760 by 12 percent), and helped increase capacity to address child labor in 28 countries.
In addition, ILAB funded model programs to address worker rights through technical assistance and provided support to improve business compliance and technical capacity of governments and to protect worker rights in 22 countries.
ILAB will refine its performance indicators in FY 2015 to more accurately measure not just the breadth of ILAB's work and will pilot qualitative measures to gauge policy priority and overall project progress.
Strategic Objective 2.1 Secure safe and healthy workplaces, particularly in high-risk industries.
The Mine Safety and Health Administration and Occupational Safety and Health Administration support this objective.
In FY 2014, MSHA did not achieve its DOL Priority Goal to reduce mining fatalities.
The fiveyear rolling average of fatal injuries per 200,000 hours worked matched the FY 2013 result of 0.0141.
Nevertheless, this is a drop of 25 percent from the FY 2010 result of 0.0187.
This reduction is attributed to a number of factors, including stronger enforcement and regulation, better technology, improvements in mining practices, and improved training.
Metal and Nonmetal mines spiked early in FY 2014; MSHA is addressing this troubling development through education, outreach, technical support, and enforcement strategies.
In FY 2013, MSHA published a final rule to revise the existing regulation for Pattern of Violations (POV).
The new rule simplified the existing POV criteria, improved consistency in applying the POV criteria, and more adequately achieved the statutory intent to encourage chronic violators to comply with the Mine Act and MSHA’s safety and health standards.
OSHA has tracked two measures to monitor its effect on Federal employee safety.
The Federal agency total injury/illness case rate fell from 3.1 per 100 employees in FY 2010 to 2.4 in FY 2014, and the Federal agency lost time injury/illness rate (also per 100 employees) fell from 1.4 to 1.2 over the same period.
OSHA contributed to these improved results by providing compliance assistance to Federal agencies and by inspecting Federal establishments with high numbers of lost time cases.
OSHA issued a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking for crystalline silica on September 12, 2013, and in FY 2014, continued work toward a final rule by holding three weeks of public hearings and collecting post-hearing comments and briefs.
OSHA estimates that the proposed rule will save nearly 700 lives and prevent 1,600 new cases of silicosis per year, once the full effects of the rule are realized.
OSHA has proposed to amend regulations to improve the quantity, quality, and accessibility of the data it uses to direct and perform its enforcement functions.
The proposed regulation on improving tracking of workplace injuries and illnesses will require electronic submission of injury and illness information employers are already required to keep under OSHA's regulations.
Combined with the expanded requirements for employers to report severe injuries to OSHA, these data will provide OSHA with a much larger database of information about injuries and illnesses in the workplace, helping OSHA use its resources more effectively by enabling OSHA to identify the workplaces where workers are at greatest risk.
Strategic Objective 3.1 Break down barriers to fair and diverse work places and narrow wage and income inequality.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, the Women’s Bureau, and the Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP) support this objective.
In FY 2014 OFCCP completed 3,987 compliance evaluations and complaint investigations of Federal contractor and subcontractor establishments, uncovering violations of EEO laws in nearly one-third of those reviews and, specifically, found evidence of discrimination at 46 establishments.
The agency also negotiated $11.9 million in back pay and nearly 1,300 potential job opportunities on behalf of more than 23,000 workers affected by discrimination.
These results include resolving 14 cases of pay discrimination and recovering approximately $1.5 million in back pay and salary adjustments for 713 workers.
About one-third of OFCCP’s settlements of discrimination cases now involve issues of pay discrimination, while in prior years the agency was addressing only a handful of such cases annually.
OFCCP completed two major rulemakings in FY 2013 with the announcement of new regulations, published in the Federal Register in September 2013, to provide increased job opportunities and strengthened protections from discrimination in employment for individuals with disabilities and America’s veterans.
The regulations also establish a hiring benchmark for covered veterans and a workforce utilization goal for individuals with disabilities, data collection requirements, and improvements in the accessibility of job listings and notices.
In FY 2014 and FY 2015, OFCCP continued to execute key administration policy initiatives that protect workers and strengthen the middle class.
The White House, through two executive orders and a presidential memorandum, directed DOL-OFCCP to undertake new rulemaking.
In response, the agency published a final rule on December 9, 2014, Implementation of Executive Order 13672 (EO) Prohibiting Discrimination Based on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity by Contractors and Subcontractors, in the Federal Register which will become effective on April 8, 2015.
The final rule includes sexual orientation and gender as protected categories or groups.
OFCCP also published a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM), Prohibitions Against Pay Secrecy Policies and Actions, in the Federal Register on September 17, 2014.
This NPRM prohibits discrimination based on certain pay disclosures, ensures that qualified and productive workers are hired at a fair market wage, and supports effective civil rights enforcement by enhancing the ability of workers to detect and remediate unlawful discriminatory practices.
Finally, OFCCP published an NPRM, Advancing Pay Equality Through Compensation Data Collection, in the Federal Register on August 8, 2014.
This NPRM implements a presidential memorandum signed on April 8, 2014, that would allow the agency to target its enforcement resources by focusing on companies with the greatest likelihood of being in violation of the OFCCP’s regulations on pay discrimination.
Beginning in FY 2010, through the Disability Employment Initiative (DEI), ODEP developed strategies designed to increase access to and use of America’s Job Centers’ services by all customers, including adults and youth with disabilities.
These strategies include promoting the Ticket to Work program through Employment Networks.
In FY 2015, ODEP and ETA will continue to test DEI models that include career pathways for youth and adults with disabilities, including those with significant disabilities.
The Women’s Bureau will conduct a Working Women Survey in order to identify women’s current employment issues and challenges and barriers to economic security.
The survey will provide the Bureau with information that can be used to develop a research and policy agenda to better serve working women.
The Office of Labor-Management Standards and certain programs from the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Mine Safety and Health Administration and the Wage and Hour Division support this objective.
OLMS instituted a risk-based audit targeting model to more effectively identify unions where criminal activity may be present by identifying anomalies in union financial reports and using other targeting strategies.
The Percentage of Targeted Audits that Result in a Criminal Case rose from 14.76 percent in FY 2010 to a record 21.70 percent in FY 2014.
OSHA Whistleblower Investigations completed per year increased almost 60 percent over the past five years, from 1,904 in FY 2010 to 3,144 in FY 2014.
Over the last 17 years, OSHA’s whistleblower enforcement responsibilities have doubled, and the number of new whistleblower cases filed with the agency has steadily increased each year, from about 1,900 new cases filed in 1997, to 3,092 new cases filed in FY 2014.
In response to the growing demand for whistleblower investigations, OSHA has recently made several changes to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of the whistleblower protection program, including elevating the program to a stand-alone Directorate, establishing the Whistleblower Protection Advisory Committee, and implementing a new, successful management model in all regional offices.
MSHA has also taken a number of actions to give miners a stronger voice in the workplace on their own safety and health.
In addition to swiftly responding to safety and health complaints by miners, MSHA filed the second highest number of discrimination complaints on behalf of miners during fiscal year 2014 than any time in history, and tied FY 2013 for the second highest number of temporary reinstatements of miners to their jobs in 2014.
For 20 years, enforcement of the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) has been primarily complaint-driven, i.e., compliance actions in many cases only applied to a single employee/situation.
WHD is implementing a new strategy to secure corporate-wide compliance through directed investigations.
As a result, WHD began conducting more on-site FMLA investigations in certain situations.
In FY 2014, WHD met its target for reducing the Percent of No Violation FMLA Investigations with a result of 38.38 percent – below the FY 2013 baseline of 39.74 percent.
The no violation rate indicates WHD’s ability to identify, through targeting efforts, those employers in violation of FMLA.
The lower rate indicates improved results identifying employers out of compliance.
Strategic Objective 3.3 Secure wages and overtime.
The Wage and Hour Division and the Employment and Training Administration’s Foreign Labor Certification (OFLC) programs support this objective.
Over the past 5 years, WHD has put more than $1.3 billion in back wages into the pockets of those workers who rightly earned them.
In FY 2014, WHD’s enforcement program continues to evolve from a complaint-based program to a strategic program where directed investigations are conducted in priority industries.
WHD focused its investigations and resources on workplaces with violations better than ever; the percent of directed investigations with no violations fell below 22 percent, down from 30 percent in FY 2010.
Misclassification of employees as independent contractors by employers seeking to avoid labor laws adversely affects a worker’s ability to receive Unemployment Insurance and Social Security benefits, workers’ compensation, health insurance and retirement coverage, and protection under the Fair Labor Standards Act and other worker protection laws.
WHD has and will continue to focus on industries in which misclassification is prevalent.
In FY 2014, the percent of directed investigations in industries with a high prevalence of employees misclassified as independent contractors increased to 21.06 percent – up from 16.44 percent in FY 2010.
The Office of the Solicitor of Labor has pursued litigation to recover overtime on behalf of misclassified employees in industries ranging from cable installation to nurse staffing agencies, and has also filed amicus briefs to refocus the case law on the proper standard for determining employee status.
And ETA’s Office of Unemployment Insurance continues to create incentives for state unemployment compensation agencies to identify and address misclassification, including updated audit standards and grant opportunities.
OFLC processes employer applications to hire non-citizens for jobs requiring higher-level degrees and skills and low-skilled temporary jobs in agriculture and nonagricultural occupations.
A perennial challenge has been balancing timeliness and quality.
In recent years, OFLC has implemented program integrity measures to verify that all American jobs are truly open to U.S. workers, that they get those opportunities first as the Congress originally intended, and that job opportunities are made available to foreign workers only when employers can establish need based on a sound labor market test (H-1B Program excepted).
Strategic Objective 4.1 Provide income support when work is impossible and facilitate return to work.
The Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs and the Employment and Training Administration’s Unemployment Insurance, Trade Adjustment Assistance, and Employment Services programs support this objective.
OWCP divisions’ claims processing performance has improved steadily over the last several years.
The percent of Federal employees with work-related injuries or illnesses under the Federal Employee Compensation Act (FECA) program’s Disability Management that were reemployed by non-postal Federal agencies rose from 89.7 percent in FY 2010 to 90.7 percent in FY 2013.
Despite a significant increase in the number of claimants due to provisions in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act that expand coverage, the average number of days to process Black Lung claims fell from 238 days in FY 2011 to 234 days in FY 2014.
The percent of First Payment of Compensation issued within 30 days for Defense Base Act (Longshore) cases rose from 55 percent in FY 2010 to 63 percent in FY 2013.
And the Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation Program’s average number of days between filing date and final decision for cases sent to NIOSH when a hearing is held fell from 619 in FY 2011 to 469 in FY 2014.
The President’s FY 2016 Budget includes several Unemployment Insurance reforms designed to strengthen the program’s ability to ensure a safety net for unemployed workers and stabilizing the economy in during economic downturns.
Reforms include trust fund solvency measures and a reformed Extended Benefit program that would be more responsive earlier in an economic downturn and replace the need for temporary emergency programs.
ETA’s Office of Unemployment Insurance has worked aggressively with States and provided significant technical assistance and resources to reduce the improper payment rate and ensure program integrity.
However, 13 states did not meet the Acceptable Level of Performance (ALP) in FY 2014, an improvement over the 18 states not meeting the ALP in FY 2013.
States failing to meet the 50 percent overpayment detection ALP were required to develop a corrective action plan as part of their FY 2015 State Quality Service Plan submission.
Strategic Objective 4.2 Improve health benefits and retirement security for all workers.
The Employee Benefits Security Administration supports this objective by enforcing Title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) and related health benefits laws.
In FY 2014, EBSA conducted more pension and health plan investigations than in any of the past five years and recovered more than $554 million through investigations.
EBSA continued to develop and implement the Major Cases initiative, which concentrates enforcement resources on cases designed to have the greatest impact on the protection of plan assets and the numbers of plan participants.
Additionally, EBSA developed measures designed to increase the effectiveness of its enforcement program while avoiding reliance on raw case numbers.
Given the number of plans that the agency oversees relative to the number of investigators, EBSA has to leverage its available resources by focusing on investigations that it believes will most likely result in the deterrence, detection, and correction of ERISA violations.
To that end, EBSA created the Sample Investigation Program (SIP) to measure overall compliance with ERISA and the impact of EBSA investigations on compliance rates of investigated employee benefit plans.
Through the SIP, EBSA has compliance data on a representative sample of a large part of its regulated plans.
EBSA will review the SIP results and determine if there are areas or particular issues (i.e. bonding) where there are high non-compliance rates that EBSA could strategically address to improve compliance through multiple approaches including additional enforcement, guidance, outreach and education.
In FY 2015, EBSA will continue to analyze the compliance data available to the Agency and use lessons learned to improve the SIP as well as the overall enforcement program.
Data collected by the SIP will be used to evaluate the effectiveness of EBSA’s enforcement targeting strategies, as well as the impact of investigations on the compliance of investigated plans.
EBSA made noteworthy progress in focusing more resources on investigations that have a greater potential impact on a larger number of plans, participants and beneficiaries, and real progress in measuring outcomes towards the Departmental goal of improving health benefits and retirement security for all workers.
From FY 2010 to FY 2014 monetary results to participants and beneficiaries have increased by 59 percent from $348 million to $554 million.
The Administration is committed to promoting the development of state-level programs that provide paid leave to employees for reasons covered under the Family and Medical Leave Act, such as for the birth or adoption of a child or care for a sick child or elder relative for an extended period.
The President’s FY 2016 Budget will include $2.3 billion for a mandatory proposal to support as many as five States that wish to launch paid leave programs, following the example of California, New Jersey, and Rhode Island.
States that participate in the new Paid Leave Partnership Initiative would be eligible to receive funds for the initial set-up and benefit costs for up to three years.
This proposal is paired with a $35 million discretionary State Paid Leave Fund to promote state implementation of paid leave programs which benefits workers by helping them retain employment while coping with family health issues, helps businesses retain skilled workers, and improves child health.
Strategic Objective 5.1 Provide sound and impartial information on labor market activity, working conditions, and price changes in the economy for decision making, including support for the formulation of economic and social policy affecting virtually all Americans.
This objective is supported by the programs of the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
BLS has been, and will continue to be, responsive to users’ needs to understand changes in the 21st Century economy.
In FY 2014, for example, the Current Population Survey added new variables to the public use files on self-employed persons’ number of paid employees, and the Produce Price Index (PPI) program completed the transition from the current aggregation structures that only reflect goods in stage-of-processing type outputs to the new structures that reflect goods, services and construction.
BLS also demonstrates its responsiveness to users needs by measuring the timeliness, accuracy, and relevance of its products and services, among other metrics.
In FY 2014, BLS reached 100 percent of the underlying timeliness and relevance targets for its (PFEIs).
BLS reached 95% of the underlying accuracy targets for its PFEIs, missing the PPI Percentage of industry product line indexes published monthly target by one percentage point.
PPI changed its approach for delinquent respondents, resulting in fewer industry indexes meeting publish-ability requirements.
PPI adjusted its outyear targets accordingly.
The external factor most likely to affect the ability of BLS to accomplish its mission is structural shifts in the economy and continued budgetary constraints.
The structural shifts in the economy translate into different, and sometimes new, demands for data as industrial sectors supersede others, and as consumer goods replace others.
BLS will continue to develop and publish new surveys and products to meet the data needs of the American public.
BLS also faces challenges due to budgetary constraints.
For example, the FY 2014 funding level was below the President’s Budget, requiring BLS to achieve savings to remain within the reduced level.
BLS curtailed the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW), largely by reducing the scope and collection for select units in the QCEW survey.
In addition, BLS has raised the need to promote the sharing of existing economic data among BLS, the Census Bureau, and the Bureau of Economic Analysis, and to improve the Nation’s economic statistical system by providing the resources necessary to align each agency’s data outputs.
Amending the current tax code to permit BLS to access Federal Tax data such that BLS and the Census Bureau data outputs can be made more consistent would benefit the agencies’ statistical products and, thus, our users.
The workforce system helps workers get good jobs, earn good wages, and retain their jobs.
As the economy recovers and job growth returns, the reintegration of millions of unemployed and underemployed workers into jobs that pay family-sustaining wages is essential for spreading the benefits of the recovery more broadly.
The Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) was signed into law on July 22, 2014 and is the first reform of the public workforce system in more than 15 years.
WIOA replaces the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) and the majority of WIOA provisions will become effective beginning PY 2015 (July 1, 2015).
Programs authorized under WIOA, including the Adult and Dislocated Worker programs, will be undergoing dramatic transformation throughout PY 2015 and 2016 as WIOA provisions are implemented and the program is further aligned with the job-driven driven training agenda.
For example, WIOA significantly broadens available training options beyond traditional classroom training, by encouraging and streamlining access to work-based training, including on-the-job training, Registered Apprenticeship, and customized training.
Work-based training is beneficial to job-seekers, especially the long-term unemployed and low-income, low-skill individuals, and also serves as tool to engage and partner with employers.
However, such strategies require significant staff and financial resources.
It is impossible to project the full impact of the WIOA transition on future performance; however, the Department will use information as it becomes available to re-baseline performance targets and provide further TA as needed.
For the WIA Dislocated Worker program, the PY 2013 result was identical to PY 2012.
Results for Adult and Dislocated Worker program participants who received training services improved, also, by 1.6 and 0.2 percentage points, respectively.
These improvements are primarily due to improved labor markets in the U.S., as evidenced by a reduction in the average unemployment rate from 7.6 percent in FY 2013 to 6.5 percent in FY 2014.
Results for those who receive training in Adult and Dislocated Worker programs are significantly higher than results for all participants.
In PY 2013, the EER for all Adult exiters was 61.1 percent; for those receiving training, it was 76.1 percent.
For the same period, comparable results for the Dislocated Worker program were 60.0 percent and 81.4 percent, respectively.
Employment Retention Rates (ERR) for the Adult, INA, and National Farmworker Job (NFJP) programs increased in PY 2013 but for Dislocated Worker and National Emergency Grants (NEG) programs, the ERR fell from the prior year.
The INA program’s ERR increased by 1.5 percentage points from 77.9 percent in PY 2012 to 79.4 percent in PY 2013.
Among other factors, the improvement in the ERR for the INA program can be attributed to the program’s focus on credential related training that will lead to careers with better paying and sustainable jobs.
The ERR for NFJP improved by 2.5 percentage points from PY 2012.
Average six-month earnings of Adult, Dislocated Worker and NEG program exiters increased slightly in PY 2013 while the average earnings for the INA program fell by $195 from $9,671 in PY 2012 to $9,476 in PY 2013.
The earnings increases for ETA programs reflect the lack of meaningful wage growth for wages nationally.
In PY 2014, ETA will continue testing new ideas and approaches such as aligning Federal, state and local workforce, education and economic development systems to meet the needs of workers as well as employer demand, strengthening participation of employers, labor, and philanthropic partners in program design and delivery, and increasing use of technology-based training methods.
Approaches for the Adult and Dislocated Worker programs include testing training and reemployment services, especially for vulnerable populations, and evaluating practices that have shown promise over the past decade, such as apprenticeships, on-the-job training, and regional and sector strategies.
SCSEP remains a mandatory partner in the American Job Center (AJC) network under WIOA.
SCSEP participants who can and need to transition to unsubsidized jobs in their communities will benefit from this coordination.
SCSEP may also be included in a state’s combined state plan, which further promotes the integration of SCSEP into the AJC network.
Notes: Targets for most of the programs that support this strategic objective have been adjusted based on a regression model that accounts for the effect of unemployment rates on program performance outcomes and OMB’s assumptions about future economic conditions.
Due to changes in performance measures and definitions under WIOA that take effect in the last quarter of FY 2016 (July 1, 2016) targets will be base lined for FY 2017 and FY 2018.
VETS assesses the performance of the American Job Center system on behalf of veterans served by the Jobs for Veterans State Grants (JVSG) by tracking the services provided to participants and participants’ employment outcomes.
Over the past two fiscal years, VETS Federal staff have provided monitoring, oversight, and technical assistance to State Workforce Agencies (SWAs) to aggressively increase the rate of intensive service provided to JVSG participants.
Intensive services include comprehensive and specialized assessments of skill levels and needs, development of an individual employment plan, group and individual career counseling and planning, and short-term skills development (such as interview and communication skills).
Since FY 2009, intensive service rates have increased from 20% to nearly 50%.
In April 2014, the Department released guidance which clarified that only veterans with significant barriers to employment, or other veteran populations specified by the Secretary, may be referred to the JVSG program.
The guidance also outlined the statutorily-mandated responsibilities of Disabled Veterans’ Outreach Program (DVOP) specialists to provide intensive services to veterans, and of Local Veterans’ Employment Representative (LVER) staff to conduct outreach activities to local businesses and employers.
In FY 2015, VETS Federal staff will launch the first full-year of formal audits of American Job Centers to enforce compliance with JVSG policies and provide technical assistance to states, where appropriate.
VETS also reports on the average earnings of participants, six months after exit from the program.
This measure is tracked for all veterans and for the subset of post-9/11 Era veterans, or those who served after September 1, 2001.
The FY 2014 result for all veterans fell short of the target as a result of serving a greater number of veterans with significant barriers to employment.
Prior to the release of guidance, many DVOP specialists were serving all veterans, not just those with significant barriers.
The post-9/11 Era veterans exceeded the target for average earnings for FY 2014.
This group, which is significantly younger than the overall veteran population, has experienced higher unemployment rates during the economic recovery.
Their increase in earnings is indicative of improving economic conditions.
Beginning in January 2013, 100% of Transition Assistance Program (TAP) DOL Employment Workshop sites implemented a new curriculum and transitioned to contract facilitation.
In FY 2014, VETS implemented a standardized assessment tool to measure the delivery of Employment Workshop by contract facilitators.
VETS staff conduct on site assessments, using the tool to rate instructors on 10 elements.
The score, as well as any identified weaknesses or best practices are communicated to VETS leadership and the facilitation contractor.
For FY 2015, VETS has revised the tool to ensure more consistency in reviewers scoring of facilitators and to provide additional narrative justification of scoring.
VETS conducts compliance investigations under the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA).
Beginning in FY 2012, VETS implemented a metric to assess the quality of USERRA investigations.
Each quarter, a sampling of closed cases is reviewed by experienced USERRA investigators.
The results of this measure continued to improve, with FY 2014 cases receiving an average score of 91.5%.
VETS is committed to continuous improvement of its USERRA program, and will continue to implement process improvements in FY 2015.
In PY 2013, ETA worked to increase the number of participants earning industry-recognized credentials (a DOL Priority Goal) through investments in youth education and training under the WIA Youth (Youth), Job Corps, YouthBuild, and Reintegration of Ex-offender (RExO) programs, and through increased collaboration with Registered Apprenticeship program sponsors (including employers) and the workforce and education systems via the Apprenticeship program.
As noted in the narrative for Strategic Objective 1.1, implementing WIOA will be ETA’s primary focus in FY 2015/PY 2014.
In PY 2013, credentials attainment improved (up to 59.0 percent in PY 2013 from 57.2 percent in PY 2012), on average, for the programs contributing to this DOL Priority Goal, including Adult, Dislocated Worker, NEGs, Youth, Trade Adjustment Assistance, Apprenticeship, RExO, Job Corps, and YouthBuild.
Literacy and numeracy outcomes improved significantly in PY 2013.
For Youth participants, over half (52.4 percent) gained one Adult Basic Education (ABE) level – up from 47.5 percent in PY 2012 and 41.5 percent in PY 2011.
This is attributed to technical assistance and training provided on this measure to improve grantee understanding of the measure; in other words, results were likely under-reported in PY 2011-12.
For YouthBuild participants, the PY 2013 result of 59.50 percent was 1.0 percentage points higher than in PY 2012.
Per WIOA, this measure will be replaced in PY 2016 with a measure of skills gains.
Credentials earned (e.g., diploma, high school equivalency, or certificate) also increased.
Youth participant results improved by over 4 percentage points to 66.6 percent.
As with the literacy/numeracy data, ETA believes this reflects improved understanding of what qualifies as a credential – that prior year results were actually better than reported – improved performance, and more youth receiving a credential.
For YouthBuild, the result fell by 0.01 percentage points to 67.19 percent.
For Job Corps, industry-recognized certification attainment increased to 93.50 percent from 89.00 percent the previous year.
Placement in employment, continued education, or the military fell for Youth participants, but only by 0.6 percentage points from an all-time high of 66 percent.
Job Corps students were placed at a rate of almost 77 percent – up by two percentage points from PY 2012.
The YouthBuild result was 51.86 percent – up from PY 2012 by roughly 1.86 percentage points.
The lower placement rates for YouthBuild in comparison to the WIA Youth and Job Corps programs is likely connected to the focus on connecting to construction-related placements.
The addition of Construction Plus will continue to give additional placement options to grantees.
In FY 2014, Apprentices’ six month average earnings fell by an insignificant $11 from FY 2013.
However, the completion rate (timely receipt of a certificate) improved by two percentage points to 46 percent.
DOL announced the availability of $100 million in grant funding to expand Registered Apprenticeship programs in high-skilled, high-growth industries.
4) have a significant impact on the economy overall.
The American Apprenticeship Grants competition will focus on public-private partnerships between employers, business associations, joint labor management organizations, labor organizations, training providers, community colleges, local and state governments, the workforce system, nonprofits and faith-based organizations.
Sources: Apprenticeship – Registered Apprenticeship Partners Information Data System (RAPIDS).
YouthBuild – grantees’ quarterly reports.
Job Corps – Job Corps Management Information System.
WIA Youth – Annual State WIA performance reports (ETA-9091).
APG: State/Grantee Quarterly Reports.
Apprenticeship – Registered Apprenticeship Partners Information Data System (RAPIDS).
YouthBuild – grantees’ quarterly reports.
RExO – grantees’ quarterly reports.
Job Corps – Job Corps Center Information System.
WIA Youth – Annual State WIA performance reports (ETA-9091).
APG – State/Grantee Quarterly Reports.
Notes: Targets for most of the programs that support this strategic objective have been adjusted based on a regression model that accounts for the effect of unemployment rates on program performance outcomes and OMB’s assumptions about future economic conditions.
In the next few months, these targets will be updated based on more recent program results.
Due to changes in performance measures and definitions under WIOA that take effect in the last quarter of FY 2016 (July 1, 2016) targets will be base lined for FY 2017 and FY 2018.
In FY 2014, ILAB met or exceeded targets on five of six reported outcome measures established in FY 2011.
In FY 2015, ILAB will continue refining performance measures to more accurately capture the effectiveness of its work.
ILAB will pilot qualitative performance measures to gauge policy priority and overall project progress this year.
As a result of ILAB activities in FY 2014, various countries and international fora adopted 35 policy positions (one more than targeted) that reflect USG international labor interests and priorities.
Additional FY 2014 accomplishments include: adoption of Paraguay’s First Action Plan on Forced Labor; a new strategic plan in Ghana with both employers and unions creating a national action plan to eliminate the worst forms of child labor; a Constitutional reform to increase employment age from 14 to 15 in Mexico; legislation across the Philippines against child labor; and as a result of ILAB’s ongoing trade negotiations , the Government of Vietnam agreed to make initial changes to their labor laws to improve compliance with international labor standards.
However, additional commitments and actions are expected as part of the ongoing trade negotiation process.
In FY 2014, ILAB managed 69 active grants for at least part of the year, totaling approximately $357 million, and met or exceeded targets for all performance measures related to grant-funded technical assistance.
ILAB focused on priority countries and initiatives while keeping adequate regional coverage.
As in FY 2014, ILAB will continue funding child labor projects that have a broader worker rights and livelihoods component for FY 2015.
ILAB will also focus on countries where the political and institutional context offers particular opportunities for the effective application of an integrated approach benefiting both child labor eradication and worker rights goals.
In FY 2014, ILAB funded model programs in 22 countries to strengthen government enforcement of labor laws, improve voluntary compliance by businesses with international labor standards, and strengthen the capacity of workers’ organizations to represent workers.
ILAB worked closely with governments, multilateral and regional organizations, and business and workers’ organizations.
In FY 2014, ILAB initiated new projects to provide livelihood services to vulnerable households, continued efforts building global capacity to combat child labor, and oversaw and managed projects initiated in previous fiscal years.
ILAB worked with grantees in over 60 countries, reaching 75,205 children engaged in or at high risk of entering child labor, exceeding its annual target by12 percent.
ILAB also worked on specific projects to help increase the capacity of governments to address child labor in 28 countries through passage of new child labor legislation, training labor inspectors, and adoption of national action plans to address child labor.
In FY 2014, OSHA continued work on establishing baselines and targets for DOL Priority Goals to secure safe and healthy workplaces, particularly in high risk industries.
In addition, OSHA reached its targets in two of the four quantitative measures.
OSHA did not reach the target for number of safety inspections or the target for the number of health inspections.
The inability of OSHA investigators to perform their inspections or lay groundwork early in the year, due to the government shutdown, significantly impaired the numbers of safety and health inspections completed.
To increase focus on those industries and workplaces with the greatest potential for health and safety hazards, in FY 2014 OSHA established a baseline for the percent of inspection that are National Emphasis Programs (NEP) and Local Emphasis Programs (LEP).
In FY 2015, OSHA is targeting for 68.7 percent of all investigations to be NEP/LEP.
In FY 2015, OSHA will continue to use enforcement, regulation, compliance assistance, and outreach to meet the agency’s priorities of reducing workplace injuries, illnesses, and fatalities.
The number of workplaces in the U.S. makes it impossible for OSHA compliance officers to inspect more than a fraction of them in a year, so OSHA will strategically prioritize its resources to target those issues and areas which will yield the greatest impact.
For example, OSHA will continue to tailor its programmed and unprogrammed inspection programs to most effectively meet its mandate of securing safe and healthy workplaces.
Unprogrammed inspections, primarily complaints/fatalities/referrals, are a vital part of OSHA’s work; properly screening complaints and responding in a timely manner are effective ways to target dangerous workplaces.
On January 1, 2015, OSHA’s new reporting requirements went into effect, requiring employers to report, in addition to all work-related fatalities, all work-related in-patient hospitalizations, as well as amputations and losses of eyes, to OSHA within 24 hours of the event.
Previously employers had to report all work-related fatalities and in-patient hospitalizations of three or more workers.
With the new reporting requirements, OSHA is expecting tens of thousands of additional reports.
However, OSHA will engage with all employers that report severe work-related injuries to assure that all hazards are corrected.
Programmed inspections are based on analyses of workplace and industry risks and statistics; they are data-driven, focusing on workplaces, practices, and substances posing the greatest risk to workers.
Of these, NEP and LEP investigations have historically been critical in supporting the Secretary’s goal of securing safe and healthy workplaces.
Corporate Wide Settlement Agreements (CSAs) and the Severe Violator Enforcement Program (SVEP) are additional tools OSHA uses to target establishments which require improvement across a number of locations (CSAs) or are particularly recalcitrant (SVEP).
In FY 2015 OSHA will continue to utilize CSAs to maximize the impact and scope of OSHA’s enforcement actions and resources, and SVEP to target high-risk workplaces.
In FY 2014, MSHA did not achieve its DOL Priority Goal to reduce mining fatalities.
After falling by 25 percent from FY 2010 to FY 2013, the rate remained stable in FY 2014 at 0.0141, largely because of a surge in metal and nonmetal (MNM) fatalities.
In FY 2015, MSHA will continue to develop and implement new ways to make enforcement more effective, less predictable, and more strategic, with the goal of continuing the longterm trend of reduced fatality rates.
Mining deaths are preventable.
In order to prevent mine deaths, operators must have in place effective safety and health management programs that are constantly evaluated, find-and-fix programs to identify and eliminate mine hazards, and training for all mining personnel.
MSHA has undertaken a number of measures to prevent mining deaths: increased monitoring and strategic enforcement through impact inspections at mines with troubling compliance histories; a more robust Pattern of Violations (POV) program; special initiatives such as "Rules to Live By," which focuses attention on the most common causes of mining deaths; and outreach efforts such as "Safety Pro in a Box," which provides guidance to the metal/nonmetal mining industry on best practices and compliance responsibilities.
These efforts will continue in FY 2015.
MSHA conducted comprehensive health inspections at 16.8 percent of MNM mines in FY 2014 – significantly exceeding the target of 10 percent.
MSHA exceeded its FY 2014 target by conducting more comprehensive health inspections at MNM mines than anticipated.
In conjunction with established Agency health priorities, inspectors must use a strategy to review potential hazards at each mine and then, if warranted, select “high risk” occupations for personal sampling.
Walk-around observations, reviews of materials mined and/or produced, discussions with miners and mine management, and direct-read area sampling were used to determine which occupations or areas are “high risk” and, if warranted, should be sampled.
Some mines also receive a more comprehensive inspection, based on analysis and mine inspector observations.
MSHA has set an ambitious target of 20% in FY 2015.
In FY 2014, MSHA initiated investigations for all 103(g) imminent danger complaints within one day of receipt.
Informed miners are an essential element in maintaining a safe and healthful environment in all mines, at all times.
The Mine Act gives miners the right to be a full stakeholder in their own health and safety.
MSHA will continue to give these complaints the highest priority in FY 2015.
In FY 2014, MSHA exceeded its target for timely review of roof control and ventilation plans by six percentage points with a result of 76 percent against a target of 70 percent.
At the end of FY 2013, MSHA evaluated the process for reviewing roof control and ventilation plans and decided to revise the reviews to account for the Operator’s time involved in the approval process.
As expected, this procedural change resulted in positive effects on the timeliness of plan reviews in FY 2014.
In addition to the exceptional work performed at MSHA every day, there were numerous achievements in 2014 that are worthy of recognition.
Among them: MSHA issued a final rule on respirable dust that was decades in the making and the implementation has been highly successful.
Continuing work to end black lung disease, MSHA recorded the lowest yearly average dust concentrations in underground coal mines in history in FY 2014.
MSHA expanded stakeholder outreach by initiating quarterly conference calls with the mine safety and health training community across the country.
MSHA field training operations were realigned to better implement the Mine Act.
The Coal and Metal/Nonmetal district citation and order settlement project was implemented and will improve MSHA citation and order writing consistency.
MSHA upgraded emergency response capabilities to ensure that Mine Emergency Operations (MEO) sites are ready to respond efficiently and finalized work on the state-of-the-art mine rescue communications systems.
MSHA acted to protect miners’ voices with the most 105(c) discrimination cases filed on behalf of miners who were retaliated against for expressing safety or health concerns.
Efforts to reverse a spike of fatalities in metal/nonmetal mines that began in late 2013 have focused on making mines safer.
In FY 2014 OFCCP continued its commitment to an aggressive posture of Active Case Enforcement that supports the agency’s three main strategies of effective enforcement, outreach to workers, and regulatory reform.
To capture activities in support of these strategies, OFCCP increased the number of performance measures from six in FY 2011 to 19 in FY 2012 to 27 in FY 2013 to 28 in FY 2014 and collected data on additional measures to be reported in FY 2014.
OFCCP continued its strategic approach to balancing quantity and quality in FY 2014, and results show that the agency continues to make progress towards finding this balance.
OFCCP initiated its comprehensive strategy in FY 2011 by laying the foundation for embedding sustainable organizational change through the initiation of comprehensive regulatory reform, expanded scope of enforcement, unprecedented outreach to workers and vulnerable populations, redesign of quality assurance monitoring, on-boarding and training of hundreds of new compliance officers, and structural reorganization across the agency at many levels.
Enforcement – The FY 2014 enforcement targets were set at levels that would enable compliance officers to balance quantity and quality by maintaining an aggressive audit posture while enforcing disciplined case management that reduces the number of aged cases, resulting in fewer case closures with deficiencies and promoting effective enforcement through case triaging.
Balancing quantity and quality is a major operational shift and cultural change for the organization that can only be fully realized over time.
To increase enforcement impact, OFCCP focused its resources on larger and more complex systemic discrimination cases in both compensation and hiring, and used the Mega Project strategy, focusing on construction projects that include a greater number of Federal contractor and subcontractor workers.
These and other strategies make OFCCP more efficient.
Even though OFCCP conducted eight percent fewer compliance evaluations in FY 2014 than in FY 2013, the number of employees receiving back pay more than doubled – 9,268 (FY13) to 22,952 (FY14).
Back pay to workers increased during the same period from $7.8 million to $11.9 million.
Outreach/Education – Since 2011, OFCCP has refined its relationship building strategy by prioritizing the development of effective and strategic relationships with an array of stakeholders to drive positive workplace change for workers.
In FY 2014, the regions developed comprehensive and diverse lists of stakeholders who can help OFCCP achieve its priority goals centered on outreach, enforcement, and regulatory reform.
In FY 2015, OFCCP will leverage these relationships to support specific case enforcement, such as increasing the number of affected class members located, connecting job placement providers with contractors that have job opportunities, and increasing participation in Mega Projects.
OFCCP will continue to work with the Chief Evaluation Office to support the evaluation of its relationship building efforts – to improve its outreach program design and performance.
The evaluation will be completed in 2017.
Regulatory Agenda – During FY 2014 and into early FY 2015, OFCCP continued executing its policy and regulatory agenda.
The agency issued guidance on gender identity and transgender status, completed and issued a final rule on discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity that becomes effective in FY 2015, and obtained OMB-approval of a revised scheduling letter authorizing the collection of specific data and information.
The new scheduling letter and itemized listing should enhance OFCCP’s ability to preliminarily identify possible pay and other forms of discrimination at the desk audit phase of all OFCCP compliance evaluations.
Moreover, pursuant to an Executive Order and a Presidential Memorandum signed in April 2014, OFCCP issued Notices of Proposed Rulemaking proposing measures to prohibit discrimination based on the disclosure of pay information and measures that would require companies doing business with the Federal Government to collect and report summary employee compensation data.
To increase employment opportunities for women and people of color on large, economically significant construction projects, OFCCP launched its Mega Construction project by issuing formal guidance and providing staff training on new processes and procedures.
In FY 2015, OFCCP anticipates finalizing rules that replace the agency’s outdated sex discrimination guidance, that create pay transparency, and that focuses OFCCP’s enforcement efforts while addressing possible pay discrimination.
In FY 2014, the Bureau successfully met or exceeded all its annual targets, completing 21 policy and research outputs and developing 16 technical assistance (TA) tools.
The Bureau released policy papers and research on topics such as paid leave, the gender wage gap, and work-family issues in conjunction with the 50th Anniversary on the President’s Commission on the Status of Women and the White House Working Families Summit.
The Bureau also initiated a Paid Leave Grant Program to fund paid leave feasibility studies to support the development or implementation of paid family and medical leave programs at the state level.
Currently, the Bureau receives anecdotal feedback from its collaborators as to how they have used its products.
Sister DOL agencies, constituent groups, and advocacy organizations use the Bureau’s research and often distribute its publications to their members/stakeholders.
The majority of WB’s collaborators took an action to increase awareness and education.
Policy change is a longer-term outcome goal, and WB predicts that policy implementations will increase over time.
WB will use the survey tool to collect data to improve future WB products to increase implementation.
In FY 2014, ODEP met the three targets used to gauge progress against its mission to develop and influence policies and practices that increase employment opportunities for people with disabilities.
ODEP develops strategies to increase access to and use of American Job Centers services by adults and youth with disabilities through the Disability Employment Initiative (DEI).
ODEP’s technical assistance centers advise, assist, train and promote the adoption and implementation of ODEP sponsored or validated policy strategies and effective practices.
In FY 2014, ODEP provided technical assistance to help Federal contractors successfully implement the new regulation section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, which requires Federal contractors to take affirmative action to employ and advance in employment, qualified individuals with disabilities.
ODEP also implemented an initiative to help people with disabilities acquire industry recognized credentials through innovative partnerships with community colleges.
In FY 2015, ODEP will work with the Advisory Committee on Increasing Competitive Integrated Employment for Individuals with Disabilities, which is a two-year body established by the recently enacted Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) to make recommendations to the Secretary of Labor and Congress on increasing employment opportunities for people with significant disabilities in competitive, integrated employment and improving the implementation of the section 14(c) certificate program carried out under the Fair Labor Standards Act.
To increase the likelihood of ODEP’s policies being adopted and implemented at the state level, in FY 2015, ODEP will seek the active participation of partners representing critical state legislative and administrative bodies (e.g., National Council of State Legislatures, National Governors Association, and Council of State Governments).
In FY 2014, OLMS exceeded all six of its performance goals.
These six performance goals include three priority measures established in FY 2008 and three additional measures established in FY 2011.
In FY 2008, OLMS established baselines for its three priority measures: the elapsed number of days to resolve union officer election complaints, the percent of electronically filed reports, and the percent of targeted audits that result in criminal cases.
These measures and their targets were established to promote OLMS effectiveness and efficiency and to increase union financial integrity, democracy, and labor-management transparency.
These are major tenets of the Department’s goal to Protect Workers’ Rights (Strategic Objective 3.2).
OLMS strives to more effectively identify unions where criminal activity may be present by identifying anomalies in union financial reports, by analyzing and finding other predicates to financial malfeasance, and by using other targeting strategies.
OLMS has become more successful in this area, exceeding its financial integrity performance goal for five consecutive years – culminating with a “fallout” rate of 21.7 percent in FY 2014.
Fallouts occur when OLMS performs compliance audits of unions and discovers possible criminal activity that results in the opening of a criminal investigation.
As a means to continue this improvement, OLMS established a work group that identified targeting methods and “red flags” that may indicate criminal activity.
This workgroup continues its work and the increased accumulation of statistical data have enabled the workgroup to make further strides in predicting fraud and embezzlement.
By instituting risk-based audit targeting models, fewer audits can be undertaken while increasing the percentage of audits that result in the opening of a criminal case, thereby maintaining a level number of criminal cases).
Fewer audits mean that OLMS can be more efficient in the assignment of resources to areas directly supporting the Department’s objectives.
OLMS has invested in new technology to facilitate the electronic filing of union financial reports.
Between FY 2010 and FY 2012, OLMS implemented a web-based system for the electronic filing of Form LM-2, LM-3, and LM-4 union annual reports.
In FY 2014, the availability of these electronic forms as well as an electronic form for the LM-30 (implemented in FY 2013), coupled with outreach efforts coordinated through OLMS’ district offices, resulted in OLMS exceeding its FY 2014 goal of 34.5 percent as 45 percent of all filings were submitted electronically (an increase of almost 3 percent over FY 2013).
Electronic filing is now available to over three quarters of those entities required to file reports under the LMRDA.
The success of the e-filing program coupled with the extent of the program’s reach enabled OLMS to increase its target in FY 2015 from 42.5 percent to 44.5 percent.
OLMS has noted that approximately 10 percent of e-filers in one year revert to manual filing in the next year.
2015 and beyond, OLMS will address this problem through analysis of existing data in order to determine if there are common factors among this population that can be addressed.
In passing the LMRDA in 1959, Congress established a 60-day deadline for court action by the Secretary of Labor upon receipt of an election complaint.
Quicker resolution of election complaints accelerates restoration of democratic voice and a democratically operated union.
In FY 2008, OLMS began tracking elapsed days, with 92 elapsed days as the baseline.
OLMS has met its goal in each subsequent year.
In FY 2014, OLMS achieved the days elapsed per case goal by completing cases in an average of just over 72 days (against a goal of 74 days).
This result was a slight increase from the 71 elapsed days achieved in FY 2013.
Much of the increase can be attributed to two factors – an increase in the number of election cases (135 actual against 109 planned) and the occurrence of a major supervised election case requiring that a substantial number of investigators be temporarily reassigned, thus reducing their availability to process the existing election cases at that time.
OLMS continues to fine-tune methods for further reducing its elapsed days including finding new ways to utilize a team-based approach for handling election cases (when resources permit) and engaging in early-involvement with the Office of the Solicitor in cases that may result in litigation.
Between these continued improvements and a return to a normal work level, OLMS expects again to exceed this measure in FY 2015.
In FY 2011, OLMS began tracking three additional measures.
For these three measures, OLMS intends to reduce the number of chronically delinquent filers of labor organization financial reports, increase the number of LM-10 and LM-20 persuader reports filed, and increase its web site satisfaction index score.
Baselines for these measures were established in FY 2010.
In FY 2010, OLMS determined there were 2,070 chronically delinquent filers, unions that have not filed a required financial report on time in each of the prior three years.
Because timely filing is a basic tenet of financial transparency, OLMS determined that reducing the number of these chronically delinquent unions was important to this goal.
For FY 2014, OLMS established a target of 1,670 chronically delinquent filers.
OLMS exceeded this target, ending the year with 1,168 chronically delinquent filers – thus exceeding the goal by about 500 filers.
OLMS expanded its efforts to reduce this number by identifying, in a more timely manner, those unions that were already chronically delinquent entering the fiscal year, and, in addition, those unions that have been delinquent the past two filings (one year short of meeting the definition of chronically delinquent).
OLMS targets these at-risk unions, offering compliance assistance to these and existing chronically delinquent filers in an effort to avoid another untimely filing.
Under the LMRDA, employers and outside agents/consultants are required to file a Form LM-10 or LM-20 when they arrange for services that are designed to influence or persuade employees with regard to their rights to organize and bargain collectively.
For FY 2011, OLMS established a goa of obtaining 545 persuader reports.
For FY 2014, OLMS had a goal of 765 reports.
OLMS efforts resulted in the submission of 1,014 LM-10 and LM-20 persuader reports – 249 above the target for this measure.
As in prior years, many of the FY 2014 submissions were delinquent reports for past years from filers who were unaware that these reports were required.
OLMS expects that in time, most delinquent reports will be filed and subsequent filings will be for the current year only.
However, at the present time, additional filers continue to be identified, thus expanding the baseline universe as well as the number of past due reports received.
If in the future, all required filers are identified and past due reports are received, OLMS would expect that the number of filings will level off, or possibly decline.
LM-10 and LM-20 reports – because both the company and the persuader are required to file a report for the same set of services.
A secondary effort is an educational effort that informs potential filers as to the requirements under the LMRDA.
The final measure is customer satisfaction with the OLMS web site.
OLMS established an index baseline of 58 in FY 2010 and a goal to increase the index score to 62 in FY 2014.
This goal was exceeded as the OLMS customer satisfaction index score in FY 2014 was 63.
OLMS will continue to analyze the customer satisfaction surveys to identify areas where improvements to the web site can be implemented.
These improvements are expected to increase the customer satisfaction score.
OLMS has also started to track and analyze user metrics with respect to on-site behavior and has fine-tuned its ability to analyze this data to provide insights into how users are interacting with the OLMS web site.
This analysis is expected to provide guidance on web site design that will lead to better user satisfaction.
OSHA supports Strategic Objective 3.2 by administering and enforcing 22 whistleblower protection statutes that protect workers who speak out to report perceived violations of the law.
Principally, this responsibility includes Section 11(c) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, which prohibits employers from discriminating against employees who bring workplace hazards to the attention of the employer or the Agency.
The additional 21 whistleblower protection provisions protect workers in a variety of industries who speak out against unsafe and/or unlawful behavior, including violations of airline, commercial motor carrier, consumer product, environmental, financial reform, food safety, health insurance reform, motor vehicle safety, nuclear, pipeline, public transportation agency, railroad, maritime, and securities laws.
Enforcement of these worker protection laws is critical to ensuring safe, high-quality work-life environments, as workers must feel free to identify, and seek correction of, illegal conditions and conduct when they arise in the workplace without fear of retaliation or discrimination.
Over the last 16 years, OSHA’s whistleblower enforcement responsibilities have doubled, and the number of new whistleblower cases filed with the agency has steadily increased each year, from about 1,900 new cases filed in 1997, to nearly 3,100 new cases filed in FY 2014.
In response to the growing demand for whistleblower investigations, OSHA has recently made several changes to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of its whistleblower protection programs, including elevating the program to a stand-alone Directorate, establishing the Whistleblower Protection Advisory Committee, and creating an internal steering committee to guide policymaking and future planning.
In FY 2015, OSHA will continue its on-going efforts to improve the efficiency and quality of the whistleblower protection programs’ investigative functions.
For example, OSHA will complete the implementation of its improved management reporting structure to all regional whistleblower programs, which will allow those regions to strengthen caseload management and oversight of field investigations.
Additionally, to encourage timely and equitable resolution of disputes, OSHA will expand the availability of its Alternative Dispute Resolution program, in which OSHA experts assist whistleblower parties to discuss resolving their disputes via voluntary settlement agreements.
To further ensure that whistleblower investigations are completed thoroughly and accurately, OSHA will strengthen its basic whistleblower training offerings by designing and developing new courses and curriculum.
Finally, OSHA will issue revised guidance materials and procedural regulations to promote consistent application of investigative practices and policies across all regions.
OSHA has two performance measures for tracking the effectiveness of OSHA’s whistleblower enforcement efforts.
The first measure, Average Age of Pending Whistleblower Investigations, monitors the program’s efforts to reduce its backlog of pending whistleblower investigations by tracking the age of cases that are pending a determination from the Agency.
Measuring this data will help OSHA ensure that regional whistleblower programs are efficiently prioritizing and completing whistleblower investigations, and will further OSHA’s customer service goals by highlighting the importance of completing investigations in a timely fashion.
The second measure, Average Days to Complete New Complaint Screening Process, tracks OSHA’s efforts to provide attentive customer service to new complaint filers.
By measuring the average time that it takes for OSHA to determine if a new whistleblower complaint is appropriate for investigation; this measure will provide a meaningful measurement of the OSHA’s responsiveness to new complainants.
As OSHA continues its efforts to improve the whistleblower protection programs, OSHA will be able to provide more quality investigations to more workers, which will help the Agency to reassure workers that voicing concerns will not leave them susceptible to retaliation and discrimination.
Without this assurance, OSHA cannot realize its goal of providing safe, healthy and fair workplaces to American workers.
MSHA’s Office of Assessments, Accountability, Special Enforcement and Investigations oversees MSHA’s program to protect miners from discrimination when they exercise their right to report health and safety hazards without fear of retaliation.
MSHA did not reach either of the FY 2014 targets for measures supporting this goal.
The result for timely investigation of discrimination complaints was 12 percentage points below target and the result for investigation of requests for temporary reinstatement was 7 percentage points below target.
However, in both cases, results for the fourth quarter of FY 2014 were well above target.
MSHA considers the 2014 problems partially resolved pending the addition of new special investigators in FY 2015.
For this reason, MSHA restored the target for discrimination complaint investigations to the FY 2012 level (85 percent) and increased the temporary reinstatement investigations target to 75 percent in FY 2016.
MSHA executive management continues to meet with the Solicitor’s office bi-weekly to monitor caseloads.
In addition, changes to the procedures for responding to FOIA requests for discrimination case information has reduced the time compliance specialists must spend on FOIA requests; this has helped expedite the review of discrimination investigations.
A key achievement of this Administration is enforcement of the anti-discrimination provisions contained in the 1977 Act.
This importance was reinforced by the tragedy at the Upper Big Branch (UBB) mine.
For the four years prior to the disaster, no one working at UBB had filed a hazard complaint, even though post-disaster investigations documented well-known, long-standing problems at that mine.
MSHA has distributed materials directly to miners and has beefed up its special investigations staff to work on claims of retaliation.
In 2011, MSHA updated its Miners’ Rights Handbook and developed new training tools, which are available online.
In FY 2013, DOL filed 34 requests for temporary reinstatement, the second highest number on record, with the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission on behalf of miners who submitted complaints of discrimination in the form of a suspension, layoff, discharge or other adverse action.
Additionally, DOL filed 58 complaints alleging mine safety discrimination during 2013.
The 58 discrimination complaints DOL filed on behalf of miners in FY 2013 was an all-time record, doubling the previous record of 29 in FY 2011.
To assess whether quality investigations are conducted, MSHA performs a headquarters review of every discrimination investigation conducted by its enforcement personnel.
Sources: Imminent danger complaint investigations - MSHA’s Standardized Information System.
Discrimination Investigations are tracked in a stand-alone database (Privacy Act Systems of Records - DOL/MSHA-10) into which the Office of Assessments, Accountability, Special Enforcement and Investigations personnel record applicable discrimination investigation information (dates, milestones, outcomes, etc).
The system is currently located on a server on MSHA’s segment of the DOL network but will be transferred to OCIO.
In FY 2014, WHD resolved 70 percent of its FMLA investigations within the fiscal year and no violations were found in 38 percent of investigations.
In FY 2014, WHD implemented directed FMLA enforcement initiatives in addition to enhanced responses to FMLA complaints, including more onsite investigations and policy reviews.
These efforts will be balanced against timely resolution of complaints and directing limited resources to pursue employers with systemic FMLA violations to achieve and maintain corporate-wide compliance.
WHD relies on a balanced set of measures to evaluate the implementation of its strategic enforcement approach to compliance.
These measures capture data on productivity, prioritization, and quality.
Over the last three years, WHD has shifted its resources from complaint-based to directed enforcement to promote compliance on behalf of workers in certain industries or program areas.
By better integrating the directed and complaint investigations, WHD maximizes limited enforcement resources towards the goal of improving compliance at the industry-level and reaching the greatest number of vulnerable workers.
In FY 2014, WHD maintained increases from the previous three years in the percent of directed investigations by reaching 44 percent while continuing to reduce the no violation rate for both complaint and directed investigations.
The no violation rate is one indication of whether WHD is selecting the right employers for investigation.
These results show the gap between complaint and directed investigations narrowing, which demonstrates that WHD directed investigations are nearly as accurate as a complaint in identifying employers with violations.
Also importantly, directed investigations reach workers that are least likely to complain.
The FY 2014 results show an average age non-residential construction DBRA wage rates of 43 months, which is short of the targeted 36 months.
WHD is conducting a top-to-bottom evaluation of the survey process and policies in an effort to significantly improve program operations and performance.
Moving forward, WHD is also evaluating the appropriate balance of measures for demonstrating progress and results given these anticipated reforms.
Foreign Labor Certification programs have as a primary responsibility, the review of employer-filed applications for labor certifications and the determination of requests for prevailing wages in order to proceed with the employment-based immigration process.
The fundamental determination, by statute, which must be made prior to the granting of labor certification, concerns whether the hiring of a foreign worker will adversely impact the wages and working conditions of U.S. workers, and that no qualified U.S. workers are willing or available to fill a given vacancy.
The Secretary has delegated the responsibilities for the administration of permanent and temporary labor certification programs ETA’s Office of Foreign Labor Certification (OFLC).
Statutes, regulations, and administrative requirements establish mandatory timeframes within which the OFLC must issue a final determination or take certain actions on employer-filed applications for permanent or temporary labor certification as well as employer filed requests for prevailing wage determinations.
A key and long standing challenge within the foreign labor certification programs has been balancing program integrity activities with stakeholder needs for timely processing of applications.
In FY 2014, this balance was affected by available staff resources for processing, the merits of the applications submitted, the volume of applications filed, as well as mandatory court orders and congressional riders.
OFLC was able to meet case processing goals for PERM applications not selected for integrity review, Complete H-2A Applications Resolved 30 Days before the Date of Need, and H-2B Applications Resolved in 30 Days.
Limited resources will continue to be allocated to those programs that have statutory and or regulatory processing times (Temporary Non-immigrant Programs) and absent additional funding, the PERM processing times and backlog will continue to increase.
OWCP supports the Secretary’s vision of Promoting and Protecting Opportunity, the Department of Labor’s Strategic Goal 4: “Secure retirement, health, and other employee benefits and, for those not working, provide income security”, and DOL’s Strategic Objective 4.1, Provide income support when work is impossible or unavailable and facilitate return to work.
Income support is provided by OWCP through the prompt and accurate adjudication of claims and payment of benefits.
Ongoing maintenance of cases receiving long-term benefits, including regular reviews to confirm entitlement and payment accuracy, promotes the integrity of OWCP’s benefit delivery.
The agency’s performance measures also focus on expediting the receipt of new claims from employers to avoid up-front delays in claims processing.
OWCP sets performance standards that seek to balance production demands with expected quality levels while ensuring that benefits and services are delivered timely and accurately.
Return to work is most successful through early identification of work injury or illness, prompt development of case information, and efficient provision of assistance services that support recovery.
In particular, OWCP uses disability management strategies in the FECA program to assist Federal workers with injury recovery and with returning to work.
Contract nurses make early contact and coordinate among claimants, employing agencies and medical providers.
They advise injured workers and assess their conditions; confirm return to work status; obtain treatment plans from the treating physicians; and work with employing agencies.
If claimants remain out of work for extended periods of time, OWCP continues regular monitoring to identify cases when medical conditions improve and provide vocational rehabilitation and job placement services as soon as it is feasible.
In addition, OWCP has upgraded data and communications systems to improve claims filing and other information exchanges with employers and claimants.
Disability management relies upon the engagement of Federal employers to share and use proven return to work practices.
Of the eight government-wide performance goals established by POWER, OWCP is responsible for four.
Increase the percent of wage-loss claims filed by Federal employers within five (5) business days to 78.0 percent.
Increase the share of Federal employees that return to work within two years of entering FECA’s disability management program – OWCP measures the performance of 14 of the largest Executive Branch agencies to improve return-to-work rates.
These agencies form the POWER Return-to-Work Council under the leadership of OWCP.
The POWER Council serves as a forum to regularly review performance results, share best practices, and set challenging individual agency goals.
From FY 2009 to FY 2014, the percentage of injured workers receiving FECA disability management services and returning to work within two years of injury increased from 85.8 percent to 90.7 percent.
While this indicates overall improvement over time, the annual target for FY 2014 (92.0 percent) was not met.
Budgetary factors may have continued to affect agencies’ reemployment efforts this past year.
In addition, an ongoing performance improvement challenge remains for those Federal agencies with employees working on more hazardous missions or having other occupational reemployment challenges.
To improve return-to work numbers, OWCP is exploring the use of more targeted strategies specifically designed for those agencies.
Reduce government-wide Lost Production Day (LPD) rates – Under POWER, individual Executive Branch agencies have been committed to reducing LPD rates (per 100 employees) by one percent per year through FY 2014.
LPD rates provide an index reflecting the overall incidence and severity of workplace injuries and the duration of lost time in the first year following occurrence of injury or illness.
The measure’s usefulness is limited to providing a general historical assessment of an agency’s safety and return to work culture.
It looks back at the impact injuries and illnesses had on an agency’s total lost production days per 100 employees.
It also is impacted by non-injury related factors such as employment fluctuations during the year.
The return-to-work outcome measure is more useful in that it reflects the effectiveness of both the FECA program in assisting with recovery and return to work and Federal agencies in reemploying their injured workers.
It also provides information that helps in designing actionable strategies to improve performance.
In FY 2014, the government-wide average LPD rate dropped to 31.8 days, exceeding the annual target of 34.4 days.
While the target was met, it is important to note that LPD performance is subject to impacts resulting from budget constraints and sequestration.
Agencies that designate funds to support return-to-work activities may reduce or redirect these resources to more mission focused work if funding is tight.
In addition, some of the positions that may have been available for returning workers in the past may no longer be available due to budget constraints.
Timely submission of Notices of Injury and Wage-Loss Claims – The ability of OWCP to promptly initiate intervention and return-to-work services is improved if Federal employers are timely in the submission of injury reports and wage-loss claims.
Earlier receipt of these forms also enables OWCP to begin claims adjudication and payment processing sooner.
POWER goals emphasized prompt filing of claims and the use of technology to facilitate the filing process.
Federal agencies with Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) capability made immediate significant gains in timeliness subsequent to their adoption of EDI.
To expand electronic filing capability to all agencies, OWCP developed a web-based capability, the Employees’ Compensation and Operations Portal (ECOMP), and continues to offer this electronic submission capability to all Federal employing agencies to further cut the time of delivery.
In FY 2014, Federal agencies achieved a result of 88.8 percent for notices of injury filings within 10 business days; this is an improvement over FY 2013, but slightly less than the target of 90.4 percent.
Percent of wageloss claims filed within five business days increased to 82.9 percent – three percent higher than in FY 2013 and 4.9 percent higher than the target of 78.0 percent.
Increase the timeliness of First Reports of Injury and First Payment of Compensation – OWCP emphasizes the performance of longshore and harbor workers’ employers using four performance measures to confirm that injury reports and first payment of benefits are filed timely and that first payments of compensation benefits are made promptly.
Longshore program improvement strategies include a combination of engaging with employers by communicating expectations/requirements; formally publishing performance results; and providing education and technical assistance.
Improved communications and information sharing between the parties are also essential to dispute resolution.
Timely resolution of disputed issues minimizes interruptions to benefit processing and facilitates more timely return to work of those injured workers.
OWCP exceeded all four FY 2014 Longshore program targets.
Injury report timeliness (within 30 days) in FY 2014 for Defense Base Act (DBA) cases was 89 percent within 30 days against a goal of 83 percent.
First payment timeliness in FY 2014 for DBA cases was 63 percent against a goal of 62 percent.
Injury report timeliness in FY 2014 for non-DBA cases was 87 percent against a goal of 85 percent.
First payment timeliness in FY 2014 for non-DBA cases was 87 percent against a goal of 85 percent.
Black Lung claims decision timeliness – In FY 2014, OWCP issued Proposed Decisions and Orders (PDO) within an average of 234 days against a target of 220 days.
The Black Lung program issued 5,125 PDOs, an increase of seven percent over FY 2013.
The average time for the development of medical evidence was 88 days against a target of 85 days.
Claims received in FY 2014 increased by 15 percent to 7,394 compared to 6,420 claims filed in FY 2013.
Incoming claims filings are expected to increase to 7,700 in FY 2015.
2) the release of the ABC News/Center for Public Integrity investigative reports highlighting questionable practices of lawyers and doctors hired by coal mine employers who contest awarded black lung claims.
The significant increase in the number of claims received, without corresponding staffing increases, has a direct correlation on the increase in the over-target timeliness of PDO issuance.
The Black Lung program’s performance priority is to improve the quality of the PDO process while minimizing the time it takes to process Black Lung claims.
2) a 100 percent review by Black Lung program management of all decisions made on claims with a diagnosis of complicated pneumoconiosis.
As the pilot program requires an average of 50 additional days of development time for each claim, this cadre of cases impacted the program’s ability to achieve the annual performance target for the average days for the development of medical evidence, which directly correlates to the increase in the average time to issue PDOs.
1) set up a quality assurance program to minimize the impact of potential bias on the chest X-ray B-reading process; and (2) implement online training modules, developed and peer-reviewed by renowned pulmonologists, to educate physicians and professional claims staff on diagnosing and documenting respiratory disorders and quantifying and articulating impairment and disability.
Timely adjudication in EEOICPA Claims – OWCP’s Energy program provides timely claims adjudication and benefit delivery.
In FY 2014, the program tracked performance with regard to the overall time to process claims, from intake to final decision.
The performance measures combine Part B and Part E results and account for the various actions a case may require, including time for dose reconstruction or oral hearing.
These measures provide a more transparent view of the claims process, including time spent by NIOSH in developing cases.
Average time to process cases sent to NIOSH when a hearing was held increased slightly in FY 2014 to 469 days – an increase of 17 days from the FY 2013 result of 452 days.
The measure remained below the FY 2014 target of 485 days.
Average time to process cases sent to NIOSH when a hearing was not held increased to 352 days against a target of 315 days.
Several FY 2014 initiatives were aimed at further reducing processing times.
The Energy program continued to refine and update the Energy Compensation System (ECS), enhancing the way the program manages cases technologically.
Deployment of an electronic method of sharing information with the Department of Energy (DOE) for verification of employment and other records improved program timeliness.
The program also continued to image paper documents through the OWCP Imaging System (OIS).
The imaging of documents allows for ease of transferring files between offices, reduces the space needed to store claims files, and allows for easier portability of case files.
This project began in FY 2013 as a pilot and throughout FY 2014 more and more case files became available electronically.
The Energy program is currently in the development and requirement stage of creating a web portal through which documents can be uploaded (rather than submitting them by mail) to the OIS and making those documents and forms immediately available to the claims staff.
This new Energy Document Portal (EDP) will be used by resource center personnel, claimants, authorized representatives, medical providers and others to file most forms and provide supporting documentation electronically.
In addition, the program began working with the Social Security Administration in FY 2014, allowing it to request earnings information through secure electronic fax, rather than through the mail.
It is expected that this will significantly reduce processing time in FY 2015.
The Federal role in Unemployment Insurance is to set broad policy for the program, establish performance measures and standards, provide technical assistance to States, monitor State performance, promote conformity and compliance of State laws and operations with Federal law, and fund the administration of State and Federal UI programs.
While State laws must meet minimum Federal requirements to participate in the Federal State UI program, States have broad discretion in establishing eligibility requirements.
ETA uses four key performance measures for this program; as indicated in the bulleted list and table below, UI tracks State level performance and provides technical assistance as needed.
States that do not meet Acceptable Levels of Performance (ALP) are required to develop corrective action plans.
Facilitate Claimant Reemployment – The rate improved by 3.3 percentage points over PY 2012 – the fourth consecutive annual increase – to almost 66 percent, which is 8.9 percentage points above the PY 2010 result.
Payment Timeliness – Results fell below 80 percent, a slight decrease from FY 2013 performance, despite improvement in 35 states.
Emergency Unemployment Compensation program), the effect of staff turnover on eligibility determination productivity, and backlogs in the claims-taking and adjudication units.
Additionally, several states have had technology issues with implementation of system modernization and others have been challenged by antiquated systems.
Detect Overpayments – Performance improved by just over 5 percentage points (to almost 68 percent) compared to the FY 2013 result.
Percent of Employer Liability Determinations Made Promptly – Performance fell slightly (less than 1 percentage point) from FY 2013.
The Employment Service assisted almost 17 million job seekers in PY 2013 – continuing a downward trend (from almost 22 million in PY 2010) due to improving labor markets.
The Employment Service also served 1.1 million Veterans in PY 2014 – down from over 1.5 million in PY 2010.
WIOA amended the Wagner-Peyser Act of 1933, which established the Employment Service.
The changes made to the Employment Service by WIOA take effect in PY 2015 and include greater flexibility for ES staff to use: assessments; career counseling; workforce and labor market information; and referrals and application assistance to other employment and training programs, such as Pell Grants and the GI Bill, to assist individuals in their career exploration.
WIOA also requires the Employment Service to provide assistance to UI claimants and envisions an Employment Service capable of providing a broader range of staff-assisted services that will better support millions of job seekers each year.
The new role of the Employment Service may lead to a higher cost per participant and decrease the number of individuals served.
In FY 2016, the Department is requesting additional Employment Service funds and authority to target these additional resources to areas that can demonstrate bot demand for and ability to provide Employment Service staff-assisted services.
Although additional information will need to be collected regarding the impact of the WIOA transition, the Department’s budget request will help offset the impact of the expanded Employment Service functions on performance.
The Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) program provides training, income support, job search allowances, and relocation allowances that expand opportunities for employment and prosperity for trade-affected workers who are threatened to lose their jobs, have lost their jobs, or a significant amount of their wages is reduced due to the impact of international trade.
Performance in support of this strategic objective is measured by the Employment Retention Rate (ERR) for participants who exit the program.
New provisions for TAA benefits and services under the 2009 and 2011 amendments are reflected in improved outcomes from 2011 onward for the EER.
Annual goals for the ERR were met or exceeded in all years in the last five years, and exceeded the goal by more than 7 percent in FYs 2012 and 2013.
The FY 2014 EER result of 91.1 showed a very slight increase from the FY 2013 result.
Sources: Facilitate Claimant Reemployment: ETA 9047 report; First Payment Timeliness: ETA 9050 and 9050p reports; Detect Overpayments: Benefit Accuracy Measurement (BAM) survey and ETA 227 report; Tax liability determinations: ETA 581 report.
Notes: [p] Preliminary, based on UI reemployment data for the period July 2012 through June 2013, the most recent data available.
1/ ETA will establish targets for these measures in PY 2014/FY 2015.
In FY 2014, EBSA conducted more pension and health plan investigations than in any other of the past five years.
EBSA focused its enforcement resources on National Projects and the Major Case Enforcement Priority.
The Major Case Enforcement Priority concentrates enforcement resources on cases designed to have the greatest impact on the protection of plan assets and the numbers of plan participants.
EBSA also engaged in a thorough analysis of the impact of its performance metrics on its enforcement program.
Based on this analysis, EBSA will discontinue reporting its cases processed measures to avoid reliance on raw case numbers.
In FY 2015, EBSA will increase the target for its Major Case metric and introduce three metrics that will focus on the timeliness of EBSA’s investigations.
EBSA will also track its monetary recoveries and non-monetary results as performance indicators.
This shift and increase in enforcement resources to Major Cases that require more resources and take more investigative time to complete impacts EBSA’s ability to close the same number of investigations as in prior years, even with an increase in enforcement resources.
As the Agency increases its focus on Major Cases, however, it expects to have larger recoveries and the ability to obtain more systemic relief that would benefit many more participants.
The Outreach, Education and Assistance program provided superior participant assistance by responding to over 99 percent of all written inquiries within 30 days of receipt and telephone inquiries by the close of the next business day.
This informal resolution of complaints without utilizing the more resource intensive investigative process enables EBSA to direct its investigative resources to more egregious and wide-spread violations of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA).
In addition, the participant assistance program plays a critical role in EBSA’s overall enforcement program.
When EBSA’s participant assistance program receives an inquiry or complaint that indicates a potential fiduciary breach or systemic problem, that inquiry is referred to staff for possible investigation.
Referrals from the participant assistance program in FY 2014 resulted in the opening of 687 enforcement cases.
Although falling slightly short of its FY 2014 target, EBSA continued to achieve high customer satisfaction ratings.
While outside factors may have contributed to EBSA not reaching a customer satisfaction score of 72%, EBSA believes that it is possible that the score has plateaued.
Accordingly, EBSA is developing plans, such as the Benefits Call Quality Assurance program, aimed at assessing not merely inquirer satisfaction, but also the technical accuracy and quality of inquiry responses.
In FY 2015, EBSA will continue to strive for a customer satisfaction rating of 72%.
The Agency also conducted outreach and education programs designed to educate plan participants and officials.
EBSA completed 1,311 Affordable Care Act (ACA) outreach activities reaching over 40,000 individuals, held 836 rapid response workshops for dislocated workers, distributed over 538,000 educational publications, and hosted over 8 million visitors on the Agency’s Web site.
Finally, EBSA made progress in closing Sample Investigation Program (SIP) cases.
EBSA reported compliance rates of plans in the FY 2011 and 2012 plan filing universes.
An estimated FY 2013 compliance rate was also determined.
The SIP gives EBSA a broad measure of the rate of baseline employee benefit plan compliance with the civil provisions of ERISA.
This compliance rate includes any and all violations of ERISA, without regard to the seriousness or pervasiveness of the violations.
A minor reporting or paper violation, that caused no injury and had little importance to plan participants, is treated the same as a violation that imperils hundreds of millions of dollars.
As a result, the bare baseline statistic does not provide a strong measure of whether the plan universe is in substantial compliance with ERISA’s obligations.
Moving forward, EBSA will prioritize its enforcement resources on more serious violations, rather than all violations.
In FY 2015, EBSA will continue to analyze the compliance data available to the Agency and use lessons learned to improve the SIP as well as the overall enforcement program.
Strategic Objective 5.1 – Provide sound and impartial information on labor market activity, working conditions, and price changes in the economy for decision making, including support for the formulation of economic and social policy affecting virtually all Americans.
In FY 2014, BLS reached 100 percent of the underlying timeliness and relevance targets for all of its Principal Federal Economic Indicators (PFEIs).
BLS reached 95% of the underlying accuracy targets for its PFEIs, missing the Producer Price Index (PPI) Percentage of industry product line indexes published monthly target by one percentage point.
PPI changed its approach for delinquent respondents, resulting in fewer industry indexes meeting publish ability requirements.
PPI adjusted it’s out year targets accordingly.
In addition, BLS measured dissemination through the Average number of Internet site user sessions each month, and fell slightly under its target of 8.7 million in FY 2014 by hosting 8.4 million user sessions Finally, in FY 2014, BLS met its target of 77 on the American Customer Satisfaction Index, which measures customer satisfaction with its full Web site.
Because this APR is primarily a planning document that uses historical information to inform future strategies and targets, it is organized around goals and measures selected to represent Departmental goals for the budget year (FY 2016).
Under GPRA, performance goals, measures and targets are identified for reporting purposes in the Congressional Budget Justification (CBJ) issued during that fiscal year.
Therefore, DOL is obliged to report PY 2013 and FY 2014 results for measures listed in its FY 2015 Performance Plan, which was published as part of the FY 2015 CBJ in April 2014 (see www.dol.gov/dol/budget/).
Some measures have since been revised, replaced, or discontinued.
The table below lists these performance measures, their targets and results for PY 2013/FY 2014 – organized by the Strategic Objective they supported in the FY 2015 CBJ.
Results are not provided for measures that were new this year, i.e., their target was to collect baseline data.