Mission: To foster, promote, and develop the welfare of the wage earners, job seekers, and retirees of the United States; improve working conditions; advance opportunities for profitable employment; and assure work-related benefits and rights.
Agencies that directly support Departmental goals and objectives in this report are grouped by program type in the following table.
The column on the right indicates, for each agency, which Strategic Objectives include performance measures in this report.
Brief descriptions of each agency and the programs they administer, organized by program type, follow this Overview.
This report explains how DOL improves the lives of American workers through the management of its agencies and programs.
It also satisfies the requirement of GPRMA to provide information on actual performance and progress in achieving goals identified in the Annual Performance Plan (APP).
Measures and targets for FY 2016 were updated in the FY 2015 Annual Performance Report (APR), which was the Department’s FY 2017 Annual Performance Plan.
The FY 2016 APR serves as the FY 2018 APP, updates measures and targets for FY 2017, and establishes targets consistent with those reflected in the FY 2018 Congressional Budget Justification.
Some measures are dropped or changed between reports.
The Strategic Goals sections present results and plans organized by the structure laid out in the DOL FY 2014-2018 Strategic Plan (see http://www.dol.gov/dol/aboutdol/).
The plan includes five strategic goals (general outcomes clearly linked to the Department’s mission), ten strategic objectives that articulate more specific goals associated with one or more programs and DOL agencies, and 19 performance goals that outline agency contributions to the objectives.
Within each strategic objective section, narratives for each contributing agency explain the data, summarize the analyses, provide plans, and provide important context and details as needed to interpret the data and brief summary analyses that follow in tabular form.
These performance goal summary tables list each applicable agency goal, its key indicators, and applicable targets, results, and status (whether or not results reach or exceed the target, indicated by Y or N).
Where “baseline” appears in the target cell for new indicators, no data were available for establishing a numerical target.
If results improve over the prior year but do not reach the target, “I” appears in the status cell.
The last three columns identify what worked, what didn’t work, and plans to improve results.
The Employment and Training Administration (ETA) provides employment assistance, labor market information, and job training through the administration of the following programs: programs authorized by the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act of 2014 (WIOA) for adults, dislocated workers, youth (including Job Corps), and targeted populations; Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) authorized by the Trade Act of 1974, as amended; Employment Services authorized under the Wagner-Peyser Act; Foreign Labor Certification activities authorized by the Immigration and Nationality Act; the Senior Community Service Employment Program authorized by the Older Americans Act; Apprenticeship programs authorized by the National Apprenticeship Act; and Competitive Grants for Worker Training and Placement in High Growth and Emerging Industry Sectors authorized under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Recovery Act).
The public workforce system contributes to our nation’s global competitiveness and economic productivity by providing lifelong learning opportunities and a broad array of employment services.
The workforce system provides critical services to a broad array of customers at all skill levels.
These services include career counseling, case management, assessments that identify transferable skills, and training.
By testing and rigorously evaluating new ideas and approaches, ETA and the workforce system are committed to continuous improvement.
The Veterans’ Employment and Training Service (VETS) serves America’s veterans and transitioning service members and their eligible spouses by preparing them for meaningful careers, providing employment resources and expertise, and protecting their employment rights.
VETS helps veterans and transitioning service members obtain positive employment outcomes through services provided at American Job Centers and Transition Assistance Program (TAP) DOL Employment Workshops at military installations.
Grants to State Workforce Agencies (SWA) support staff dedicated to serving veterans, specifically those who require special assistance due to disabilities or other significant barriers to employment.
VETS coordinates with the Department of Defense to provide workshops at military installations worldwide to prepare service members for transition to meaningful civilian employment.
VETS also provides funding, through the Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program (HVRP), to organizations that serve veterans experiencing homelessness, who warrant more comprehensive services.
VETS protects employment and reemployment rights of veterans and members of the National Guard and Reserve forces under the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) in order that they can serve on active duty without harm to their employment status.
VETS also enforces preferences that apply to Federal employment of veterans.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) requires that employers doing business with the Federal Government comply with the laws and regulations requiring a fair and diverse workplace, free of discrimination and harassment.
OFCCP also requires that federal contractors meet contractual equal employment opportunity and affirmative action requirements.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) was established by the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 with the mission to assure, so far as possible, that every American worker has safe and healthful working conditions.
OSHA ensures the safety and health of America’s workers by setting and enforcing workplace safety and health standards; delivering effective enforcement; providing training, outreach, and education; and encouraging continual improvement in workplace safety and health.
Through these efforts, OSHA aims to reduce the number of worker illnesses, injuries, and fatalities and contribute to DOL’s broader goals of promoting economic recovery and the competitiveness of our nation’s workforce.
The Wage and Hour Division (WHD) is responsible for administering and enforcing a number of federal laws that establish the minimum standards for wages and working conditions in the United States.
These labor statutes provide basic protections for all workers and while they differ in scope, all of the statutes enforced by WHD are intended to protect and to promote the welfare of the nation’s workforce, to provide opportunities for advancement, and to promote fair compensation for work performed.
The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) minimum wage provisions and the prevailing wage laws provide a floor for the payment of fair wages, while the FLSA overtime provisions are intended to broaden work opportunities and promote employment.
The Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act and the immigration programs establish working conditions intended both to protect the wages and the safety and health of vulnerable workers and to provide that the labor force is not displaced by lower-paid foreign or migrant labor.
The prevailing wage programs provide protection to local middle class workers who may be disadvantaged by competition from outside labor who offer their services at wages lower than those in the locality.
The Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) was enacted to enable eligible workers to take job-protected family or medical leave from work, and the child labor provisions of the FLSA promote the safe employment of young workers, encourage their educational endeavors, and provide a path to future employment.
The Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA) has a single outcome goal to improve health benefits and retirement security for all workers.
EBSA is charged with protecting more than 149 million workers, retirees and their families who are covered by nearly 685,000 private retirement plans, 2.2 million health plans, and similar numbers of other welfare benefit plans.
Together, these plans hold estimated assets of $9.1 trillion.
EBSA’s mission is carried out in a complex and evolving economic and regulatory environment.
The retirement and health benefits security of workers, retirees, and their families continue to be significant factors in the overall financial security of the American public.
In order to enhance benefits security and maintain public confidence in our private benefits system, EBSA administers an integrated program of regulation; compliance assistance and education; civil and criminal enforcement; and research and analysis.
The Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) protects the safety and health of the nation’s miners through enforcement of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 (Mine Act), as amended by the Mine Improvement and New Emergency Response Act of 2006 (MINER Act).
The mission of MSHA is to prevent death, disease, and injury from mining and to promote safe and healthful workplaces for the nation’s miners.
MSHA’s mission is carried out through the enactment and enforcement of mandatory safety and health standards; mandated inspections which require four complete inspections annually at active underground mines and two complete inspections annually at active surface mines; and miner training and compliance assistance to operators.
The Office of Labor-Management Standards (OLMS) administers the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959, as amended (LMRDA), and related laws.
These laws primarily establish safeguards for union democracy and union financial integrity and require public disclosure reporting by unions, union officers, union employees, employers, labor consultants and surety companies.
OLMS also administers employee protections under various federally-sponsored transportation programs that require fair, equitable, and protective arrangements for transit employees when federal funds are used to acquire, improve, or operate a transit system.
These arrangements must be approved by DOL before Federal funds may be released to grantees.
The Bureau collaborates with national, state, and local organizations, governments, and employers, providing technical assistance, resources, and education to assist in the implementation of public policy, programs, initiatives, and workplace practices and solutions.
The Bureau advises the Secretary, the Administration, and sister DOL agencies on policy and regulatory issues.
The Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP)’s goal is to increase the number and quality of employment opportunities for people with disabilities.
Through its national leadership, ODEP impacts the systems that influence the employment outcomes of people with disabilities by developing and improving public and private policies and practices.
To realize its systems change goal, ODEP undertakes research to create and validate promising policy strategies and effective practices; collaborates with Federal agencies, private and public sector employers, labor organizations, and other stakeholders to expand physical and programmatic access to American Job Centers and the workforce system in general; improves employer organizational practices and makes workplaces more inclusive; and increases access to the employment supports that are crucial to every worker’s success throughout the employment process, and especially to a job seeker or worker with a disability.
The Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB)’s mission is to improve global working conditions, raise living standards, protect workers’ ability to exercise their rights, and address workplace exploitation of children and other vulnerable populations.
ILAB leads the U.S. Government’s representation on labor and employment issues in bilateral, regional and multilateral engagements and works closely with other agencies to develop and implement economic, trade and labor policies.
ILAB’s mission also advances DOL’s domestic priorities by ensuring that U.S. trade agreements are fair for American workers.
ILAB provides technical assistance grants and research to promote labor standards and acceptable conditions of work, eliminating of the worst forms of child labor; and reporting on international labor issues.
The mission of the Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs (OWCP) is to protect the interests of workers who are injured or become ill on the job, as well as their families and their employers, by making timely, appropriate, and accurate decisions on claims, by providing prompt payment of benefits, and by helping injured workers return to gainful work as early as is feasible.
OWCP implements four statutory federal workers’ compensation programs providing monetary, medical, and return-to-work benefits for work-related injuries and illnesses to federal employees, coal mine workers, nuclear weapons workers, longshore and harbor workers, contractors serving overseas, and certain other designated employee groups.
The agency adjudicates claims, administers the benefit funds authorized for these purposes, and provides oversight of claims resolutions by responsible parties.
The federal-state UI program, authorized under the Federal Unemployment Tax Act and Title III of the Social Security Act, provides temporary, partial wage replacement for unemployed workers, providing them with income support when suitable work is unavailable.
To be eligible for benefits, unemployed workers must meet eligibility requirements established by state laws that conform to federal law, including that they have worked recently, are involuntarily unemployed, and are able and are available for work.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) is the principal federal statistical agency responsible for measuring labor market activity, working conditions, and price changes in the economy.
Its mission is to collect, analyze, and disseminate essential economic information to support the public and private decision-making that forms the basis of our democratic, free-enterprise system.
Like all federal statistical agencies, BLS executes its statistical mission with independence, serving its users by providing products and services that are accurate, objective, relevant, timely, and accessible.
Policies and decisions based on BLS data affect virtually all Americans, and the wide range of BLS data products is necessary to fulfill the diverse needs of a broad customer base.
BLS conforms to the conceptual framework of the Interagency Council on Statistical Policy’s (ICSP) Guidelines for Reporting Performance by Statistical Agencies and the “Strengthening Federal Statistics” chapter of the Analytical Perspectives volume in the President’s Budget.
BLS reports the full cost to produce its data products.
BLS also measures accuracy, timeliness, relevance, dissemination, and mission achievement.
These six criteria are common among statistical agencies because they represent critical aspects of a statistical program’s performance.
Using these common concepts as a basis for measuring and reporting on statistical agency outcomes helps inform decision-makers more consistently about the performance of statistical agencies.
The Government Performance and Results Act Modernization Act requires that federal agencies report to Congress on “unmet goals” annually.
Annually, agency leaders should review progress on each of the agency’s strategic objectives established by the agency Strategic Plans and updated annually in the Annual Performance Plan.
These reviews should inform strategic decision-making, budget formulation, and near-term agency actions, as well as preparation of the Annual Performance Plan and Annual Performance Report.
This document summarizes findings of DOL’s Strategic Review of our ten Strategic Objectives.
Strategic Objective 1.1 Advance employment opportunities for US workers in 21st century demand sectors and occupations using proven training models through increased employer engagement and partnerships.
The Department of Labor, in consultation with the Office of Management and Budget, has highlighted this objective as a focus area for improvement for three consecutive fiscal years.
Therefore, following the summary of findings and as required by GPRMA, this section includes milestones for actions being taken to improve performance.
Employment and Training Administration (ETA) and Veterans’ Employment and Training Service (VETS) programs that support this objective include the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) Adult, WIOA Dislocated Worker, National Dislocated Worker Grants, Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker, Indian and Native American, Trade Adjustment Assistance, Senior Community Service Employment Program, Jobs for Veterans State Grants (JVSG), and the Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program (HVRP).
The Department’s funding for these programs goes to a range of states, localities, nonprofits, and other entities that employ employment and training delivery strategies designed to meet the needs of the target group being served.
DOL provides leadership for these programs through technical assistance, policy guidance, and grants administration.
With few exceptions, DOL employment and training program participants’ entered employment rate, employment retention rate, and average earnings improved over the past four years.
Additionally, beginning in PY 2016, VETS required HVRP grantees to coenroll participants in the WIOA formula programs.
This is the first step in using state wage records to determine employment outcomes for these participants.
In July 2015 VETS stood up an employer outreach capability, placing a Regional Veterans Employment Coordinator (RVEC) in each of six regional offices.
Since then, RVECs have assisted over 550 employers on using their state workforce systems to find qualified veterans to hire.
Employment and earnings outcomes for workers are better when training is closely targeted to specific occupations and industries, particularly in real work-based settings (e.g., Registered Apprenticeship, internships, customized training, on-the-job training (OJT), incumbent worker training, sectoral partnerships, firm industry cluster partnerships, and public/private/union partnerships, Career Pathways, Sector Strategies, and other work-based learning programs).
On April 28, 2016, 12 Federal agencies announced the expanded partnerships regarding Career Pathways building on the work that the Departments of Labor, Education, and Health and Human Services began in 2012 to promote the use of career pathways in acquiring valuable skills and industry-recognized credentials through better alignment with business by education, training and employment, and human and social services.
Additionally, the regulations implementing WIOA include numerous provisions to make funds available for OJT and work-based learning.
However, only a small fraction of job seekers served by these programs receive training (as opposed to less expensive career services, such as skill assessment, job search assistance, and career counseling).
ETA’s Supporting Sector Strategies Initiative predated the passage of the WIOA, which mandates the use of sector strategies as a critical component of successful workforce development, and launched the Sector Strategies Virtual Institute to expand evidence-driven best practices.
In May 2016, ETA provided 1200 state and local workforce development teams the opportunity to participate in a variety of skill building workshops.
In September 2016, ETA launched the Virtual Business Engagement Academy to provide technical assistance for more than 700 state and local workforce system leaders to enhance their capacity to implement industry sector partnerships.
Given the diversity of the populations served and state, regional and local dynamics, uniform adoption of best practices and employer engagement strategies is difficult.
However, best practices and evidence-based practices are commonly incorporated by the system, and WIOA provisions reinforce this.
The Workforce Information Advisory Council (WIAC), a Federal Advisory Committee, was created under WIOA to provide the Secretary of Labor with recommendations to improve the labor market information (LMI) systems at the national, state, and local levels.
The WIAC is comprised of 14 members that represent national, state, and local LMI users and providers, and can draw from their best practices to create a set of recommendations that will help advance employment opportunities for all American workers.
Helping job seekers obtain the employment and training services needed to be successful in the labor market is one of DOL’s Top Management and Performance Challenges for FY 2016.
WIOA provides a great opportunity to restructure the performance accountability framework to improve data collection, program reporting, and information system upgrades.
This report identifies challenges states are facing in reporting data on credential attainment (including occupational licenses), and whether employment is related to the training services received.
Under WIOA, credential attainment is one of six primary indicators of performance.
The Departments of Labor and Education are working to finalize a definition and calculation method for this indicator that is applicable to programs in both agencies.
To identify and expand the use of proven models that engage business, DOL is pursuing evaluation and research projects that have strong employer components.
Conclusive information from such research will be widely disseminated as it becomes available.
In addition, DOL will provide technical assistance to states as they conduct their own evaluations and research projects, as required under WIOA.
Where evidence supports a particular approach, states and grantees are encouraged – and for some competitive grant programs, required – to adopt it.
Building on this evidence base, DOL made significant investments in FY 2016 to engage employers in developing a skilled workforce in demand industries through its H-1B funded TechHire Partnership and America’s Promise Job-driven grants.
TechHire Partnership grants were awarded in June 2016 (for four years) to 39 publicprivate partnerships to help train tomorrow’s workforce in rapid-growth sectors like tech, healthcare, and advanced manufacturing.
The grants focus on providing workers the skills required for well-paying, middle- and high-skilled jobs while providing employers with the skilled technology workers needed to grow and expand.
DOL estimates that more than 18,000 participants will receive services through the TechHire Partnership grant program.
Over $125 million of the grants went to partnerships that specifically target, train, and support young people, ages 17-29.
In addition, $24 million went to partnerships that help other disadvantaged groups with barriers to employment, including veterans, people with disabilities, people with limited English proficiency (LEP), and people with criminal records (https://www.doleta.gov/TechHire/).
America’s Promise Job-Driven grants aim to accelerate the development of regional workforce partnerships with business and industry leaders committed to providing a pipeline of skilled workers in a specific industry sectors.
In November 2016, DOL awarded a $111 million in America’s Promise grants to 23 regional workforce partnerships to create or expand regional workforce partnerships between employers, economic development, workforce development, community colleges, training programs, K-12 education systems, and community-based organizations to support a range of sector-driven strategies, including work-based learning, classroom instruction, and competency-based education to provide workers with the skills and credentials they need to enter into, or advance within, H-1B industries and occupations.
ETA-TA-05: Host WIAC meetings in fall 2016 and spring 2017, to prepare recommendations to the Secretary on LMI system improvements.
The WIAC met in July 2016 and in November 2016.
They also held virtual meetings in January 2017 and February 2017.
To date, no recommendations have been prepared.
ETA-TA-06: Award cooperative agreements to one to three national/regional organizations that will convene states to review licensing requirements to enhance portability and access.
On January 12, 2017, DOL awarded $7.5 million through a cooperative agreement to the National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL) for a project to improve geographic mobility for workers in licensed occupations.
ETA-OA-02: Issue policy guidance to the educational and workforce systems to support the expansion of youth apprenticeships.
With the joint Training and Employment Notice (TEN) Number 31-16 from the Departments of Labor and Education, workforce and education stakeholders now better understand how to proceed in working on Registered Apprenticeship programs for high school youth.
There is great demand for high school apprenticeship programs, so this policy guidance will help to facilitate expansion of Registered Apprenticeships targeting youth employment.
ETA-OA-04: Issue grant and contract awards to allocate the ApprenticeshipUSA funds to states, industry intermediaries and other partners.
The ApprenticeshipUSA initiative will expand apprenticeships across the country in a diverse array of industry sectors as part of the strategy to grow and diversify apprenticeship.
This effort will result in thousands of new apprenticeships in diverse industries, including health care, advanced manufacturing, and information technology.
ETA-OA-05: Conduct at least six Apprenticeship Accelerator Sessions to target a minimum of ten new occupations.
The purpose of Accelerator Sessions is to bring together employers, associations, colleges and other potential Registered Apprenticeship sponsors in a one-day meeting to learn more about the registration process and build their interest in becoming a sponsor.
Many organizations have registered programs after attending an Accelerator Session.
ETA-OA-07: Engage American Apprenticeship grantees in a series of technical assistance training on employer engagement.
By successfully engaging more employers in registered apprenticeship, grantees will increase employer participation in registered apprenticeship, thereby expanding apprenticeship opportunities for underrepresented populations around the country.
Strategic Objective 1.2 – Provide marketable skills and knowledge to increase workers’ income and help them overcome barriers to the middle class through partnerships among business, education, labor, community organizations, and the workforce system.
ETA programs that support this objective include Registered Apprenticeship, WIOA Youth, Job Corps, YouthBuild, and Reintegration of Ex-Offenders.
In FY 2016, the six month average earnings for completers of registered apprenticeship programs were $32,460.
ETA continues to advance efforts to modernize Registered Apprenticeship.
Recent examples include promoting Registered Apprenticeship as a critical talent development opportunity for the WIOA system.
Other new partnerships have been formed through the Registered Apprenticeship College Consortium (RACC), which has led to over 280 college partners that have agreed to award college credit for completion of a Registered Apprenticeship program.
To expand Registered Apprenticeship into new industries and occupations, in September 2015, ETA awarded $175 million (H-1B funds) to grantees that competed for assistance to train and hire more than 34,000 new apprentices over the next five years in industries as diverse as healthcare, IT, and advanced manufacturing.
The FY 2016 budget appropriation enacted $90 million for ApprenticeshipUSA program activities, the first-ever appropriation to support wide-scale apprenticeship expansion across the United States.
Other ETA programs also demonstrated success in increasing workers’ skills and knowledge through partnerships, particularly through targeted technical assistance efforts.
In the WIOA Youth program, the share of participants entering employment or enrolling in post-secondary education, the military or advanced training/occupational skills training in the first quarter after exit increased from 59 percent in PY 2011 to 66 percent in PY 2015.7 ETA’s efforts to help states and local areas implement WIOA provisions that expand and enhance services to out of school youth include: (1) hosting the “Enough is Known for Action” briefing which explored strategies to engage out-of- school youth and other populations; (2) conducting monthly Interagency Youth Workgroup meetings between the Departments of Labor, Education, and Health and Human Services; and (3) issuing guidance.
From PY 2011 to PY 2015, the percent of Job Corps students who entered employment or enrolled in post-secondary education and/or advanced training/occupational skills training in the first quarter after exit increased from 73 percent to 78 percent.
To address those challenges, Job Corps is conducting unannounced visits to centers with an elevated risk profile.
During these visits, federal staff from Job Corps’ national and regional Offices assess each selected center’s compliance with established policy covering center safety and security; disciplinary and behavior management systems; significant incident reporting; residential and recreational programing; student attendance and accountability; and counseling and evaluation of student progress.
Each visit also includes focus groups with randomly selected students and line staff.
Many job seekers face challenges in finding employment opportunities because most jobs paying middle-class wages require a higher level of education and some form of credential, pointing to the need for different training strategies that focus on the attainment of industry-recognized credentials.
9 ETA designs grant competitions, where applicable, to specifically promote credential attainment.
In addition to the extensive work to support Strategic Objective 1.1, ETA provides technical assistance and training to grantees on resources and strategies for increasing the attainment of industry recognized credentials.
For example, ETA updated its electronic tools to include information on credentials related to each occupation – from short-term certificates to apprenticeship to licensure and certifications – and indicate the quality or value of specific certifications, including employer demand based on job postings nationally.
Labor force statistics from the Current Population Survey indicate that over 20 percent of those employed possess occupational licenses, and that those workers obtain higher wages and experience less unemployment than those without licenses.
Yet workers who need to relocate to a higherdemand area to increase their economic opportunities face restrictions on licensing portability and reciprocity among states.
ETA has awarded a grant to the NCSL to convene a consortium of states to address these licensing issues and develop technical assistance to share with all states to address geographic mobility of workers.
Strategic Objective 1.3 Advance workers’ rights, acceptable work conditions, and livelihoods, particularly for the world’s vulnerable populations.
The Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB) supports this objective.
In FY 2016, working through grantees in 60 countries, ILAB provided education or vocational services to 33,341 children engaged in or at high risk of entering child labor and helped to increase capacity to address child labor in 26 countries.
In addition, ILAB promoted a fair global playing field for workers and businesses by building the technical capacity of governments in 21 countries.
In FY 2016, ILAB piloted its Policy Priority Maturity Model to track priority policies from initial communication to consideration, adoption, promulgation and implementation and/or enforcement in an effort to better connect ILAB program activities with the achievement of its outcome goals.
ILAB will further refine this indicator in FY 2017.
Strategic Objective 2.1 Secure safe and healthy workplaces, particularly in high-risk industries.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) support this objective.
Performance results for OSHA’s DOL Priority Goal on the numbers of hazards abated related to falls in construction and general industry were down in FY 2016, compared to FY 2015, because OSHA carried out fewer inspections in FY 2016 and consequently issued fewer citations.
In FY 2016, OSHA carried out 31,948 inspections (15,610 construction inspections), compared to 35,822 (17,550 in construction) in FY 2015 – a decrease of 11 percent.
Decreasing resources, a hiring freeze and attrition limited the amount of staff available to do inspections.
Fall protection continues to be the number one violation cited by OSHA.
Falls are the leading cause of death in the construction industry and account for 20 percent of all serious injuries.
In FY 2015, OSHA continued to focus on preventing fall hazards through inspection targeting.
OSHA partnered with the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, the Center for Protection of Workers’ Rights (CPWR), and the Department of Defense on Safety Stand-Downs in 2014 and 2015.
Safety Stand-Downs are voluntary events for employers to talk directly to employees about safety.
The National Campaign to Prevent Falls in Construction Final Report indicated that thousands of employers received certificates, and over 1 million workers and over 1.5 million military and civilian personnel participated in the Stand-Downs.
OSHA also has national and local emphasis plans (NEPs and LEPs), as well as a Strategic Plan that direct Compliance Safety and Health Officers (CSHOs) to those establishments with the most significant risk of fall hazards.
In FY 2016, OSHA conducted 12,731 inspections of worksites as a result of these programs, and 7,964 fall-related violations were abated in FY 2016.
This level of attention and proactive enforcement will directly impact the workers at these establishments.
More generally, this enforcement activity will alert and educate other employers about fall hazards in the industries and local areas affected.
OSHA tracks two measures to monitor its effect on federal employee safety.
The Federal agency total injury/illness case rate fell from 3.08 per 100 employees in FY 2010 to 2.12 in FY 2016, and the Federal agency lost time injury/illness rate (also per 100 employees) fell from 1.44 to 1.13 over the same period.
OSHA contributed to these improved results by providing compliance assistance to federal agencies and by inspecting federal establishments with high numbers of lost time cases.
In March 2016, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) issued a final rule to curb lung cancer, silicosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and kidney disease in America's workers by limiting their exposure to respirable crystalline silica.
The rule is comprised of two standards, one for Construction and one for General Industry and Maritime.
Both standards took effect on June 23, 2016, after which industries have one to five years to comply with most requirements.
OSHA estimates that, once its effects are fully realized, the rule will save over 600 lives and prevent more than 900 new cases of silicosis each year.
The Final Rule is projected to provide net benefits of about $7.7 billion annually.
Since January 2015, OSHA’s requirements for employers to report severe injuries to OSHA, has provided the agency with expanded information about injuries and illnesses (i.e., amputations, hospitalizations, and eye losses) in workplaces.
OSHA’s regulation on improving tracking of workplace injuries and illnesses, which became effective in January 2017, will also expand OSHA’s database of information about workplaces with injuries and illnesses.
OSHA is preparing an NPRM that proposes a delay in the implementation date from July 1, 2017, to December 1, 2017.
All of this information helps OSHA use its resources more effectively by enabling OSHA to identify the workplaces where workers are at greatest risk.
In FY 2016, MSHA did not achieve its DOL Priority Goal target to reduce mining fatalities.
The five-year rolling average of fatal injuries per 200,000 hours worked was 0.0123 and the target was 0.0120.
Although the target was missed, in FY 2016 the mining industry experienced the fewest deaths in mining history at 25 and it was the safest year on record at 0.0094 fatal injuries per 200,000 hours worked.
MSHA missed the target because coal mine closures led to a rapid decline in hours worked (11 percent in the past year) that exceeded the drop in fatalities.
The FY 2016 fatality rate is 36 percent below the FY 2010 result of 0.0187.
This reduction is attributed to a number of factors, including stronger enforcement and special initiatives, such as impact inspections, Rules to Live By, better technology, improvements in mining practices, and improved training.
Since the 2009 launch of the “End Black Lung – Act Now” campaign, average respirable dust levels have decreased annually.
Dust sampling results for FY 2016, collected under the respirable coal dust rule that went into effect in August 2014, dropped to historic lows.
During this period, the yearly average respirable dust samples collected by MSHA from the dustiest occupations in underground coal mines fell to 0.64 milligrams per cubic meter (mg/m3), down from the FY 2015 average of 0.70 mg/m3.
The rule is achieving the intended result of lowering miners’ exposures to unhealthy dust.
MSHA will face challenges in the coming years responding to changes in the mining industry and changes in the demographics of MSHA’s labor force.
As coal production decreases, MSHA will continue to realign its resources to meet the demands of activities in all mines.
At the end of FY 2016, MSHA completed its reorganization of District 6 to combine with Districts 5 and 7, thereby eliminating one MSHA coal district in Eastern Kentucky where coal mining activity is declining the most.
In the last quarter of the fiscal year MSHA has announced it is closing the District 11 office in Birmingham, Alabama to combine it with District 7 in Barboursville, Kentucky (District 11 was formerly part of District 7).
A large proportion of MSHA staff is eligible for retirement, creating a need for significant recruitment efforts.
To increase diversity, MSHA created a Diversity and Inclusion Committee to develop employee inclusion initiatives across MSHA, including a renewed focus on special emphasis programs.
Strategic Objective 3.1 Break down barriers to fair and diverse work places and narrow wage and income inequality.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP), the Women’s Bureau (WB), and the Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP) support this objective.
In FY 2016, OFCCP completed 1,844 compliance evaluations and complaint investigations of federal contractor and subcontractor establishments, uncovering violations of EEO requirements in 22 percent of those reviews and, specifically, evidence of discrimination at 46 establishments.
The agency also negotiated $10.6 million in back pay and 1,043 potential job opportunities on behalf of more than 18,000 workers affected by discrimination.
These results include resolving 15 cases of pay discrimination and recovering more than $760,000 in back pay and salary adjustments for 577 workers.
About one-third of OFCCP’s settlements of discrimination cases now involve issues of pay discrimination, while in prior years the agency was addressing only a handful of such cases annually.
Also in FY 2016, OFCCP continued to focus on high-quality systemic, compensation-based evaluations that yield more results for workers.
All of the pay discrimination notices of violations issued by OFCCP in FY 2016 were related to systemic pay findings.
Also, 51 percent of the construction compliance evaluations were associated with a high-impact project – up from 31 percent in FY 2015.
High-impact projects have the potential for better success in increasing the representation of minorities, women, people with disabilities, and protected veterans in skilled trades through effective recruitment and training, and OFCCP is committed to focusing resources in this area to ensure effective affirmative action and non-discrimination.
The Women’s Bureau implemented its grant authority in FY 2014 and awarded $500,000 in grants to conduct research and analysis on the feasibility of paid family and medical leave programs.
In FY 2015, grant funding increased to $1.55 million, extended to municipalities, U.S. Territories and Possessions and federally recognized Indian/Native American Tribes.
In FY 2016, the Bureau hosted a paid family and medical leave symposium for researchers and policy makers, and convened stakeholder groups, state legislators, and businesses in 15 cities to participate in discussions on paid leave policies.
To date, the Bureau has awarded over $3 million in grants for its Paid Leave Analysis Grant program.
In addition, the Bureau launched a Portable Retirement Benefits Planning Grant program to support retirement security for workers in a changing labor market, particularly low-wage workers and women, who face a higher risk of poverty in retirement.
Also in FY 2016, the Bureau conducted a Working Women’s Survey to learn more about women’s decisions to exit the workforce, such as family care and household responsibilities.
The survey results will be available in FY 2017.
Beginning in FY 2010, through the Disability Employment Initiative (DEI), ODEP and ETA developed strategies to increase access to, and the use of, American Job Centers’ services by adults and youth with disabilities.
These strategies include the Ticket to Work program, which assists with access to support services such as employment services and vocational rehabilitation, through Employment Networks.
In FY 2015, ODEP and ETA tested DEI models that include career pathways for youth and adults with disabilities, including those with significant disabilities.
In FY 2016, ODEP engaged public and private partners to develop and assess strategies to advance stay at work/return to work (SAW /RTW) as a cost effective means of partially addressing the high unemployment of Americans with disabilities.
ODEP continues to work on measuring the success of its policies, recommendations, and technical assistance.
Strategic Objective 3.2 Protect workers’ rights.
The Office of Labor-Management Standards (OLMS) and whistleblower programs from the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) and the Wage and Hour Division (WHD) support this objective.
OLMS continues to increase productivity and manage limited resources by placing greater reliance on technology and data mining.
OLMS also continues fine-tuning its risk-based audit targeting model to more effectively identify only unions where criminal activity may be present by detecting anomalies in union financial reports and refining targeting strategies.
In FY 2016, the average number of days to resolve union election complaints was 67.4 days, the lowest in the 2012-2016 period.
The percentage of targeted audits that result in a criminal case rose from 13.81 percent in FY 2012 to 21.46 percent in FY 2015, and dipped to 17.14 percent in FY 2016 which was still above the 15 percent target.
In FY 2017, OLMS will continue leveraging relationships with its 43 national and international unions through the Voluntary Compliance Partnership (VCP) program.
This program is designed to improve compliance with filing deadlines, increase electronic filing, and ensure that unions are adequately bonded.
By doing so, VCP enables investigators to devote more of their time to high priority investigations.
OSHA Whistleblower Investigations completed per year increased almost 60 percent over the past five years, from 1,904 in FY 2010 to 3,307 in FY 2016.
In response to the growing demand for whistleblower investigations, OSHA has recently made several changes to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of the whistleblower protection program, including elevating the program to a stand-alone directorate, establishing the Whistleblower Protection Advisory Committee, and implementing a new, successful management model in all regional offices.
OSHA also launched the Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Program in FY 2015, which allows for voluntary resolution of the complaint, and the Quality Review Tool (QRT), which is used for auditing purposes that include case file reviews.
Beginning in 2010, MSHA launched the Worker Voice Initiative to educate miners about their rights and protections when speaking about unsafe working conditions in the nation’s mines.
Temporary reinstatements increased over 400 percent from FY 2008 to FY 2016, from 4 cases to 21.
The record high was 40 cases in FY 2012.
Additionally, in FY 2016, the Department filed a record 45 complaints alleging discrimination of miners who had spoken out about mine hazards, exceeded only by 58 filings in FY 2013 and up 650 percent from 6 in FY 2008.
For 20 years, enforcement of the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) has been primarily complaint-driven, i.e., compliance actions in many cases only applied to a single employee or situation.
To promote a more effective use of limited resources, WHD is adapting its FMLA enforcement policies to promote a more comprehensive approach to compliance.
Since FMLA compliance at the establishment level is often driven by corporate policies, WHD is developing strategies to provide a more in-depth review of the employer’s business practices and leave policies to make a broader impact on compliance, rather than resolving one individual complaint.
In FY 2016, WHD resolved 71 percent of its incoming complaints within the fiscal year (slightly lower than the 72 percent in FY 2015).
In FY 2013, WHD moved to a more strategic focus in the FMLA program aiming to achieve corporate-wide compliance in more investigations.
In FY 2016, every region conducted planned, directed investigations focused on industries or areas where FMLA violations were considered likely.
WHD is continuing to develop strategies and guidance in FY 2017 to expand cases from situation-specific to corporate-wide compliance, which requires evaluating implementation of company policy.
Strategic Objective 3.3 Secure wages and overtime.
The Wage and Hour Division (WHD) and the ETA’s Office of Foreign Labor Certification (OFLC) programs support this objective.
The nature of employment and business structures has changed in recent years.
Fragmentation of employment relationships and the scope and complexity of industry structures combined with the growth of the contingent workforce present complex enforcement challenges that require new levels of coordination and strategy.
WHD’s enforcement program continued focusing its limited resources by directing enforcement to industries where the compliance problems are the greatest.
In FY 2016, directed investigations were conducted in priority industries with an overall increase in the percent of directed investigations from 27 percent in FY 2010 to 46 percent in FY 2016.
At the same time, WHD focused its investigations and resources better than ever on workplaces with violations.
The percent of directed investigations with no violations fell to 19 percent, down from 30 percent in FY 2010, while the percent of complaint investigations with no violations fell to 16 percent, down from 26 percent in FY 2010.
This demonstrates that directed investigations, despite the absence of on-the-ground information from complainants, are nearly as accurate as a complaint in finding employers with violations.
WHD continues its commitment to focusing on those industries with a history of violations that employ workers unlikely to complain.
For several years, the agency has maintained a high percent of overall investigations in priority industries.
In FY 2008, WHD found back wages of $57.5 million for 76,900 workers in certain low-wage industries.
In FY 2016, WHD found more than $77 million in those low wage industries for over 106,000 workers.
5 years to nearly $900, an increase of over $300 per employee in that timeframe.
In FY 2016, each WHD agency-initiated investigation found an average of $11,170 – an increase of over $4500 per investigation in the last 5 years.
WHD prioritized low wage industries in both complaint and directed investigations while increasing the back wage recoveries per worker in those industries.
By focusing on priority industries, along with providing more guidance on the FLSA, WHD also increases the likelihood of detecting instances of misclassification of employees as independent contractors, a practice which undercuts law-abiding employers.
The Department, along with the Department of Homeland Security, jointly published the 2015 H-2B Interim Final Rule and H-2B Wage Final Rule.
The rules, which became effective on April 29, 2015, strengthen protections for U.S. workers while also ensuring that employers can access foreign workers temporarily when U.S. workers are not available.
The 2016 Consolidated Appropriations Act contained provisions amending the substance of important aspects of the new H-2B Interim Final Rule and Final Wage Rule, significantly affecting the processing of employer H-2B applications.
12 The time required to implement these new legislative provisions, in conjunction with the 78 percent increase in H-2B filings during the FY 2016 holiday season when compared to the same period in FY 2015, caused significant delays in processing employer H-2B applications.
As the result of the factors described above, in FY 2016, the Department processed only three percent of H-2B applications within 30 days of receipt of application, compared to the 95 percent of applications in FY 2015.
In FY 2017, OFLC plans to reorient the focus of its timeliness measure in order better to reflect employer requirements, and is measuring the percent of H-2B employer applications resolved within 30 days before the date of need.
Strategic Objective 4.1 Provide income support when work is impossible and facilitate return to work.
The Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs (OWCP) and ETA’s Office of Unemployment Insurance (OUI), Trade Adjustment Assistance, and Employment Services programs support this objective.
The share of federal employees with work-related injuries or illnesses under the Federal Employees’ Compensation Act (FECA) program’s Disability Management that were reemployed by non-postal federal agencies fell slightly from 91.5 percent in fiscal year (FY) 2012 to 89.5 percent in FY 2016.
The percent of first payment of compensation issued within 30 days for Defense Base Act (Longshore) cases rose from 63 percent in FY 2012 to 70 percent in FY 2016.
In FY 2016, the Black Lung program had a large volume of pending claims older than 240 days (as of October 1, 2015).
The Black Lung program reduced this set of aged claims by 85 percent, which resulted in an increase in FY 2016 average processing time.
The average number of days to process Black Lung claims rose from 262 days in FY 2012 to 334 days in FY 2016.
The Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation Program’s average number of days between filing date and final decision for cases sent to the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health when a hearing is held was reduced from 552 in FY 2012 to 501 in FY 2016.
Over the past few years, OWCP (primarily the FECA program) has seen a dramatic increase in claimants, prescriptions, and expenditures for compounded drugs.
Additionally, the FECA program implemented the requirement for a Letter of Medical Necessity by the claimant’s physician prior to authorization of any compounded medication by OWCP Division of Federal Employees’ Compensation.
The Department will continue developing the technology and analytic tools to enhance its FECA improper payment estimation methodology.
In FY 2014, OWCP secured special funding from Congress to establish and staff a Program Integrity Unit with three auditors/analysts to provide greater oversight and analysis of payment accuracy.
OWCP has also contracted with a data analytics firm to assist in developing technology and analytic tools to detect and monitor inherent risk in claims, payments, and providers.
The OIG has identified Reducing Improper Payments as a DOL Top Management and Performance Challenge for FY 2016.
13 To address the improper payment challenges in the Unemployment Insurance (UI) program, ETA has a continuously evolving, comprehensive strategic plan in place to work with states that targets the largest root causes of UI improper payments.
14 This plan has changed over time as states have implemented a number of robust strategies and new strategies have been identified.
ETA provided a total of $685 million in supplemental funding in FYs 2011-2016 to support states’ efforts in implementing core integrity activities and to support modernization of state UI information technology systems, which also contribute to their ability to ensure program integrity.
Starting in FY 2012, ETA began identifying “High Priority States” with persistently high UI improper payment rates for enhanced monitoring and targeted technical assistance to identify impediments to reducing improper payments; action steps designed to reduce improper payments, with a particular focus on prevention; and strategies to successfully implement these steps.
States remain subject to enhanced monitoring until they achieve an improper payment rate under 10 percent and sustain that performance for at least two consecutive quarters.
In FY 2016, as part of the effort to reengineer UI benefit accountability processes, new criteria for the “High Priority” designation of states have been established using a more comprehensive approach that integrates overall program performance, program integrity, and state operational policies and practices.
ETA continues to publish an Improper Payments by State website that depicts each state’s improper payment rate, root causes of overpayments, and progress in implementing strategies included in the UI strategic plan.
Another key component of ETA’s strategic plan is the establishment of a national UI Integrity Center (Center), operated by the National Association of State Workforce Agencies (NASWA) through a cooperative agreement with the New York State Department of Labor.
The Center is a state-driven source of innovative program integrity strategies to address improper payments and reduce fraud in the UI program.
The strategies and tools being developed by the Center will be made available to all states and include: data analytics and predictive modeling methodologies and other tools to improve UI fraud prevention and detection; a secure portal for the rapid exchange of fraud information between states as it is identified; locally adaptable staff training on fraud solutions and integrity practices; promotion of integrity practices to be included in state UI modernization efforts; creation of a “model” plan for Benefit Payment Control operations; creation of a UI Data Hub for the exchange of state fraud data elements; and implementation of a UI Digital Library with curated program integrity content for states and other stakeholders.
While the UI program has made progress in implementing its strategic plan to improve program integrity, there are certain essential program characteristics that, by their nature, contribute to the improper payment rate.
First, the UI system has competing responsibilities that require states to continuously balance the need for both timeliness and accuracy; the program is designed to require full payment of unemployment compensation “when due” but the program also requires extensive fact-finding and verification of information to prevent improper payment of benefits.
Second, there is no cost effective way to prevent the vast majority of UI overpayments due to an improper work search, one of the highest root causes of UI improper payments.
Finally, there are lags in the current data sources used by states to identify individuals that continue to claim benefits after returning to work.
As a result, there is no opportunity for states to impact this significant portion of the UI improper payment rate.
Since 2009, the Trade Adjustment Assistance program (TAA) has included a wage supplement in the form of Reemployment Trade Adjustment Assistance (RTAA).
This benefit encourages eligible workers age 50 and older to accept new jobs more rapidly by offsetting the earnings losses from losing their previous jobs with up to $10,000 in wage supplements.
These supplements go to workers who find reemployment and earn less than $50,000 a year.
From FY 2011 to FY 2016, the proportion of trade participants who are receiving this benefit has increased from 3 percent to 17 percent.
In FY 2016, approximately $27.0 million in RTAA benefits funds were provided to support the 5,648 recipients.
Eligible adversely affected workers are also provided access to income support in the form of Trade Readjustment Allowances (TRA) during their participation in the TAA program.
From FY 2011 to FY 2016, the proportion of trade participants receiving TRA increased from 17 percent to 52 percent.
16 In FY 2016, approximately $199.4 million in TRA funds were provided to 24,742 participants to support training and reemployment efforts.
Strategic Objective 4.2 Improve health benefits and retirement security for all workers.
The Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA) supports this objective by enforcing Title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) and related laws.
In FY 2016, EBSA continued to implement performance measurement changes designed to increase the effectiveness of its enforcement program.
EBSA focused its FY 2016 enforcement resources on National Projects and the Major Case Enforcement Priority.
In increasing the investigative time spent on Major Cases, a significant portion of the agency’s enforcement resources were concentrated on those cases likely to have the greatest impact on the protection of plan assets and participants’ benefits.
In FY 2016, Major Cases produced $275 million in monetary results and accounted for 78 percent of total monetary results.
Protecting Retirement, Health, and Other Benefit Plans for Workers, Retirees, and Their Families has been identified as a DOL Top Management and Performance Challenge for FY 2016.
Given the number of plans that the agency oversees relative to the number of its investigators, EBSA has to devise ways to focus its available resources on investigations, audits and other reviews that it believes will most likely result in the deterrence, detection, and correction of ERISA violations.
To that end, EBSA created the Sample Investigation Program (SIP) to measure overall compliance with the civil provisions of ERISA and the impact of EBSA investigations on compliance rates of investigated employee benefit plans.
EBSA has continued to analyze the compliance data available to the agency and use lessons learned to improve the SIP as well as the overall enforcement program.
EBSA has begun to focus on specific compliance issues of special importance to the integrity of plans and plan benefits.
For instance, EBSA initiated a bonding compliance project in FY 2015 that will continue into FY 2017.
Additionally, pension assets that are held in otherwise regulated entities (e.g. banks) can escape full audit scrutiny by third-party CPAs or CPA firms, who may express “no opinion” on the financial statements even if their audits raise concerns.
EBSA has no enforcement authority over these third-party auditors, but is able to focus its resources on CPA firms with historically higher deficiency rates.
EBSA refers CPAs who perform significantly deficient audit work to state licensing boards for potential disciplinary action.
As part of the Form 5500 “21st Century” project, EBSA is developing proposed changes to strengthen the requirements for limited scope audit certifications from banks and insurance companies.
EBSA is also developing certain changes to the Form 5500 financial statements and schedules to improve reporting of alternative and hard‐to‐value assets and to improve group health plan reporting.
The agency issued a proposed regulation in July 2016.
While EBSA will continue to contract with qualified non-governmental organizations to provide audit services for the Thrift Savings Plan (TSP), the agency believes it is critical to improve the Department’s focus and oversight in areas where weaknesses with TSP have been identified but not adequately mitigated.
Accordingly, EBSA efforts will be focused on addressing significant IT security issues identified through its audit program.
Strategic Objective 5.1 Provide sound and impartial information on labor market activity, working conditions, and price changes in the economy for decision making, including support for the formulation of economic and social policy affecting virtually all Americans.
This objective is supported by the programs of the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).
BLS is responsive to users’ needs to understand changes in the 21st century economy.
The Current Population Survey published the first annual average estimates on certifications and licensures, based on certification questions added to the survey in 2015.
The National Compensation Survey published FY 2015 Occupational Requirements Survey testing information, including results of the Pre-Production and the observation tests on the BLS website.
BLS also demonstrates its responsiveness to users’ needs by measuring the timeliness, accuracy, and relevance of its products and services, among other metrics.
In FY 2016, BLS reached 100 percent of the underlying timeliness, accuracy, and relevance targets for all of its Principal Federal Economic Indicators.
In addition, BLS measured dissemination through the Average number of BLS website page views each month, and fell slightly under its target of 17.0 million by averaging approximately 16.3 million page views each month.
BLS measured mission achievement with Customer satisfaction with the BLS website through the E-Government Satisfaction Index, formerly known as the American Customer Satisfaction Index (ACSI), with a year-end score of 76, over its target of 75.
The external factors most likely to affect the ability of BLS to accomplish its mission are demands for new and additional data, survey response rates, and barriers to sharing data between federal agencies.
The structural shifts in the economy translate into different, and sometimes new, demands for data as industrial sectors supersede others, and as consumer goods replace others.
Within resource constraints, BLS will continue to develop and publish new surveys and products to meet the data needs of the American public.
Preventing a further decline in response rates is a challenge for BLS, primarily due to competing surveys, less willingness on the part of respondents to participate, and concerns about safeguarding respondent confidentiality.
BLS is addressing this challenge by upgrading strategic communications, offering alternative response modes to reduce burden, and using more alternative data sources.
BLS has raised the need to promote the sharing of existing economic data among BLS, the Census Bureau, and the Bureau of Economic Analysis, and to improve the nation’s economic statistical system by aligning each agency’s data outputs and developing new ways to track emerging economic trends.
BLS is addressing this challenge by monitoring and responding to new developments related to a data synchronization legislative initiative.
To continually improve the efficiency and effectiveness of its programs, DOL uses results-based, data-driven management techniques.
DOL frequently assesses whether efforts are successful, and why – and seeks ways to improve.
Each DOL agency prepares an annual Operating Plan that details the strategies and resources it will apply to reach goals and objectives at all levels of the organization.
These operating plans seek to balance quantity with quality, establish ambitious targets for continuous improvement of program performance, demonstrate prioritization of resource allocation, and identify evidence supporting DOL’s strategies.
Departmental leaders review performance against those operating plans each quarter to monitor progress and hold agencies accountable for implementing the plans, achieving milestones, and making adjustments as needed.
Agency heads and senior staff meet each quarter with the Deputy Secretary and the Performance Improvement Officer.
Agencies submit narrative explanations and analysis of quarter and yearto-date data – prepared with Department staff assistance – for discussion at the meeting.
Discussions focus on implications of the data for strategies around what is and what is not working.
Agencies usually leave the meeting with action items for the next quarter.
This review process has focused Departmental leadership on strategic management of core functions through the use of program performance and budget data.
Identification and discussion of key measures; annual and seasonal targets; and how budgets, workload, and strategies affect results have helped clarify priorities and improve performance against benchmarks.
The GPRMA requires that federal agencies identify and address in their APPs Major Management Challenges (MMCs) – defined as programmatic or management functions that have greater vulnerability to waste, fraud, abuse, and mismanagement and where failure to perform well could seriously affect the ability of an agency or the federal government to achieve its mission or goals.
MMCs may include issues the GAO identifies as high risk or Top Management and Performance Challenges for DOL identified by the OIG.
The Deputy Secretary is the accountable official for each of these challenges, which are described briefly below.
As noted by OIG, “OMB has recognized the UI [Unemployment Insurance] program as being at high risk for improper payments…. Fraud continues to be a significant threat to the integrity of the UI program, as identity thieves and organized criminal groups have found ways to exploit program weaknesses.” 19 To address the improper payment challenges in the UI program, the Department has a continuously evolving, comprehensive strategic plan in place to work with states that targets the largest root causes of UI improper payments.
A key component of the Department’s strategic plan is the establishment of a national UI Integrity Center (Center), operated by the National Association of State Workforce Agencies (NASWA), through a cooperative agreement with the New York State Department of Labor.
The Center is a statedriven source of innovative program integrity strategies to address improper payments and reduce fraud in the UI program.
However, the Department notes that certain structural issues inherent to the UI program, as identified in FY 2016 by an independent technical workgroup of UI subject matter experts, statisticians, and economists, hinder the reduction of a significant portion of the improper payments.
These structural issues include the difficulty in verifying claimant work search contacts at the time of certification, balancing the need for accuracy in preventing improper payments with the strong policy reasons and statutory requirement to make full payment of benefits to claimants “when due,” and the lags in current data sources used by states to identify claimants collecting benefits after returning to work.
OIG also notes that “the Department also remains challenged in identifying the full extent of improper payments in the FECA [Federal Employees’ Compensation Act] program, and OIG continues to have concerns regarding the completeness of the claims universe used to determine DOL’s published FECA improper payment estimates.”
However, the Department notes that many improper payments in the FECA program were “technically proper” when they were initiated, but due to current payment cycles, the payments could not be adjusted when additional information was received.
Summary level information about how DOL is addressing improper payments for both programs is in the Strategic Objective 4.1 section of the Strategic Review Progress Update in this document.
Additional information about measures and remediation efforts is available in the Improper Payments Reporting Details section of the FY 2016 AFR (https://www.dol.gov/sites/default/files/media_0/_Sec/2016annualreport.pdf).
As noted in the Strategic Review Progress Update under Strategic Objective 1.2, OIG has also identified safety and security at Job Corps centers as a DOL Top Management and Performance Challenge.
ETA has taken significant steps to increase security at Job Corps Centers.
Job Corps has a Student Conduct System designed to support a safe, secure learning environment for all students and staff.
Job Corps implemented a new Zero Tolerance Policy on June 1, 2016.
This policy increased the accountability of students to conduct themselves appropriately.
It also enhanced and clarified center staff’s authority to address misconduct expeditiously.
Job Corps has taken a strategic approach to risk management to identify centers with high levels of programmatic risk.
Those factors include safety, student conduct, and zero tolerance.
Job Corps executed announced and unannounced assessments of centers that resulted in a record number of contractual actions.
Job Corps has established the Division of Regional Operations and Program Integrity to coordinate regional operations and activities.
This new division functions to ensure consistency, strengthen quality assurance, and improve communication and coordination across the Job Corps system.
Increased security investments at centers.
Potential contractors, as part of their proposal to operate a Job Corps Center, are now required to provide a narrative describing their approach to student safety and behavior management, which increases the Department’s ability to hold to contractor selected responsible for not effectively implementing these proposals.
We continue to leverage the contract process and the contract itself as a vehicle to drive behavior change, increase compliance, and measure accountability.
In 2011, OIG cited numerous problems with Job Corps’ cost per student metrics.
To improve cost controls, ETA has revised the award and incentive fees for Job Corps Operations Contracts.
Center operations contracts with a cost and technical incentive were first awarded in 2015, and currently seven are performing.
It is too soon to determine the impact of the cost incentive.
Since the initial awards, ETA increased the minimum cost incentive fee (for savings) from two percent to three percent and increased the maximum cost incentive fee from 3.6 percent to 4.0 percent.
Cost sharing for under- or overruns was also revised from 20 percent (contractor) and 80 percent (government) to 50 percent each.
Increasing the cost incentive fee and creating equity in the cost sharing will further incentivize contractors to control costs, thereby creating savings for the Government.
Securing data and information systems is a continuing challenge for all federal agencies, including DOL.
This challenge is further compounded by the presence of legacy information technology systems in DOL’s operating environment.
These legacy systems represent increased risk of hardware or software failures, complications from non-support for end-of-life products, and the unacceptable lack of current security patches.
Degradation of any of DOL’s mission critical systems would imperil mission delivery, with potential resulting impacts to worker safety, inviolability of sensitive economic data, or the confidentiality of citizens’ Personally Identifiable information.
Whether the negative impacts are man-made, as is the case with hackers of an unpatched legacy system, or simply the natural failure of unsupported, irreplaceable legacy system components, the risks are significant.
Given the realities outlined above and taking full account of DOL’s business environment and resource constraints, DOL has established a methodical approach to reducing the risk of our operational legacy systems as part of the DOL IT Modernization and Cybersecurity Programs.
Management remains committed to this effort to address DOL’s highest risk legacy systems, applying focused and purposeful attention to developing and implementing appropriate mitigation strategies.
Descriptions of each challenge, progress to date and what remains to be done are summarized in the report at https://www.oig.dol.gov/public/topchallenges/2016.pdf.
The Chief Evaluation Office (CEO) in the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy works closely with agency staff to design, fund, and implement program evaluations.
The results from evaluations inform policy and improve DOL’s performance-based management initiatives in support of the GPRMA.
For more information see http://www.dol.gov/asp/evaluation/.
ETA training and employment programs emphasize, through provision of technical assistance (TA) to the workforce system, training for job-seekers that leads to industry-recognized credentials as a means of increasing their earning potential.
The Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) was signed into law on July 22, 2014 and is the first reform of the public workforce system in more than 15 years.
WIOA supersedes the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (WIA) and the majority of WIOA provisions became effective beginning PY 2015 (July 1, 2015).
Programs authorized under WIOA, including the Adult and Dislocated Worker programs, are undergoing dramatic transformation in PY 2016 as WIOA provisions are implemented and programs are further aligned with the skill demands of 21st century jobs.
DOL worked closely with its partners at the U.S. Department of Education to publish joint regulations for the implementation of WIOA; in addition, DOL published a Final Rule that governs services to adult and dislocated worker populations that went into effect in October 2016.
DOL is working to ensure an orderly implementation of the Final Rules, and will be providing ongoing guidance and technical assistance to ensure successful implementation of WIOA.
Changes include significantly broadening available training options beyond traditional classroom training through improved access to work-based training options such as on-the-job training, Registered Apprenticeship, and customized training.
Work-based training is beneficial to job-seekers, especially the long-term unemployed and low-income, low-skill individuals; it also serves as a tool to engage and partner with employers.
The Department will use information as it becomes available to re-baseline performance targets and provide further TA as needed.
PY 2015 is the last year ETA training and employment programs will report under the WIA performance measures: Entered Employment Rate (EER), Employment Retention Rate (ERR), and Six Months Average Earning.
The following is a summary of performance for PY 2015.
EER increased by 1.4 and 1.5 percentage points in PY 2015.
EER increases are primarily due to improved labor markets in the U.S., as evidenced by a reduction in the Total Unemployment Rate from 5.4 percent in FY 2015 to 5.0 percent in FY 2016.21 ETA has utilized the flexibility under WIOA to ensure job seekers have career services tailored to their individual needs, emphasized training that leads to industry-recognized credentials linked to career pathways, and promoted strategies like work-based learning to improve employment results for adults and dislocated workers.
Results for individuals who received training services in Adult and Dislocated Worker programs are significantly higher than results for all exiters, most of whom did not receive training.
In PY 2015, the EER for all Adult exiters was 67.1 percent; for those receiving training, it was 79.1 percent.
For the same period, comparable results for the Dislocated Worker program were 68.1 percent and 83.4 percent, respectively.
The ERR increased for the Adult, Dislocated Worker, National Farmworker Job (NFJP), and Indian and Native American (INA) programs in PY 2015 but fell for the National Dislocated Worker Grants program.
Six Months Average Earnings of Adult and Dislocated Workers program exiters rose slightly in PY 2015 while decreasing by $2,296 for National Dislocated Worker Grant exiters.
Beginning in July 2016, the WIA common measures were replaced by the WIOA primary indicators of performance for the core programs: employment in the 2nd quarter after exit, employment in the 4th quarter after exit, median earnings in the 2nd quarter after exit, credential attainment, measurable skill gains, and effectiveness in serving employers.
In PY 2016, ETA will continue to build on tested ideas and approaches such as aligning federal, state, and local workforce, education and economic development systems to meet employer demand; strengthening participation of employers, labor, and philanthropic partners in program design and delivery; utilizing career pathways models; and increasing use of technology-based training methods.
Approaches for the Adult program include targeting individuals on public assistance, other low income individuals, and individuals who are basic skills deficient to help them obtain the skills necessary to find meaningful employment and career pathways that provide opportunities for further improving their skills and wages.
WIOA Dislocated Worker programs include targeting training and reemployment services for individuals who have lost employment through no fault of their own as well as transitioning service members and military spouses who are having difficulty finding meaningful employment.
ETA will continue evaluating and promoting practices that have shown promise over the past decade, such as apprenticeships, on-the-job training, other work-based training and regional and sector strategies.
Notes: Targets for most of the programs that support this strategic objective have been revised [r] based on a regression model that accounts for the effect of unemployment rates on program performance outcomes and OMB’s assumptions about future economic conditions.
Several states (AK, AR, DE, ID, MT, NE, SC, VT, and WY) are not included in the Entered Employment Rate - Training measure for the Adult and Dislocated Worker programs.
VETS assesses the performance of the American Job Center system on behalf of veterans served by the Jobs for Veterans State Grants (JVSG) program by tracking the services provided to participants and participants’ employment outcomes.
VETS’ federal staff provide monitoring, oversight, and technical assistance to State Workforce Agencies (SWAs) to aggressively increase the rate of individualized career services, formerly called intensive services, provided to JVSG participants.
Individualized career services include comprehensive and specialized assessments of skill levels and needs, development of an individual employment plan, group and individual career counseling and planning, and short-term skills development (such as interview and communication skills).
Since FY 2011, the rate of intensive services, which have been shown to improve employment outcomes, has increased from 25.0 percent to 88.0 percent as of 6/30/2016.
This was the last quarter of data for VETS to examine the intensive service rate under WIA.
VETS will now transition this measure by tracking the percentage of individualized career serves, as defined by WIOA.
However, a baseline of this metric must first be developed as it is not the same as the previous intensive service metric.
In April 2014, the Department released guidance which clarified that only veterans with significant barriers to employment, or other veteran populations specified by the Secretary, may be referred to the JVSG program.
The guidance also outlined the statutorily-mandated responsibilities of Disabled Veterans’ Outreach Program (DVOP) specialists to provide intensive services to veterans, and of Local Veterans’ Employment Representative (LVER) staff to conduct outreach activities to local businesses and employers.
A 2015 analysis of American Job Centers services by the Department’s Chief Evaluation Office found veterans in AJC employment programs, particularly those in JVSG, are doing better than nonveterans on a number of dimensions, including receiving services more quickly (consistent with priority of service), becoming employed, staying employed, and having higher earnings.
VETS also reports on the average earnings of participants, six months after exit from the program.
This measure is tracked for all veterans and for the subset of post-9/11 Era veterans, or those who served after September 1, 2001.
The FY 2016 result for veterans with significant barriers to employment exceeded the $16,000 target, and was higher than the results from previous years.
In FY 2016, VETS continued work to improve the DOL Employment Workshop for exiting service members.
The average score of a TAP facilitator has risen in each of past three fiscal years, from 90.8 percent to 96.9 percent in FY 2016.
Standardizing the facilitator tool three years ago has helped to produce comparable results from year, and VETS maintains high standards for all facilitators of the TAP Employment Workshop.
VETS conducts compliance investigations under the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA).
Beginning in FY 2012, VETS implemented a metric to assess the quality of USERRA investigations.
Each quarter, a sampling of closed cases is reviewed by experienced USERRA investigators.
The results of this measure were above target, in FY 2016 with an average proportion of closed cases meeting the VETS standard of 95.5 percent.
VETS is committed to continuous improvement of its USERRA program, and continues to implement process improvements in FY 2017.
VETS is currently assessing other agencies’ metrics and quality assessment procedures in an effort to consider alternative methods to gauge the quality of our USERRA investigations and referrals.
Sources: State reported outcomes via the VETS-200 Reports, except for the states of Pennsylvania, Texas, and Utah, which use the ETA-9133 Reports.The Veterans' Employment and Training Operations and Programs Activity Report (VOPAR) system, USERRA Information Management System.
The REO Entered Employment Rate for Non-Youth increased by over seven percentage points in PY 2015, following a six point increase the prior year.
Due to the numerous ways recidivism rates may be measured, adult offender grantees have been reporting inconsistent rates.
Placement in employment, continued education, or the military decreased slightly for Job Corps students but increased slightly for YouthBuild and Youth participants in PY 2015 as compared to PY 2014.
The percent of Job Corps students who attained credentials (e.g., High School Diploma (HSD), High School Equivalence (HSE), or certificate) dropped to 62.0 percent in PY 2015, continuing a three-year decline from 70.5 percent in PY 2012.
This trend, however, is primarily an artifact of the multiple enrollment suspensions of 2012 and 2013.
The Job Corps enrollment gaps 22 temporarily altered the composition of separated students by over-representing long-term stayers that typically attain better outcomes.
This in turn artificially increased Career Technical Training completion rates and HSD/HSE credential attainment rates for PY 2012 and early PY 2013.
After the last enrollment suspension was lifted, performance rates on these measures began to re-settle to previous levels.
The separating student population again began reflecting varying enrollment lengths with differential attainments.
Consequently, Job Corps’ credential attainment measure outcomes experienced an artificial increase in PY 2012-PY2013 and a subsequent artificial decline over the following two-year period to the levels prior to the enrollment suspensions.
In other words, Job Corps true performance results for the credential measure have been largely consistent in the past several years.
In addition, the implementation of the new HSE testing options in 2014 also has had a moderate impact on the credential attainment results.
In particular, the new 2014 General Education Development (GED) test is more rigorous than the previous 2002 GED series.
Recent changes have also led to more rigorous standards for the two alternative HSE tests: High School Equivalence Test and Test Assessing Secondary Completion.
This has resulted in lower HSE attainment rates for many Job Corps centers.
In PY 2015, Job Corps strengthened this measure by recasting it as “Primary Industry Recognized Credential,” redefining the pool of eligible certificates to those critical to each student’s specific training program.
This more rigorous definition focuses on getting students the key certificates needed to qualify and obtain placement into permanent employment with sustainable wages.
As a result, the performance result is lower than in previous years.
Literacy and numeracy outcomes (measured by the percent who gained one Adult Basic Education (ABE) level in either category) increased by about one percentage point in PY 2015 for YouthBuild participants but fell by the same amount for Youth participants and for Job Corps students.
The learning gains for the Job Corps measure experienced the same artificial change in performance as the credential measure due to the enrollment suspension – an artificial increase in PY 2012 and PY 2013 and a subsequent artificial decline.
This measure is also highly correlated with the HSD/HSE attainment, and declines could be associated with the decline in HSE attainment discussed previously.
Per WIOA, this measure will be replaced in PY 2016 with a measure of skills gains.
In FY 2016, the Number of Active Registered Apprentices increased to over 500,000, exceeding the target for this DOL Priority Goal for FY 2016- 17.
Success is attributed to $175 million in new grant funding to expand Registered Apprenticeship programs in high-skilled, high-growth industries (awarded in September 2015), combined with the Leaders of Excellence in Apprenticeship Development, Education and Research (LEADERs) initiative and regional Sector of Excellence in Apprenticeship (SEA) efforts.
Apprentices’ six month average earnings increased slightly compared to FY 2015.
The completion rate (timely receipt of a certificate) declined slightly from 45.2 to 44.1 percent in FY 2016.
Notes: Targets for most of the programs that support this strategic objective have been revised [r] based on a regression model that accounts for the effect of unemployment rates on program performance outcomes and OMB’s assumptions about future economic conditions.
The Entered Employment Rate for Non-Youth (REO) performance measure result reflects program-to-date data (since program inception in Spring 2006).
In FY 2016, ILAB met or exceeded targets for all four of its reported outcome measures established in FY 2011.
In FY 2017, ILAB will streamline its performance metrics to more succinctly capture the effectiveness of its work and its focus on trade agreements and programs oversight and enforcement.
In FY 2016, ILAB continued levelling the global playing field for American workers by negotiating, monitoring, and enforcing the labor provisions of trade agreements and programs to ensure that trade partners do not unfairly attract trade or investment by reducing workers’ protections.
These efforts were bolstered by targeted technical assistance projects in more than 30 countries to strengthen compliance with the labor requirements of U.S. trade agreements and preference programs, including improving labor enforcement and addressing child labor and forced labor.
ILAB worked closely with interagency partners, businesses, and workers in key trading countries such as Colombia, Honduras, Peru and Vietnam.
As a result of ILAB activities in FY 2016, various countries and international fora adopted 51 policy positions that reflect USG international labor priorities, exceeding its target of 38.
ILAB increased its efforts to support trade-related negotiations and workers’ protections that promote a fair global playing field for American workers and businesses.
It also worked to improve standards on issues like forced labor and adherence to labor standards in a number of countries, including Venezuela, Qatar, and Colombia.
ILAB advocated to make growth stronger, fairer, and more inclusive among the world’s major economies and encouraged concerted action to empower women in the workplace and promote apprenticeships for vulnerable populations.
In FY 2016, ILAB managed over 60 grants, totaling approximately $360 million, and met or exceeded targets for all technical assistance measures.
These projects engage governments, businesses, and workers to improve enforcement of and voluntary compliance with labor laws and international labor standards.
ILAB projects seek to reduce child labor and forced labor among vulnerable populations and to build capacity within governments and civil society to address these issues on their own in a sustainable manner.
ILAB provided a range of education services to 33,341 children rescued from exploitative child labor, exceeding its target of 24,300.
ILAB helped increase government capacity to address child labor or forced labor in 26 countries through the adoption of new legislation and policies, training labor and criminal enforcement officials, establishment of child labor monitoring, integration of child labor or forced labor concerns into education and development policies, and support for data collection and research.
In addition, Congressionally-mandated reports on child labor, forced labor, and human trafficking provided actionable recommendations in 137 trade beneficiaries countries and identified over 130 goods in more than 70 countries produced by child labor or forced labor.
In FY 2016, OSHA continued work on DOL Priority Goals to secure safe and healthy workplaces, particularly in high risk industries.
OSHA’s Severe Injury Reporting Program had a significant effect on OSHA inspections in FY 2016.
The requirement for employers to report single hospitalizations, amputations, or losses of an eye is providing OSHA with information on severe injuries in real time and gives OSHA the ability to reach employers the Agency had not been able to reach before.
A typical week results in 200 reports; OSHA directly inspects about one third of the reports, and the overwhelming majority of these inspections are safety inspections.
For the rest of the reports, OSHA responds through Rapid Response Investigations (RRI) or a finding that the event was non-work-related.
These and other unprogrammed inspections, such as complaints and referrals, are a vital part of OSHA’s work; properly screening complaints and responding in a timely manner are effective ways to target dangerous workplaces.
In addition, to increase focus on those industries and workplaces with the greatest potential for health and safety hazards, in FY 2014 OSHA established a baseline for the percent of inspection that are National Emphasis Programs (NEP) and Local Emphasis Programs (LEP).
In FY 2016, 73% of all investigations were NEP/LEP.
Programmed inspections are based on analyses of workplace and industry risks and statistics; they are data-driven, focusing on workplaces, practices, and substances posing the greatest risk to workers.
Of these, NEP and LEP investigations have historically been critical in supporting the Secretary’s goal of securing safe and healthy workplaces.
Also, in FY 2014, OSHA began a trial of an enforcement weighting system that accounts for the different amounts of time and resources required by different types of impactful enforcement activities.
In FY 2015, OSHA ran both systems in parallel, analyzing and adapting the enforcement weighting system as the Agency learned more about how it works in practice.
In FY 2016, OSHA used enforcement weighting system results a internal agency output measures.
In FY 2016, OSHA continued to use enforcement, regulation, compliance assistance, and outreach to meet the agency’s priorities of reducing workplace injuries, illnesses, and fatalities.
The number of workplaces in the U.S. makes it impossible for OSHA compliance officers to inspect more than a fraction of them in a year, so OSHA strategically prioritizes its resources to target those issues and areas which will yield the greatest impact.
Corporate Wide Settlement Agreements (CSAs) and the Severe Violator Enforcement Program (SVEP) are additional tools OSHA uses to target establishments which require improvement across a number of locations (CSAs) or are particularly recalcitrant (SVEP).
In FY 2016, the Agency continued to use CSAs and SVEP to gain the maximum advantage from OSHA's enforcement actions.
In FY 2016, MSHA did not achieve its DOL Priority Goal target to reduce mining fatalities.
The five-year rolling average of fatal injuries per 200,000 hours worked was 0.0123 and the target was 0.0120.
Although the target was missed, in FY 2016 the mining industry experienced the fewest deaths in mining history at 25 and it was the safest year on record at 0.0094 fatal injuries per 200,000 hours worked.
MSHA missed the target because coal mine closures led to a rapid decline in hours worked (11 percent in the past year) that exceeded the drop in fatalities.
The FY 2016 fatality rate is 36 percent below the FY 2010 result of 0.0187.
Reduced fatalities are attributed to a number of factors, including stronger enforcement and regulation, better use of technology, safer mining practice, and improved training.
In FY 2017, MSHA will continue to develop and implement new ways to make enforcement more effective, less predictable (for miners), and more strategic.
Mining deaths are preventable.
In order to prevent mine deaths, operators must have in place effective safety and health management programs that are constantly evaluated, find-and-fix programs to identify and eliminate mine hazards, and training for all mining personnel.
MSHA has undertaken a number of measures to prevent mining deaths: increased monitoring and strategic enforcement through impact inspections at mines with troubling compliance histories; a more robust Pattern of Violations (POV) program; special initiatives such as "Rules to Live By," which is regularly evaluated for effectiveness and focuses attention on the most common causes of mining deaths; and outreach efforts such as "Safety Pro in a Box," which provides guidance to the metal/nonmetal mining industry on best practices and compliance responsibilities.
Since October 2015, nine fatalities and more than 1,100 nonfatal accidents have occurred in the nation’s coal mines, resulting in restricted duty, missed days at work, and permanent disabilities for the miners who worked there.
While injury rates have been fairly consistent during this time period, records indicate a trend in accidents resulting in more serious injuries.
The circumstances in at least 30 of the accidents might have led to fatalities.
MSHA implemented a call to safety to all coal miners, both underground and surface, in which inspectors engaged coal miners and mine operators and advised caution before proceeding with the their tasks.
These engagement efforts will continue in FY 2017.
MSHA conducted comprehensive health inspections at 29 percent of MNM mines in FY 2016 – 7.7 percentage points above the FY 2015 result.
In conjunction with established Agency health priorities, inspectors must use a strategy to review potential hazards at each mine and then, if warranted, select “high risk” occupations for personal sampling.
Walk-around observations, reviews of materials mined and/or produced, discussions with miners and mine management, and direct-read area sampling were used to determine which occupations or areas are “high risk” and, if warranted, should be sampled.
Some mines also receive a more comprehensive inspection, based on analysis and mine inspector observations.
In FY 2016, MSHA initiated investigations for all 103(g) imminent danger complaints within one day of receipt.
Informed miners are an essential element in maintaining a safe and healthful environment in all mines, at all times.
The Mine Act gives miners the right to be a full stakeholder in their own health and safety.
MSHA will continue to give these complaints the highest priority in FY 2017.
MSHA continues on-site monitoring of approved instructors to ensure they are providing effective health and safety training to miners.
MSHA is placing special emphasis on evaluation of contract instructors.
In FY 2016, MSHA monitored and evaluated 1,072 training instructors – the most ever.
For the seventh consecutive year MSHA completed all of its statutorily mandated inspections in all 50 states, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands.
MSHA is in the process of executing its plan for implementing the Mine Act in the US Territories – Guam, American Samoa and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
In FY 2016, MSHA exceeded its target for timely review of mine plans with a result of 83 percent against a target of 70 percent.
With several years of results exceeding targets MSHA raised the targets for timeliness of plan reviews in FY 2017.
Since the 2009 launch of the “End Black Lung – Act Now” campaign, average respirable dust levels have decreased annually, reaching historic lows.
Sampling taken during the second year of the Respirable Coal Mine Dust Rule indicated that the yearly average respirable dust samples collected by MSHA from the dustiest occupations in underground coal mines fell to 0.64 milligrams per cubic meter (mg/m3), which is far below the 1.5 mg/m3 standard.
Mine operators and MSHA personnel have collected nearly 154,000 respirable dust samples under the new rule, and 99.3 percent of those samples met compliance levels.
In FY 2013, MSHA published a final rule to revise its regulation implementing Section 104(e) of the Mine Act's POV provision.
Evidence from the POV process shows compliance improvement by operators.
In June, 2016 MSHA conducted its annual screening of mines for POV actions.
For the first time since MSHA revised the screening criteria in 2010, no mines were identified as meeting the criteria.
Not only are fewer mines being identified, but compliance with health and safety conditions at mines identified through the POV process has improved.
Compared to the prior six months, violations per inspection hour among these mines decreased 43 percent, significant and substantial (S&S) violation rates decreased by 67 percent, and the rate of unwarrantable failure violations decreased by 85 percent.
Moreover, the number of S&S violations dropped by more than half at the top 200 mines nationally since the 2010 POV reforms were put in place (from 20,000 to about 9,000).
In August, 2016, MSHA tested the newly developed seismic system designed to locate missing miners underground at American Rock Salt near Mt. Morris, NY.
The testing of the seismic system at the salt mine was at a depth of 1,300 feet, and signals generated underground were detected by the system on the surface.
Additional testing of this cutting edge technology will be conducted in FY 2017 at greater depths and under multiple-seam conditions where voids from previous mining may complicate signal transmissions.
As part of the gaps analysis on mine rescue preparedness, MSHA sought to develop a reliable seismic device to locate missing miners following mine emergencies.
MSHA will locate these devices at each of the four Mine Emergency Operations sites in the U.S.
Sources: Injury data – Mine operators' and non-exempt contractors' Mine Accident, Injury, and Employment reports and MSHA's Standardized Information System Notes: MSHA’s fatality rate reflects the number of fatalities per 200,000 hours worked during the prior five-year period.
In FY 2016, OFCCP continued its commitment to an aggressive posture of Active Case Enforcement that supports the agency’s three main strategies of effective enforcement, policy development and regulatory reform, and external engagement.
In FY 2015, OFCCP created two categories of measures, Enforcement Priority Measures and Enforcement Activity Measures.
Priority Measures involve Compensation, High-Impact Construction Projects, Quality, Timeliness, and Results for Workers, while Activity Measures include Supply & Service, Construction, and FAAP case closures.
This strategic change formally recognized that Priority Measures reflect OFCCP’s mission critical focus areas for staff and outcomes that have the greatest impact on the job seekers and workers we protect, while Activity Measures simply reflect the estimated OFCCP caseload necessary to achieve these priority outcomes.
OFCCP continued its strategic approach to balancing quantity and quality in FY 2016, and results show that the agency continues to make progress towards achieving this balance.
OFCCP initiated its comprehensive strategy in FY 2011 by laying the foundation for embedding sustainable organizational change through the initiation of comprehensive regulatory reform, expanded scope of enforcement, unprecedented outreach to workers and vulnerable populations, redesign of quality assurance monitoring, and extensive compliance officer training.
Enforcement – Even more significantly, in the third quarter of FY 2015, OFCCP made the strategic decision to de-emphasize case closure targets, with the intention of eliminating them completely starting in FY 2016, which the agency did.
To increase enforcement impact, OFCCP instead focused its resources on developing high quality, more diverse and more complex systemic discrimination cases in both compensation and hiring that reflect the rapidly changing labor market, and used the High-Impact Construction Project strategy, focusing on construction projects that include a greater number of Federal contractor and subcontractor workers.
These and other strategies make OFCCP more efficient.
During FY 2016, results in back pay for workers amounted to $10.3 million, greater than the last five years, on average, with one-third the cases.
Currently, systemic discrimination cases under investigation are at a high, setting up the agency up for a potential significant increase in settlements in FY 2017.
Outreach/Education – Since 2011, OFCCP has refined its relationship building strategy by prioritizing the development of effective and strategic relationships with an array of stakeholders to drive positive workplace change for workers.
In FY 2014, the regions developed comprehensive and diverse lists of stakeholders who can help OFCCP achieve its priority strategies centered on outreach, enforcement, and regulatory reform.
In FY 2015, OFCCP leveraged these relationships to support case-specific enforcement, such as locating affected class members, connecting job placement providers with contractors that have job opportunities, and increasing participation in High-Impact Construction Projects.
To support the field’s enforcement efforts, OFCCP launched the Class Member Locator Website and video in late FY 2015, providing information about OFCCP settlements to the public, some of who might be part of an OFCCP class.
In FY 2016, OFCCP continued to work on the formal evaluation of its relationship building efforts – to improve its outreach program design and performance.
The evaluation will be completed in 2017.
Regulatory Agenda – In FY 2016, OFCCP revised its outdated regulations on sex discrimination.
These updated regulations became effective on August 15, 2016, and address contractors’ obligations to ensure that their workplace practices do not discriminate on the basis of sex.
These regulations reflect the current state of the law and the changes in America’s workforce, and they moved the agency away from enforcing 40-year old sex discrimination regulations.
Through these revised regulations, OFCCP provides contractors much needed clarity about their obligations and, thus, supports their voluntary compliance.
In addition, the regulations provide for efficient enforcement during compliance evaluations and complaint investigations.
In FY 2016, the Bureau exceeded its target for number of policy and research outputs created, producing a total of 21 issue briefs, research papers, and other publications containing labor force statistics on working women, including working mothers and women of color.
The Bureau hosted its second annual paid family and medical leave symposium to disseminate findings among researchers and policy makers, and convened stakeholder groups, state legislators, and businesses in 15 cities to participate in discussions on paid leave policies.
To date, the Bureau has awarded over $3 million in grants for its Paid Leave Analysis Grant program, which supports research and analysis needed to explore, develop, implement and/or improve paid family and medical leave programs at the State and municipal levels, as well as in U.S. Territories and Possessions and federally recognized Indian/Native American Tribes.
The Bureau also partnered with 18F to produce guidance and technology resources to help states develop the administrative and fiscal infrastructure necessary to administer a paid leave insurance program.
The Bureau funded a module on access to and use of leave in the 2017 American Time Use Survey (ATUS), and worked with the U.S. Census Bureau to include questions related to maternity leave in the 2018 Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP).
In FY 2016, the Bureau sponsored research on the effects of providing child and elder care on women’s long-range financial security.
In FY 2016, the Bureau launched a Portable Retirement Benefits Planning Grant program to support innovative ways to increase retirement security for workers in a changing labor market, particularly low-wage workers and women, who face a higher risk of poverty in retirement.
The Bureau also developed and maintains an interactive, web-based map depicting state-level equal pay and pay transparency laws.
The Bureau worked closely with ETA’s Office of Apprenticeship (OA) to promote expanded employment and training opportunities for women in higher-paying occupations where they have traditionally been under-represented, including apprenticeships in the trades and other industries.
With OA, the Bureau co-administers the Women in Non-Traditional Occupations (WANTO) grant program, a program that delivers technical assistance to service providers and others.
The Bureau also worked on revamping and revising its popular women’s employment rights guide and developing a guide for stakeholders detailing key provisions for women within the federal workforce development system as administered by the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA).
In FY 2016, ODEP met the three targets used to gauge progress toward its mission to develop and influence policies and practices that increase employment opportunities for people with disabilities.
ODEP and ETA develop strategies to increase access to and use of American Job Center services by adults and youth with disabilities through the Disability Employment Initiative (DEI).
ODEP’s technical assistance centers advise, assist, train, and promote the adoption and implementation of ODEP sponsored or validated policy strategies and effective practices.
In FY 2016, ODEP worked extensively with ETA and WHD to effectively manage the WIOA Advisory Committee on Increasing Competitive Integrated Employment for Individuals with Disabilities in developing recommendations to the Secretary of Labor and Congress on increasing employment opportunities for people with significant disabilities in competitive, integrated employment, and improving the implementation of the section 14(c) certificate program carried out under the Fair Labor Standards Act.
In September 2016, the Committee submitted its Final Report, with over 30 major recommendations.
In addition, ODEP is also working to increase the likelihood of its policies being adopted and implemented at the state level.
Consequently, in FY 2016, ODEP began working with partners representing critical state legislative and administrative bodies (e.g., National Conference of State Legislatures, National Governors Association, and Council of State Governments).
Furthermore, ODEP engaged public and private partners to develop and assess strategies to advance stay at work/return to work (SAW /RTW) as a cost effective, mutuallybeneficial means of partially addressing the high unemployment of Americans with disabilities.
In FY 2016, OLMS met or exceeded targets for all three measures with targets.
For its three measures with projections, results exceeded projections for two measures and missed the projection for the third target.
In FY 2008, OLMS established baselines for its three priority measures: the elapsed number of days to resolve union officer election complaints, the percent of electronically filed reports, and the percent of targeted audits that result in criminal cases.
These measures and their targets were established to promote OLMS effectiveness and efficiency at increasing union financial integrity, union democracy, and labor-management transparency.
These are major tenets of the Department’s goal to Protect Workers’ Rights (Strategic Objective 3.2).
OLMS strives to more effectively identify unions where criminal activity may be present by pinpointing anomalies in union financial reports, by analyzing and finding other predicates to financial malfeasance, and by using other targeting strategies.
OLMS has become more successful in this area, exceeding its financial integrity performance goal for six consecutive years – with a “fallout” rate high of 21.46 percent in FY 2015.
The fallou rate dipped to 17.14 percent in FY 2016, but still exceeded the performance goal of 15 percent.
Fallouts occur when OLMS performs compliance audits of unions and discovers possible criminal activity that results in the opening of a criminal investigation.
As a means to continue this improvement, OLMS established a work group that identified targeting methods and “red flags” that may indicate criminal activity.
This workgroup continues its efforts and the increased accumulation of statistical data has enabled the workgroup to make further strides in predicting which unions are afflicted by fraud and embezzlement.
By instituting risk-based audit targeting models, fewer audits can be undertaken while increasing the percentage of audits that result in the opening of a criminal case.
Fewer audits mean that OLMS can be more efficient in the assignment of resources to areas directly supporting the Department’s objectives.
In FY 2017, OLMS’s fallout rate target is 15.50 percent.
OLMS has invested in new technology to facilitate electronic filing of union financial reports.
In FY 2016, the availability of electronic forms coupled with outreach efforts coordinated through OLMS’ district offices and the national office’s Voluntary Compliance Partnership program resulted in OLMS exceeding its FY 2016 target of 46 percent as 50.1 percent of all filings were submitted electronically (one point higher than FY 2015).
The success of the e-filing program paired with the extent of the program’s reach enabled OLMS to increase its target in FY 2016 from 44.5 percent to 46 percent.
In FY 2017, the OLMS target for this measure is 48 percent.
OLMS has introduced a new rule to require electronic filing of the Form LM-3 and LM-4 reports.
This requirement will be effective for fiscal years beginning on or after January 2, 1017.
In the meantime, OLMS will continue outreach efforts through compliance assistance seminars and directly with national unions who are members of the Voluntary Compliance Partnership program.
In passing the LMRDA in 1959, Congress established a 60-day deadline for filing a court action by the Secretary of Labor upon receipt of an election complaint.
Quicker resolution of election complaints accelerates restoration of democratic voice and a democratically operated union.
In FY 2016, OLMS averaged just over 67 days elapsed per case; four and a half days better than the 72-day target and a better than two-day improvement from the 70.2 elapsed days achieved in FY 2015.
OLMS continues to fine-tune methods for further reducing its elapsed days including use of a teambased approach for handling election cases (when resources permit) and engaging in early-involvement with the Office of the Solicitor in cases that may result in litigation.
OLMS expects that continued early communications and coordination with the SOL will yield further process improvements and the agencies will continue to seek out additional methods of expediting election complaint resolutions.
Because timely filing is fundamental to financial transparency, OLMS determined that reducing the number of chronically delinquent unions was important to this goal.
A union is deemed to be chronically delinquent if its three most recent reports are filed late.
For FY 2016, OLMS established a projection of 1,470 chronically delinquent filers.
This year, only 927 filers met the criteria for chronic delinquency, 543 below projection.
To obtain this result, OLMS identified those unions that were already chronically delinquent entering the fiscal year and those unions that have been delinquent the past two years.
OLMS offers at-risk and delinquent unions compliance assistance to avoid another untimely filing and reaches out to the identified unions prior to their filing deadlines to urge them to file in a timely manner.
The FY 2017 projection is 1,370.
Under the LMRDA, employers and labor relations consultants are required to file a Form LM-10 or LM-20 when they arrange for services that are designed to communicate with employees with regard to their rights to organize and bargain collectively.
The FY 2016 result was 1,044 LM-10 and LM-20 persuader reports, 129 above the 915 report projection.
Despite this success, filings have begun to level off as fewer and fewer new filers are being identified and known filers are required to file fewer reports.
OLMS continues to cross-match LM-10 and LM-20 reports since both the employer and the persuader are required to file reports for the same set of services.
The FY 2017 projection is 990.
The final measure is customer satisfaction with the OLMS web site, using the American Customer Satisfaction Index.
The FY 2016 projection was 64, and the result was 58.
The FY 2017 projection is 65.
OLMS will continue to analyze the customer satisfaction surveys to identify potential web site improvements.
While the agency has made changes to the website design on the OLMS Home Page, the underlying pages remain the same.
The website is judged by its overall look and feel, not just the feel of the main page.
Comments OLMS has received indicate visitors are still having problems with navigation.
In fact, a heat chart compiled by ForeSee indicates that the most important factor in improving our score would be navigation.
OLMS has also started to track and analyze user metrics with respect to on-site behavior and has fine-tuned its ability to analyze this data to provide insights into how users are interacting with the OLMS web site.
While this analysis is expected to provide guidance on web site design that could assist in improving user satisfaction, changes to the web site are dependent upon funding.
OSHA supports Strategic Objective 3.2 by administering and enforcing twenty-two whistleblower protection statutes that protect workers who speak out to report perceived violations of the law.
Principally, this includes Section 11(c) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSH Act), which prohibits employers from discriminating against employees who bring workplace hazards to the attention of the employer or the Agency.
The additional twenty-one whistleblower protection provisions protect workers in a variety of industries who speak out against unsafe and/or unlawful behavior, including violations of airline, commercial motor carrier, consumer product, environmental, financial reform, food safety, health insurance reform, motor vehicle safety, nuclear, pipeline, public transportation agency, railroad, maritime, and securities laws.
Enforcement of these worker protection laws is critical to ensuring safe, high-quality work-life environments, as workers must feel free to identify, and seek correction of, illega conditions and conduct when they arise in the workplace without fear of retaliation or discrimination.
Over the last 16 years, OSHA’s whistleblower enforcement responsibilities have doubled, and the number of new whistleblower complaints filed with the agency has steadily increased each year, from about 1,900 new complaints filed in 1997, to over 3,350 new complaints received and docketed in FY 2016.
In response to the growing demand for whistleblower investigations, OSHA has recently made several changes to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of its whistleblower protection programs, including elevating the program to a stand-alone Directorate, establishing the Whistleblower Protection Advisory Committee, and creating an internal steering committee to guide policymaking and future planning.
OSHA has two performance measures for tracking the effectiveness of OSHA’s whistleblower enforcement efforts.
The first measure, Average Age of Pending Whistleblower Investigations, monitors the program’s efforts to reduce its backlog of pending whistleblower investigations by tracking the age of cases that are pending a determination from the Agency.
The second measure, Average Days to Complete New Complaint Screening Process, tracks OSHA’s efforts to provide attentive customer service to new complaint filers.
Average age of pending investigations improved from 372 days in FY 2014 to 317 days in FY 2015 to 303 days in FY 2016.
Average days to complete new complaint screenings decreased from 16 days in FY 2015 to 15 days in FY 2016.
These two quantitative performance measures will be continued in FY 2017.
In FY 2016, OSHA implemented several programmatic changes to its Whistleblower Protection Programs, which OSHA believes will allow the whistleblower program to operate more efficiently and effectively for years to come.
These changes included continuing the agency’s planned expansion of alternative dispute resolution (ADR) processes to additional Regions, as resources permit, as well as direct oversight of investigations by regional whistleblower managers.
In addition, OSHA conducted a quality review of a specific subset of completed whistleblower cases in FY 2016 that was composed of appealed Section 11(c) cases that were submitted for administrative review - referred to as Requests for Review (RFRs) Baselines were established for top issues identified in this review, and a procedural as well as a substantive issue were selected for introduction as two new quality performance measures in FY 2017: (1) Percent of Section 11(c) Request for Review files that included a pretext testing of Respondent’s proffered non-retaliatory reason(s) for the alleged adverse action(s) and (2) Percent of Section 11(c) Request for Review files that followed the 10-day lack of cooperation procedures in accordance with the Whistleblower Investigations Manual.
Finally, OSHA will continue to plan for transition from the antiquated WebIMIS database to a more advanced database and case management system to help OSHA better manage investigative caseloads and all aspects of OSHA’s Whistleblower Protection Programs.
As OSHA continues its efforts to improve the whistleblower protection programs, OSHA will be able to provide more quality investigations to more workers, which will help the Agency to reassure workers that voicing concerns will not leave them susceptible to retaliation and discrimination.
Without this assurance, OSHA cannot realize its goal of providing safe, healthy and fair workplaces to American workers.
MSHA’s Office of Assessments oversees MSHA’s program to protect miners from discrimination when they exercise their right to report health and safety hazards without fear of retaliation.
The FY 2016 result for timely investigation of discrimination complaints (95 percent) was 13 percentage points above the FY 2015 result and 10 percentage points above the target.
The FY 2016 result for timely investigation of reinstatement requests (8 percent) was three percentage points above the FY 2015 result and six percentage points above the target.
A key achievement of this Administration is enforcement of the anti-discrimination provisions contained in the 1977 Act.
This importance was reinforced by the tragedy at the Upper Big Branch (UBB) mine.
For the four years prior to the disaster, no one working at UBB had filed a hazard complaint, even though post-disaster investigations documented well-known, long-standing problems at that mine.
MSHA has distributed materials directly to miners and has beefed up its special investigations staff to work on claims of retaliation.
In 2011, MSHA updated its Miners’ Rights Handbook and developed new training tools, which are available online.
In FY 2016, DOL filed 45 complaints alleging mine safety discrimination, the second highest number on record, with the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission on behalf of miners who submitted complaints of discrimination in the form of a suspension, layoff, discharge or other adverse action.
Additionally, DOL filed 21 requests for temporary reinstatement during 2016.
To assess whether quality investigations are conducted, MSHA performs a headquarters review of every discrimination investigation conducted by its enforcement personnel.
In FY 2016, WHD resolved 71 percent of its FMLA investigations within the fiscal year.
In FY 2016, every region conducted planned, directed investigations focused on industries or areas where FMLA violations were considered likely.
These efforts are balanced against timely resolution of complaints and directing limited resources to pursue employers with systemic FMLA violations to achieve corporate-wide compliance.
WHD relies on a balanced set of measures to evaluate the implementation of its strategic enforcement approach to compliance.
These measures capture data on productivity, prioritization, and quality.
For several years, WHD has shifted its resources from a heavily complaint-based program to directed enforcement in order to maximize the effective use of limited resources.
By better integrating the directed and complaint investigations, WHD maximizes limited enforcement resources towards the goal of improving compliance at the industry-level and reaching the greatest number of workers.
In FY 2016, WHD conducted 46 percent of its investigative work in directed investigations, the highest percentage in recent history.
While achieving this milestone, WHD also succeeded in realizing historically low no violation rates for both directed and complaint investigations and performed better than the targeted levels.
The no violation rates are indications of whether WHD is selecting the right employers for investigation.
These results show the gap between complaint and directed investigations has narrowed to insignificant levels, which demonstrates that WHD directed investigations are nearly as accurate as a complaint in identifying employers with violations.
Importantly, directed investigations reach workers that are least likely to complain.
Moving forward, WHD is continuing to increase its number and percent of directed investigations while maintaining a low no violation rate in both complaint and directed investigations with those no violation targets continuing to merge.
Davis-Bacon wage rates for non-residential construction averaged 51 months in FY 2016.
WHD has been conducting a top to bottom evaluation of the wage determination process to identify continuing issues and concerns and develop additional process improvements to enhance the sufficiency and quality of wage rates.
The Office of Foreign Labor Certification (OFLC) reviews applications from employers seeking to hire and bring foreign workers as immigrants to the U.S. in permanent positions, and non-immigrant workers for temporary professional positions as well as agricultural and non-agricultural seasonal positions.
In addition, OFLC processes employer requests for determination of prevailing wages they need to proceed with the employment-based immigration process.
The fundamental determinations, which by statute must be made prior to the granting of labor certification, concern whether the hiring of a foreign worker will adversely impact the wages and working conditions of U.S. workers, and that no qualified U.S. workers are willing or available to fill a given vacancy.
Statutes, regulations, and administrative requirements establish mandatory timeframes within which the OFLC must issue a final determination or take certain actions.
A primary continuing challenge for the foreign labor certification programs has been balancing the quality review of applications against employer needs for timely processing of applications.
In FY 2016, OFLC’s ability to maintain quality review efforts and timeliness was affected by the level of available staff resources, the quality of the applications received, a five percent increase in volume of all applications received, implementation of new regulations governing the H-2B (temporary non-agricultural) program and the enactment of congressional riders regarding the H-2B program.
Timeliness decreased marginally for the H-2A (temporary agricultural) program to 95 percent of complete applications processed within 30 days before the date of need.
DOL published an H-2B interim Final Rule in April 2015 that impacted the program in FY 2016.
Impacts included a change in filing patterns and a temporary suspension of case processing to implement provisions included in the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2016.
Additionally, there was a six percent increase in H-2B applications received above FY 2015.
As a result, only three percent of applications were resolved within 30 days of receipt of during FY 2016.
OFLC made remarkable progress in reducing average resolution time for PERM applications not selected for integrity review.
Processing time went from 191 days in FY 2015 to 140 days in FY 2016.
Resolution time was also sharply reduced for PERM applications subject to integrity review – from 520 days in FY 2015 to 332 days in FY 2016.
H-1B application processing has sustained the timeliness goal of 100 percent for FY 2016.
OWCP provides income support through prompt and accurate adjudication of claims and payment of benefits.
Ongoing maintenance of cases receiving long-term benefits, including regular reviews to confirm entitlement and payment accuracy, promotes the integrity of OWCP’s benefit delivery.
The agency’s performance measures also focus on expediting the receipt of new claims from employers to avoid up-front delays in claims processing.
OWCP sets performance standards that seek to balance production demands with expected quality levels while ensuring that benefits and services are timely and accurately.
Increase the share of Federal employees that return to work within two years of entering FECA’s disability management program – OWCP monitors the performance of 14 of the largest Executive Branch agencies to improve return-to-work rates.
From FY 2011 to FY 2014, these agencies formed the Protecting Our Workers and Ensuring Reemployment (POWER) Return-to-Work Council under the leadership of OWCP.
The POWER Council served as a forum to regularly review performance results, share best practices, and set challenging individual agency goals.
From FY 2009 (before POWER) to the end of FY 2014, the results of this measure increased from 85.8 percent to 90.7 percent.
In FY 2016, the FECA program did not meet the annual target of 92.5 percent.
The results of this measure decreased slightly to 89.5 percent from the FY 2015 result of 90.3 percent.
This reflects the impact of budgetary factors that continue to affect agencies’ reemployment efforts, but OWCP continues to focus on communication and outreach to federal agencies to support their efforts to return their employees to work.
Timely submission of Notices of Injury and Wage-Loss Claims – OWCP improved its ability to promptly initiate intervention and return-towork services if Federal employers are timely in submitting injury reports and wage-loss claims.
Earlier receipt of these forms enables OWCP to begin claims adjudication and payment processing sooner.
Federal agencies with Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) capability continued to make gains in timeliness subsequent to their adoption of EDI.
To expand electronic filing capability to all agencies, OWCP developed a web-based capability, the Employees’ Compensation and Operations Portal (ECOMP), and continues to offer this electronic submission capability to all Federal employing agencies to further cut the time of delivery.
From FY 2012 to FY 2016, the percent of notices of injury filed by non-postal agencies within 10 work days improved from 86.2 percent to 90.9 percent; but below the target of 91.4 percent.
The percentage of wage-loss claims filed within five work days improved from 75.9 percent in FY 2012 to 86 percent in FY 2016, which is above the target of 85.4 percent.
Increase the timeliness of First Reports of Injury and First Payment of Compensation – OWCP emphasizes the performance of longshore and harbor workers’ employers using four performance measures to confirm that injury reports and first payment of compensation claims are filed timely and that first payments of compensation are made promptly.
Longshore program improvement strategies include a combination of engaging with employers by communicating expectations/requirements; formally publishing performance results; and providing education and technical assistance.
Improved communications and information sharing between the parties are also essential to dispute resolution.
Timely resolution of disputed issues minimizes interruptions to benefit processing and facilitates more timely return to work of those injured workers.
OWCP improved its performance on all four Longshore program measures over the past five years.
Between FY 2012 and FY 2016, injury report timeliness (within 30 days) for Defense Base Act (DBA) cases has improved from 85 percent to 92 percent.
First payment timeliness for DBA cases improved from 63 percent in FY 2012 to 70 percent in FY 2016.
Injury report timeliness for non-DBA cases improved from 86 percent to 93 percent between FY 2012 and FY 2016.
First payment timeliness for non-DBA cases improved from 85 percent in FY 2012 to 89 percent in FY 2016.
OWCP began working with stakeholders in FY 2016 to convert the submission of the LS 202, Employers First Report of Injury, from paper to electronic filing allowing for quicker notification and improved performance.
OWCP conducted a successful pilot project and began receiving claims electronically from one company.
OWCP will continue to partner with our stakeholders to expand this initiative in FY 2017.
In FY 2016, OWCP assigned policy examiners to review cases every quarter and identify opportunities to improve the timely payment process.
This effort was well received by our stakeholders as it helped them to understand where gains in performance were possible.
OWCP will continue this practice into FY 2017.
Black Lung claims decision timeliness – The Black Lung program received 7,478 claims in FY 2016, an increase of ten percent over the 6,818 claims received in FY 2015.
This represents a 72 percent increase over the FY 2009 volume of 4,354 claims.
The Black Lung program projects incoming claim filings to increase to 8,000 in FY 2017.
The expected increase is attributable to the struggling coal mining economy, where there have been increased responsible operator bankruptcy filings and increased mine closures and layoffs.
The absence of an increase in staffing levels combined with the number of claims received since 2009 contributed to the increase in pending claims.
The Black Lung program successfully reduced the volume of pending claims older than 240 days (as of October 1, 2015) by 85 percent.
However, as older pending claims were closed, the total average time to process Black Lung claims rose; between FY 2012 and FY 2016, the average time increased from 262 days to 334 days.
The Black Lung program issued 6,346 Proposed Decisions and Orders (PDO) in FY 2016, an increase of 19 percent over FY 2015.
OWCP balances the quality of the Black Lung decisions with the time it takes to process claims.
3) conducting pre-decisional quarterly spot audits of PDOs.
5) continue educating and training physicians and claims examiners on diagnosing and documenting respiratory disorders and quantifying and articulating impairment and disability.
Timely adjudication in EEOICPA Claims – OWCP’s Energy program provides timely claims adjudication and benefit delivery.
In FY 2016, the program continued to track performance with regard to the overall time to process claims, from intake to final decision.
The performance measures combine Part B and Part E results and account for the various actions a case may require, including time for dose reconstruction or oral hearing.
The average time to process cases sent to NIOSH when a hearing was held decreased from 552 days in FY 2012 to 501 days in FY 2016.
The FY 2016 result did increase four days from the FY 2015 result of 497 days.
The average time to process cases sent to NIOSH when a hearing was not held increased from 331 days in FY 2012 to 358 days in FY 2016, however the FY 2016 result was a decrease from the FY 2011 result of 457 days.
Within OWCP, goals for cases sent to NIOSH are contextual (do not have targets) because OWCP does not have control over NIOSH’s processing time.
In FY 2016, NIOSH took 225 days to process cases, which is above the target of 200 days OWCP established with NIOSH.
In FY 2014, NIOSH averaged fewer than 200 days.
In FY 2016, NIOSH's increased processing time was due to holding cases for Program Evaluation Reports, new Special Exposure Cohort classes, and updates to the Interactive RadioEpidemiological Program system used for determining probability of causation.
The Energy program continued to refine and update the Energy Compensation System, enhancing the way the program manages cases technologically.
The program continued to image paper documents through the OWCP Imaging System (OIS), facilitating effective and easy transfer of files between offices, reducing the space needed to store claims files, and enabling portability of case files.
In FY 2017, the Energy program will complete the expansion of access to case files in OIS to all Resource Centers, allowing Resource Center staff to view case activity, which will aid in providing claimants with case status information.
In FY 2015, the Energy program fully implemented the Energy Document Portal (EDP) through which documents can be uploaded to the OIS (rather than submitted by mail) and made available immediately to the claims staff.
The EDP is used by resource center personnel, claimants, authorized representatives, medical providers and others to file most forms and provide supporting documentation.
The program continued working with the SSA to request employment information through secure electronic fax, rather than through the mail.
In FY 2017, the program will continue to collaborate with SSA in an effort to begin receiving employment information from SSA electronically.
In FY 2016, NIOSH and the Energy program implemented an electronic file sharing web-portal, allowing both agencies to share information more efficiently with the anticipation that the use of technology will continue to help bring down end to end claims adjudication time when NIOSH referral occurs.
The federal role in Unemployment Insurance (UI) is to set broad policy for the program, establish performance measures and standards, provide technical assistance to states, monitor state performance, promote conformity and compliance of state laws and operations with federal law, and fund the administration of state and federal UI programs.
While state laws must meet minimum federal requirements to participate in the federal-state UI program, states have broad discretion in establishing eligibility requirements.
ETA uses three key performance measures for this program; as indicated in the bulleted list and table below, UI tracks state level performance and provides technical assistance as needed.
States that do not meet Acceptable Levels of Performance (ALP) are required to develop corrective action plans.
Payment Timeliness – Intrastate first payments made within 21 days improved slightly to 84.4 percent in FY 2016 but remains below the target of 87.5 percent.
Reasons for the states’ inability to achieve the performance standard include state staff layoffs, high state staff turnover, and technology issues.
The staff layoffs are a consequence of the reduction in administrative funding resulting from lower workloads and an improved economy.
States have experienced loss of experienced staff due to retirements and newer staff has not yet achieved sufficient experience in making claim eligibility determinations.
Newer staff takes longer to process claims and require more supervision which has led to workload backlogs in the claims-taking and adjudication units.
Additionally, several states have reported technology issues following system modernization implementation efforts or because they have antiquated technology systems.
ETA continues to identify states with chronic poor performance, and provide intensive technical assistance and enhanced monitoring.
Detect Overpayments – The percent of estimated overpayments that states detect and establish for recovery dropped again to below 60 percent due to state staff layoffs, high state staff turnover, and information technology issues.
ETA has developed a comprehensive strategic plan to prevent, reduce and recover improper payments and continues identifying states with high improper payment rates for targeted technical assistance.
A key component of ETA’s strategic plan is the establishment of a national UI Integrity Center (Center), operated by the National Association of State Workforce Agencies (NASWA), through a cooperative agreement with the New York State Department of Labor.
The Center is a state-driven source of innovative program integrity strategies to address improper payments and reduce fraud in the UI program.
Among the Center’s key activities is work focused on providing states with best practices for managing detection and recovery efforts and utilizing data analytics to prioritize work.
Additionally, from FY 2005 through FY 2016, ETA has provided approximately $367 million to states in supplemental funding for integrity‐related projects to help improve the prevention, detection and recovery of improper payments.
Percent of Employer Liability Determinations Made Promptly – In FY 2016, 88.9 percent of new employer tax liability determinations were made within 90 days – improved from FY 2015 but slightly below targeted performance.
In PY 2015, the Employment Service (ES) assisted over 13 million job seekers, including over 5 million UI claimants and nearly 900,000 Veterans – continuing a downward trend that began in PY 2011 concurrent with improving labor markets.
The changes made to the Employment Service by WIOA that took effect in PY 2015 include greater flexibility for ES staff to use assessments; career counseling; workforce and labor market information; and referrals and application assistance to other employment and training programs, such as Pell Grants and the GI Bill, to assist individuals in their career exploration.
WIOA also requires ES to provide assistance to UI claimants and encourages ES to provide a broader range of staff-assisted services through its American Job Centers.
These enhanced services may lead to a higher cost per participant and decrease the number of individuals served.
In FY 2017, the Department requested additional funds and authority to target these additional resources to areas that can demonstrate both demand for and ability to provide staff-assisted services.
The Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) program provides training, income support, job search allowances, and relocation allowances that expand opportunities for employment and prosperity for trade-affected workers who are threatened to lose their jobs, have lost their jobs, or have experienced a significant reduction in their wages due to international trade.
The Employment Retention Rate for participants who exit the program increased slightly to 92.4 percent in FY 2016.
TAA will provide performance outcomes on measures specified under WIOA that also align with those included in the TAA Reauthorization Act of 2015, when these results become available for WIOA core programs.
EBSA’s enforcement program seeks to detect and correct violations that result in monetary recoveries for employee benefit plans, participants and beneficiaries or in other corrective remedies including, but not limited to, significant broad-based reforms for large plans or common service providers.
In FY 2014, EBSA developed measures designed to increase the effectiveness of its enforcement program while avoiding reliance on raw case numbers.
As a result, EBSA replaced its cases closed measures in FY 2015 with three measures that track investigation timeliness.
EBSA focused its FY 2016 enforcement resources on National Projects and the Major Case Enforcement Priority.
The Major Case Enforcement Priority concentrates a significant portion of the Agency’s enforcement resources on those cases likely to have the greatest impact on the protection of plan assets and participants’ benefits.
While EBSA knows from experience that achieving a result in a Major Case takes longer and is more resourceintensive, such cases have also resulted in greater monetary results per investigative staff day.
In FY 2016, Major Cases produced $275 million in monetary results and accounted for 78% of total monetary results.
In FY 2017, EBSA will continue to focus on the timeliness of the Agency’s investigations and to shift investigative emphasis to more complex cases.
The Outreach, Education and Assistance program provided superior participant assistance in FY 2016 by responding to over 99 percent of telephone inquiries by the close of the next business day and to over 93 percent of written inquiries within 30 days of receipt.
Total inquiry volume for the fiscal year exceeded 193,000.
In responding to these inquiries, EBSA continued to achieve high customer satisfaction ratings and surpassed its goal of a 72 percent customer satisfaction rating.
Benefit recoveries achieved by the participant assistance program contributed more than $394 million to EBSA’s overall monetary results.
This informal resolution of complaints without utilizing the more resource intensive investigative process enables EBSA to direct its investigative resources to more egregious and wide-spread violations of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA).
In addition, the participant assistance program plays a critical role in EBSA’s overall enforcement program.
When EBSA’s participant assistance program receives an inquiry or complaint that indicates a potential fiduciary breach or systemic problem, that inquiry is referred to staff for possible investigation.
Referrals from the participant assistance program in FY 2016 resulted in the opening of 662 enforcement cases.
The Agency also conducted outreach and education programs designed to educate plan participants and officials.
EBSA completed 379 Affordable Care Act outreach activities reaching over 16,000 individuals, held 772 rapid response workshops for dislocated workers, distributed over 350,000 educational publications, and hosted over 7.0 million visitors on the Agency’s website.
In FY 2017, EBSA will again strive for a customer satisfaction rating of 72 percent.
The Agency will also continue to develop plans, such as the Call Quality Assurance Program, aimed at assessing not merely inquirer satisfaction but also the technical accuracy and quality of inquiry responses.
Strategic Objective 5.1 – Provide sound and impartial information on labor market activity, working conditions, and price changes in the economy for decision making, including support for the formulation of economic and social policy affecting virtually all Americans.
In FY 2016, BLS reached 100 percent of the underlying timeliness, accuracy, and relevance targets for all of its Principal Federal Economic Indicators.
In addition, BLS measured dissemination through the Average number of BLS website page views each month, and fell slightly under its target of 17 million by averaging approximately 16.3 million page views each month.
Page view counts for fourth quarter tend to be seasonally lower.
In FY 2017, BLS will complete a conceptual analysis for a redesigned website to ensure that its data products are readily accessible to its customers through the Internet and to meet users’ needs.
Finally, BLS measured mission achievement with customer satisfaction with the BLS website through the E-Government Satisfaction Index (EGSI), formerly known as the American Customer Satisfaction Index (ACSI), with a year-end score of 76, over its target of 75.
Specifically, the BLS score improved from last year in the areas of content, functionality, and search.
Notes: 1/ BLS revised its performance framework in 2014.
Cross-cutting measures were new beginning in FY 2014.
The FY 2012 - 2013 results are shown for trend-comparison purposes.
2/ In FY 2015, BLS replaced its dissemination measure due to a change in software.
The FY 2014 result is shown for trend comparison purposes.
3/ In FY 2016, the American Customer Satisfaction Index (ACSI) was renamed to the E-Government Satisfaction Index (EGSI).
EGSI Score is calculated on a 100 point scale.
Because this APR is primarily a planning document that uses historical information to inform future strategies and targets, it is organized around goals and measures selected to represent Departmental goals for the budget year (FY 2018).
Under GPRA, performance goals, measures and targets are identified for reporting purposes in the Congressional Budget Justification (CBJ) issued during that fiscal year.
Therefore, DOL is obliged to report PY 2015 and FY 2016 results for measures listed in its FY 2017 Performance Plan, which was published as part of the FY 2017 CBJ in February 2016 (see www.dol.gov/dol/budget/).
Some measures have since been revised, replaced, or discontinued.
The table below lists these performance measures, their targets and results for PY 2015/FY 2016 – organized by the Strategic Objective they supported in the FY 2018 CBJ.
Results are not provided for measures that were new this year, i.e., their target was to collect baseline data.