This report explains how DOL improves the lives of American workers through the management of its agencies and programs.
It also satisfies the requirement of the Government Performance and Results Modernization Act of 2010 (GPRMA) to provide information on actual performance and progress in achieving goals identified in the Annual Performance Plan (APP).
The Strategic Goal sections present results and plans organized by the structure laid out in the DOL FY 2018- 2022 Strategic Plan (see http://www.dol.gov/dol/aboutdol/).
As illustrated below, three Strategic Goals (Goal 1, etc.), one Management Goal, and eighteen Strategic and Management Objectives (1.1, etc. – each the responsibility of one DOL component agency) support realization of Secretary Acosta’s vision and achievement of DOL’s Mission.
Measures and targets for FY 2017 were updated in the FY 2016 Annual Performance Report (APR), which was the Department’s FY 2018 Annual Performance Plan (APP).
This FY 2017 Report serves as the FY 2019 APP, updates measures and targets for FY 2018, and establishes targets consistent with those reflected in the FY 2019 Congressional Budget Justification.
Some measures are deleted or modified between reports.
To present the most current information, this APR provides complete information for the budget year measures only – in this case, those retained or added in FY 2019 – including actual performance for the five preceding years, if available, plus targets for the most recent year, the current year, and the budget year.
Strategic objective summary tables list applicable measures, targets, results, and status (whether or not results reached or exceed the target, indicated by Y or N).
Where “baseline” appears in the target cell for new indicators, no data were available for establishing a numerical target.
If results improved over the prior year but did not reach the target, “I” appears in the status cell.
The last column identifies the level of success and plans to improve results.
Vision: Helping American workers gain and hold good, safe jobs.
Mission: To foster, promote, and develop the welfare of the wage earners, job seekers, and retirees of the United States; improve working conditions; advance opportunities for profitable employment; and assure work-related benefits and rights.
1.1 Create customer-focused workforce solutions for American workers.
1.2 Provide veterans, service members, and their spouses with resources and tools to gain and maintain employment.
1.3 Develop evidence-based policies, practices, and tools to foster a more inclusive workforce to increase quality employment opportunities for individuals with disabilities.
1.4 Provide timely, accurate, and relevant information on labor market activity, working conditions, and price changes in the economy.
1.5 Formulate policies and initiatives to promote the interests of working women.
2.1 Secure safe and healthful working conditions for America’s workers.
2.2 Prevent fatalities, disease, and injury from mining and secure safe and healthful working conditions for America’s miners.
2.3 Secure lawful wages and working conditions for America’s workers.
2.4 Improve the security of retirement, health, and other workplace-related benefits for America’s workers and their families.
2.5 Promote fair and diverse workplaces for America’s federal contractor employees.
2.6 Promote a fair global playing field for American workers and businesses by effectively enforcing U.S. trade agreements and combating global child labor and modern slavery.
2.7 Promote union financial integrity, transparency, and democracy.
3.1 Provide workers’ compensation benefits for workers who are injured or become ill on the job.
3.2 Support states’ timely and accurate benefit payments for unemployed workers.
Improve human resources efficiency, effectiveness, and accountability.
Provide modern technology solutions that empower the DOL mission and serve the American public through collaboration and innovation.
Maximize DOL’s federal buying power through effective procurement management.
Safeguard fiscal integrity, and promote the effective and efficient use of resources.
ETA Strategic Objective 1.1 – Create customer-focused workforce solutions for American workers.
Enroll 1 million new apprentices (including registered programs, industryrecognized apprenticeships, and other nonregistered programs) over the next five years to enable more Americans to obtain jobs that pay a family-sustaining wage through high quality earn-and-learn opportunities.
By Sept 30, 2019, DOL will enroll 280,000 new apprentices as part of the agency’s broader efforts to promote and expand apprenticeship.
The public workforce system contributes to our nation’s global competitiveness and economic productivity by providing lifelong learning opportunities and a broad array of employment services.
The workforce system provides critical services to a broad array of customers at all skill levels as well as provides services to employers.
These services include career counseling, case management, assessments that identify transferable skills, and skill development.
By testing and rigorously evaluating new ideas and approaches, ETA and the workforce system are committed to continuous improvement.
ETA employment programs emphasize, through its funding, policy guidance and provision of technical assistance (TA) to the workforce system, skill development for job-seekers that leads to industry-recognized credentials as a means of increasing their earning potential.
Beginning in July 2016,3 the WIA common measures were replaced by the six WIOA primary indicators of performance for the WIOA core programs: employment in the 2nd quarter after exit, employment in the 4th quarter after exit, median earnings in the 2nd quarter after exit, credential attainment, measurable skill gains, and effectiveness in serving employers.
The Department is collecting two years of baseline data for each new WIOA primary indicator prior to setting targets.
The Presidential Executive Order on Expanding Apprenticeships in America, signed June 15, 2017, states that “it shall be the policy of the Federal Government to provide more affordable pathways to secure, high paying jobs by promoting apprenticeships and effective workforce development programs, while easing the regulatory burden on such programs and reducing or eliminating taxpayer support for ineffective workforce development programs.”
The Secretary has established a Priority Goal to support implementation of the Order to expand apprenticeships.
2) advance modern work-based learning solutions to provide high quality alternatives to college for youths and adults.
On April 18, 2017, President Trump signed Executive Order 13788, Buy American Hire American, emphasizing the importance of ensuring that American labor is hired to fill jobs.
The President’s Order touches on three temporary worker programs for which the Department shares administrative or enforcement responsibilities: H-1B, H-2B, and H-2A.
Within the “Hire American” directive, the Order calls on the Department to fully enforce the protections in the laws governing temporary worker visas and to prevent any abuse of these programs.
Additionally, the President directed Federal agencies to review all nonimmigrant visa programs and propose new rules and guidance to eliminate fraud and abuse as part of his initiative to protect U.S. workers.
A continuing challenge for the foreign labor certification programs has been balancing the quality review of applications while meeting statutory and regulatory processing timeframes in the context of shifting volumes and legislative changes.
As a result of the significant increases in the filing of H-2B (temporary non-agricultural) applications in the first few weeks of Calendar Year 2016, only 25.5 percent of applications were resolved within 30 days before the date of need.
In response, in FY 2017, ETA’s Office of Foreign Labor Certification (OFLC) implemented an Interoperability Plan designed to facilitate reassignment of staff to respond to shifts in application filing.
As a result, timeliness of H-2B processing improved to 63.7 percent.
The Veterans’ Employment and Training Service (VETS) coordinates efforts to assist veterans seeking employment and employers seeking skilled workers – to provide America’s veterans better job opportunities.
VETS administers several programs to meet the employment and education needs of veterans, transitioning service members, and eligible spouses.
The Jobs for Veterans State Grants (JVSG) program provides funding to states for Disabled Veterans’ Outreach Program (DVOP) specialists and Local Veterans’ Employment Representative (LVER) staff.
The Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program (HVRP) addresses one of the most vulnerable populations by reintegrating homeless veterans into society and the workforce.
Training Track (CTTT) workshops provide tools to support a successful transition from military to civilian employment.
Pursuant to the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA), VETS investigates complaints received from individuals who believe their employment or reemployment rights under USERRA were violated.
DVOP specialists provide individualized career services to veterans with significant barriers to employment, transitioning service members, and to wounded, ill, or injured service members and their caretakers.
VETS tracks the employment outcomes for those served by DVOP specialists, such as the employment rate in the second quarter after exit for veterans served by a DVOP specialist.
This measure is newly defined by WIOA; in PY 2017-18, VETS will continue to collect baseline data.
HVRP effectiveness is measured in part by the successful placement of homeless veterans into meaningful employment.
VETS manages its USERRA investigations to ensure each complaint is appropriately investigated in terms of quality and timely completion.
The quality of each case is determined by measuring how well VETS developed and investigated the allegations in each complaint.
A sample of closed cases is reviewed quarterly; in FY 2017, 99 percent of the closed USERRA cases met VETS’ quality standard.
The Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP) promotes policies and practices, coordinating with employers and all levels of government, to increase the number and quality of employment opportunities for individuals with disabilities.
ODEP employs strategies to help employers meet their business objectives by fully integrating the skills and talents of job seekers and employees with disabilities.
Additionally, ODEP uses data and evidence to promote the adoption and implementation of policy strategies and effective practices to increase the number and quality of job opportunities for people with disabilities.
Based on research and evaluation, ODEP develops or identifies effective policy and practices, conducts outreach to share this critical information, and provides technical assistance to all levels of government and employers to aid them in adoption and implementation.
In FY 2017, ODEP developed 43 policy outputs to assist state legislators with policy strategies for addressing disability employment in their respective states and issued 147 implementation tools to aid entities in adopting and implementing proven practices.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) is the principal federal statistical agency responsible for measuring labor market activity, working conditions, and price changes in the economy.
Its mission is to collect, analyze, and disseminate some of the nation’s most sensitive and important economic data to support public and private decision-making.
Like all federal statistical agencies, BLS executes its statistical mission with independence.
BLS serves the general public, the U.S. Congress, DOL and other federal agencies, state and local governments, business, and labor by providing data products that are accurate, objective, relevant, timely, and accessible, and also provides technical assistance and consulting services.
Policies and decisions based on BLS data affect virtually all Americans, and the wide range of BLS data products is necessary to fulfill the diverse needs of a broad customer base.
BLS is committed to maintaining the highest level of scientific integrity in producing official statistics.
BLS complies with the Statistical Policy Directives and the Standards and Information Quality Guidelines from OMB, as well as the National Research Council’s Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency.
Together, these form the foundation for achieving and maintaining scientific integrity within and among the principal statistical agencies.
BLS also conforms to the conceptual framework of the Interagency Council on Statistical Policy’s (ICSP) Guidelines for Reporting Performance by Statistical Agencies and the “Strengthening Federal Statistics” chapter of the Analytical Perspectives volume in the President’s Budget.
BLS reports the full cost to produce its data products.
BLS also measures accuracy, timeliness, relevance, dissemination, and mission achievement.
These six criteria are common among statistical agencies because they represent critical aspects of a statistical program’s performance.
Using these common concepts as a basis for measuring and reporting on statistical agency outcomes helps inform decision-makers more consistently about the performance of statistical agencies.
The Women’s Bureau (WB) conducts research to formulate practices and policies aimed at increasing economic and employment opportunities and advancement for the 74 million working women and their families in the U.S. WB identifies trends, data gaps, policy and programmatic needs, and strategic mechanisms to safeguard the interest of working women.
These efforts allow WB to inform and educate individuals and organizations at the local, state, and national levels about the issues facing women in the labor force.
In FY 2017, WB exceeded its target for the number of policy and research deliverables, producing a total of 21 issue briefs, research papers, and other resources containing labor force statistics on working women and information on their employment rights, including state-level requirements, and federal and state-level equal pay protections.
WB will improve the scope and comprehensiveness of all products and add detailed data and input from a broad array of stakeholders.
OSHA Strategic Objective 2.1 – Secure safe and healthful working conditions for America’s workers.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) was established by the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 with the mission to ensure employers provide American workers safe and healthful working conditions.
By September 30, 2019, increase trenching and excavation hazards abated by 10 percent compared to FY 2017, through inspections and compliance assistance at workplaces covered by OSHA.
Through these efforts, OSHA aims to reduce the number of worker illnesses, injuries, and fatalities and contribute to DOL’s broader goals of promoting the competitiveness of our nation’s workforce.
OSHA’s compliance officers strategically prioritize enforcement resources to target high hazard industries and irresponsible employers.
Corporate Wide Settlement Agreements (CSAs) and the Severe Violator Enforcement Program (SVEP) are additional tools OSHA uses to target establishments which require improvement across a number of locations.
OSHA met its previous Agency Priority Goal (APG) of increasing the number of abated workplace hazards in FY 2017.
Moving forward, OSHA’s new APG is to increase trenching4and excavation hazards abated by 10 percent compared to FY 2017, through inspections and compliance assistance at workplaces covered by OSHA.
OSHA seeks to reduce injuries and fatalities by targeting workplaces where there are potential trenching/excavation hazards for inspections as well as outreach.
OSHA will work with industry associations and the public utilities who hire a significant portion of the work to create a public-private effort to impact these fatalities.
Increased inspection activity focusing on trenching/excavation hazards should result in fewer injuries and fatalities – the ultimate outcome for DOL and American workers.
Safety training is a critical piece of OSHA’s strategic effort to prevent workplace fatalities, injuries, and illnesses.
OSHA conducts training programs at the OSHA Training Institute (OTI), administers the OTI Education Centers Program, and administers the Outreach Training Program.
In FY 2017, preliminary data shows OSHA provided training for 1,024,431 individuals.
The Voluntary Protection Program (VPP) is another important component of OSHA’s compliance assistance activities.
This program recognizes employers and workers who have implemented effective safety and health management systems and who maintain belowaverage injury and illness rates in their respective industries.
The program also brings OSHA and employers together to cooperatively and proactively prevent future fatalities, injuries, and illnesses.
In FY 2017, preliminary data indicates OSHA completed 264 VPP approvals and reapprovals.
OSHA also administers and enforces twenty-two whistleblower protection statutes that protect workers who experience retaliation for reporting violations of the law.
Principally, this includes Section 11(c) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSH Act), which prohibits employers from retaliating against employees who bring workplace hazards to the attention of the employer or the Agency.
The additional twenty-one whistleblower protection provisions protect workers in a variety of industries who speak out against unsafe and/or unlawful behavior, including violations of transportation, consumer protection, or financial reform laws.
In FY 2017, OSHA completed 3,348 whistleblower investigations, awarding more than $29 million to complainants including 82 reinstatements.
MSHA Strategic Objective 2.2 – Prevent fatalities, disease, and injury from mining and secure safe and healthful working conditions for America’s miners.
The Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) protects the safety and health of the nation’s miners through enforcement of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 (Mine Act), as amended by the Mine Improvement and New Emergency Response Act of 2006 (MINER Act).
The mission of MSHA is to prevent death, disease, and injury from mining and to promote safe and healthful workplaces for the nation’s miners.
By September 30, 2019, reduce the reportable injury rate associated with powered haulage equipment, the primary cause of miners’ injuries, by 10 percent per year based on a rolling 5-year average per 200,000 hours worked.
MSHA’s mission is carried out through the promulgation and enforcement of mandatory safety and health standards; mandated inspections which require four complete inspections annually at active underground mines and two complete inspections annually at active surface mines; miner training; and technical compliance assistance activities.
In order to prevent miner deaths, operators must have in place effective safety and health programs that are constantly evaluated to identify and eliminate mine hazards, and that provide training for all mining personnel.
MSHA has undertaken a number of measures to prevent mining deaths: increased monitoring and strategic enforcement through targeted inspections at mines with identified problem areas; a Pattern of Violations (POV) program; special initiatives such as focusing on inexperienced miner and miners working alone; and outreach efforts such as "Safety Pro in a Box," which provides guidance to the metal/nonmetal mining industry on best practices and compliance responsibilities.
In FY 2017, MSHA achieved the target for its FY 2016-2017 APG, established in the DOL FY 2014-2018 Strategic Plan, to reduce the five-year rolling average of fatal injuries per 200,000 hours worked.
MSHA also achieved its goal of reducing injury rates based on a five-year rolling average per 200,000 hours worked.
Reduced injuries and fatalities are attributed to a number of factors beyond enforcement, including better use of technology, safer mining practices, and improved training.
MSHA has determined that accidents caused by powered haulage equipment, which is a category of moving machines used to transport miners or haul materials in surface and underground mines, contributed to 30% of fatalities and 9% of total injuries.
Accordingly, MSHA has established a new APG for FY 2018-2017: reduce the reportable injury rate associated with powered haulage equipment by 10 percent based on a five-year rolling average per 200,000 hours worked.
WHD is responsible for administering and enforcing laws that establish the minimum standards for wages and working conditions.
WHD enforces and administers the minimum wage, overtime, and child labor provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act; the prevailing wage requirements and wage determination provisions of the Davis Bacon Act and Related Acts, Service Contract Act, Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act, Walsh-Healey Act, and Copeland Act; the wages and working conditions under the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act; the Family and Medical Leave Act; and the Employee Polygraph Protection Act.
WHD also enforces the field sanitation and temporary labor camp standards in agriculture and certain employment standards and worker protections of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
Collectively, these labor standards cover most private, state, and local government employment.
They protect over 135 million of America’s workers in more than 7.3 million establishments throughout the U.S. and its territories.
WHD prioritizes resources by using an evidence-based, multi-pronged approach to improve compliance, including compliance assistance to employers; investigations in high-violation industries; engagement and education of private and public stakeholders; and the use of media, including social media.
WHD focuses on (1) prioritizing industries with the greatest compliance problems, and (2) developing strategies that impact compliance.
In FY 2017, WHD successfully increased its results for Percent of Agency-Initiated Investigations, reaching the highest percentage (51 percent) in recent history while also increasing its result in the Number of Compliance Actions.
Data show that agency-initiated investigations and the strategic use of enforcement resources have achieved positive results for low-wage workers and result in greater compliance.
In FY 2017, WHD also succeeded in realizing the lowest no-violation rates in recent history for both Percent of Agency-Initiated No Violation Investigations and Percent of Complaint No Violation Investigations, at 14 and 15 percent, respectively.
The no-violation rates indicate that WHD is selecting effective criteria to identify employers that are, in fact, in violation.
These results show that the difference between complaint and agency-initiated investigations is insignificant, with WHD agency-initiated investigations as accurate as complaint investigations in identifying employers with violations.
The FY 2017 result in Percent of All Investigations in Priority Industries increased to 78 percent.
This measure reflects WHD’s commitment to prioritizing enforcement resources in those industries with the most serious violations.
Increasing the percentage of agency-initiated investigations, and prioritizing complaints, has increased the agency’s presence in industries that have a history of violations.
In FY 2018, to reflect its commitment to compliance assistance, WHD will begin to track and report the number of outreach hours spent in compliance assistance.
The goal is to increase impact through direct engagement with industry leaders and more modern compliance assistance methods.
The Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA) is charged with protecting more than 150 million workers, retirees and their families who are covered by nearly 694,000 private retirement plans, 2.2 million health plans, and similar numbers of other welfare benefit plans.
Together, these plans hold estimated assets of $9.3 trillion.
EBSA employs a comprehensive, integrated approach encompassing programs for enforcement, compliance assistance, interpretive guidance, legislation, and research.
In FY 2017, the agency recovered over $1.1 billion for direct payment to plans, participants and beneficiaries.
EBSA’s enforcement program seeks to detect and correct violations that result in monetary recoveries for employee benefit plans, participants and beneficiaries or in other corrective remedies including, but not limited to, significant broad-based reforms for large plans or common service providers.
In FY 2015, EBSA replaced its cases closed measures with measures that track investigation timeliness.
These measures have ensured the effective management of newly opened cases.
EBSA focused its FY 2017 enforcement resources on National Enforcement Projects and the Major Case Enforcement Priority.
The Major Case Enforcement Priority concentrates a significant portion of the agency’s enforcement resources on those cases likely to have the greatest impact on the protection of plan assets and participants’ benefits.
In FY 2018, EBSA has introduced measures to evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of investigative time.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) requires that employers that do business with the Federal Government comply with contractual equal employment opportunity and affirmative action requirements to ensure a fair and diverse workplace, free of discrimination and harassment.
OFCCP recognizes the importance of striking a balance between its enforcement efforts and compliance assistance activity.
The agency is strengthening contractor engagement through the use of additional compliance resources, tools, and national training.
In FY 2017, OFCCP used its High-Impact Construction Project strategy to focus on construction projects that reach a greater number of Federal contractor and subcontractor workers.
These and other strategies make OFCCP more efficient.
At the end of FY 2017, OFCCP continued to achieve its quality targets with 93 percent of cases concluding without major deficiencies.
The Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB) promotes a fair global playing field for workers and businesses in the United States by enforcing trade commitments, strengthening labor standards, and combating international child labor and forced labor.
When other countries fail to enforce their labor laws or abide by their trade-related labor commitments, they undermine the competitiveness of goods made in the U.S.
The majority of ILAB’s work involves negotiating and/or working cooperatively with other U.S. government agencies, foreign ministries, industry and employers, and workers’ and other civil society organizations.
In FY 2017, ILAB provided targeted technical assistance for projects in approximately 70 countries to strengthen compliance with the labor requirements of U.S. trade agreements and preference programs, including improving labor enforcement and addressing child labor and forced labor.
ILAB also provided education or vocational services to more than 17,000 children engaged in or at risk of entering hazardous child labor and helped to increase capacity to address child labor and forced labor in 22 countries in 2017.
ILAB worked closely with interagency partners, businesses, and workers in key trading countries such as Colombia, Honduras, and Peru.
It also worked to improve standards on issues like forced labor and adherence to labor standards in a number of countries, including Venezuela, Qatar, and Colombia.
The Office of Labor-Management Standards (OLMS) administers the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959, as amended (LMRDA), and related laws.
These laws primarily establish safeguards for union democracy and union financial integrity and require public disclosure reporting by unions, union officers, union employees, employers, labor consultants and surety companies.
Timely resolution of election complaints accelerates restoration of democratic voice and a democratically operated union.
In FY 2017, OLMS averaged under 65 days elapsed per case – an improvement of almost three days from FY 2016.
OLMS continues to fine-tune methods for further reducing its elapsed days including use of a team-based approach for handling election cases (when resources permit) and engaging in early-involvement with the Office of the Solicitor in cases that may result in litigation.
The FY 2018 target balances the changes OLMS can make to its processes with outside factors that can affect resolution of these types of cases, such as cooperation from the unions being investigated.
OLMS’ investments in new technology and outreach to facilitate electronic filing of union financial reports led to continued progress as 58.0 percent of all filings were submitted electronically – almost eight percentage points higher than FY 2016.
A new rule that requires electronic filing of the Form LM-3 and LM-4 reports for fiscal years beginning on or after January 2, 2017, should maintain this trend in FY 2018 and beyond.
Sources: Office of Labor-Management Standards electronic Labor Organization Reporting System (e.LORS) and internal data tracked by the OLMS Division of Enforcement.
OWCP Strategic Objective 3.1 – Provide workers’ compensation benefits for workers who are injured or become ill on the job.
The role of the Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs (OWCP) is to provide workers’ compensation benefits for workers injured or ill on the job.
By September 30, 2019, reduce the percentage of initial opioid prescriptions and duration of new opioid prescriptions for federal employees with work-related injuries by 30 percent from the FY 2016 baseline.
The agency adjudicates claims, administers the benefit funds authorized for these purposes, and provides oversight of claims resolutions by responsible parties.
In FY 2018, OWCP will continue development of the OWCP Workers’ Compensation System (OWCS), an integrated claims processing and management system for all four programs.
OWCP expects the Longshore program to begin testing OWCS by the end of 2018.
In FY 2018, the Federal Employees’ Compensation Act (FECA) program will focus on its new APG of reducing the overuse and rate of new opioid addictions by limiting the supply and duration of new opioid prescriptions to only what is appropriate and necessary.
A major aspect of the Longshore program focuses on ensuring first payment of benefits are timely.
The percentage of first payments of compensation issued for non-Defense Base Act (DBA) cases within 30 days from the date disability begins increased from 85 percent in FY 2012 to 88 percent in FY 2017.
The Black Lung program has focused on maximizing productivity and managing pending claims.
The implementation of prototype performance standards for claims examiners in FY 2017 led to increased productivity and a reduction in the pending claims inventory by nine percent between FY 2016 and FY 2017.
The Energy program works closely with the Department of Energy, the Department of Justice, the Social Security Administration (SSA), and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) to issue claim decisions.
The federal-state Unemployment Insurance (UI) program, authorized under the Federal Unemployment Tax Act and Title III of the Social Security Act, provides temporary, partial wage replacement for unemployed workers, providing them with income support when suitable work is unavailable.
To be eligible for benefits, unemployed workers must meet eligibility requirements established by state laws that conform to federal law, including that they have worked recently, are involuntarily unemployed, and are able, available, and actively seeking work.
The federal role is to set broad policy for the program, establish performance measures and standards, provide technical assistance to states, monitor state performance, promote conformity and compliance of state laws and operations with federal law, and fund the administration of state and federal UI programs.
States that do not meet minimum standards are required to develop corrective action plans.
First Payment Timeliness – Intrastate first payments made within 21 days improved slightly to 84.0 percent in FY 2017 but did not meet the target of 87.0 percent.
States have lost experienced staff due to retirements, and have therefore lost sufficient expertise in processing and adjudication.
Several states have also reported technology issues following system modernization implementation efforts or due to antiquated technology systems.
Detection of Recoverable Overpayments – The percent of estimated overpayments that states detect and establish for recovery fell by more than ten percentage points in FY 2017 to 47.4 percent (vs. the target of 61.4 percent) for many of the same reasons cited for the drop in first payment timeliness.
ETA estimates that the UI improper payment rate will increase in FY 2018 to 13.75 percent.
The increase, in part, is tied to work search requirements that are a condition of UI eligibility.
Structural issues, which are in place for policy reasons, include the requirement for certain due process steps before stopping payment of benefits.
Sources: First Payment Timeliness: ETA 9050 and 9050p reports; Detection of Recoverable Overpayments: Benefit Accuracy Measurement (BAM) survey and ETA 227 report.
OASAM Strategic Objective M.1 – Improve human resources efficiency, effectiveness, and accountability.
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management’s (OASAM) Human Resources Center (HRC) provides leadership, guidance, and technical expertise on all human capital areas to the Department.
The Director of HRC serves as the Department’s Chief Human Capital Officer (CHCO).
By September 30, 2019, begin implementation of an enterprise-wide shared services model for DOL core administrative functions.
OASAM will implement a shared services model for the delivery of DOL HR services.
A realigned HR service delivery model will improve strategic human capital planning; create greater consistency in the delivery of HR products and services across the Department; reduce overall HR costs; gain efficiency in HR service delivery through economies of scale; and improve efficiency and effectiveness of HR service delivery.
The implementation of an effective shared services solution for HR service delivery will permit DOL program agencies to focus time and resources on mission-oriented outcomes.
Specifically, HRC will improve hiring outcomes and reduce burden on hiring managers particularly for mission critical positions.
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management’s (OASAM) Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) provides information technology leadership, products, and support for DOL.
OCIO plays a critical leadership role in driving reforms in systems development, better managing technology spending, and succeeding in achieving real, measurable improvements in mission performance.
OCIO provides guidance to the Department in support of government-wide directives for capital planning, IT security, information management, and enterprise architecture.
OASAM will implement a shared service model for DOL IT services, products and support that leverages economies of scale, adheres to federal standards and requirements, ensures greater CIO oversight, and provides an enhanced customer experience.
OCIO will also begin creating a common environment for the enterprise platform, including standards, processes, and governance.
By leveraging a common platform, DOL will eliminate redundancies and move towards automation, increased accessibility, and enhanced security.
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management’s (OASAM) Business Operations Center (BOC), Office of the Chief Procurement Officer (OCPO) provides leadership, guidance, and oversight of all procurement policy and services.
OASAM will implement a shared services model for the delivery of DOL procurement services.
By centralizing procurement functions, DOL will achieve economies of scale; gain managerial oversight and efficiencies to more rapidly implement government-wide procurement directives; enforce procurement legislation, regulation, and policies; and strategically plan customer demands.
An effective shared services solution for departmental procurement services will allow DOL program agencies to focus their resources on program delivery and mission outcomes.
OCPO will leverage the government’s buying power, making it possible to obtain significant reductions in the price of goods and receive better services at lower costs.
OCPO will leverage government-wide buying vehicles produced by OMB’s FSSI and Category Management Initiatives.
OCPO will also provide and promote DOL-wide procurement vehicles, reducing redundancy in procurement vehicles for the same services and gaining cost savings with DOL buying power.
OCPO will baseline the number of DOL enterprise-wide procurement vehicles in FY 2018 and set an FY 2019 target after receiving baseline data.
OCPO will execute plans to increase the use of contract solutions designated as “Best In Class” (BIC) and government-wide solutions to save money, avoid wasteful and redundant contracting actions, and free up acquisition staff to accelerate procurements for high-priority mission work.
In FY 2018, OCPO will establish a goal of increased spending through BIC designated contract solutions by 35%.
The Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) provides financial management leadership, direction, and guidance to the Office of the Secretary of Labor and all DOL program agencies on matters arising from financial statutes, as appropriate.
OCFO oversees DOL-wide accounting, financial management, the budget process, and financial system, and leads the Department’s annual audit of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Accurate and timely financial information demonstrates DOL’s accountability to stakeholders and facilitates data-driven operational, budget, and policy decisions.
OCFO oversees the Department’s responsibility for internal controls by assisting program management in establishing and ensuring strong controls over all financial resources in DOL.
Notes: The targets for the measure "number of material weaknesses eliminated" are based on previous year independent audit findings.
OCFO also reports the results of this measure on a one-year lag, such that the FY 2018 result reflects the material weaknesses eliminated in FY 2017 AFR, due to publication date of the Agency Financial Report.
The Government Performance and Results Act Modernization Act requires that federal agencies report to Congress on “unmet goals” annually.
The Office of Management and Budget’s Circular A-11, Part 6 mandates that agencies meet this requirement through a Strategic Review.
However, that OMB guidance also states: “[b]ecause agencies are currently developing new strategic goals and objectives that will be reflected in the update to the agency Strategic Plan with the President’s FY 2019 Budget, agencies may forego the reporting requirements for any current strategic objectives from the FYs 2014-2018 strategic plan that an agency determines will be substantively different or no longer aligned with the current Administration’s policy, legislative, regulatory or budgetary priorities.”
Accordingly, this year’s update presents key findings organized under the new goal structure.
However, it does not include assessments (e.g., Noteworthy Progress, Adequate Progress, or Area for Improvement).
Also, the Management Goal strategic objectives supported by the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management and the Office of the Chief Financial Officer were not included in this review because the plan that was in effect in FY 2017 did not have a management goal.
Employment and earnings outcomes for workers are higher when education is closely targeted to specific occupations and industries, particularly in real workbased settings (e.g., Registered Apprenticeship, internships, on-the-job training, sectoral partnerships, firm industry cluster partnerships, and public/private/union partnerships, Career Pathways, Sector Strategies, and other work based learning programs).
Strong partnerships are necessary among the public workforce system, education providers, and employers in key sectors that provide well-paying jobs.
However, a major challenge is that funds are limited; only a small fraction of job seekers served by these programs receive education (as opposed to less expensive career services).
Billions of dollars per year in grants provide basic employment services to tens of millions; only 10-15 percent of them receive education.
Helping job seekers obtain the education, training, and support services needed to succeed in the labor market is one of DOL’s Top Management and Performance Challenges for FY 2017.
The OIG noted that the Department “needs the right performance information to make evidencebased and data-driven decisions.”9 The transition to WIOA presents some inherent risk from a performance accountability standpoint; however it also provides a great opportunity to improve the performance accountability framework, data collection and program reporting, and make information system upgrades.
ETA has developed a new reporting system – the Workforce Integrated Performance System (WIPS) – for states and competitive grantees to submit data for WOIA outcomes, including new data validation capacities.
DOL was recognized in the Results for America Federal Invest In What Works 2017 Index as a leading agency focused on building the infrastructure necessary to be able to use data, evidence, and evaluation in budget, policy, and management decisions.
A 2012 study of the Registered Apprenticeship program found that those who complete the program earn $240,000 more than non-participants over their careers, with net social benefits of over $50,000 per completing participant.
Approximately 90 percent of registered apprentices are employed after completing their apprenticeship programs with an average starting salary of over $60,000 – $15,000 more than for all program participants (i.e., including those who did not complete the apprenticeship).
On June 15, 2015, President Trump issued Executive Order 13801, Expanding Apprenticeships in America, which authorized the Secretary of Labor to establish industry-recognized apprenticeships programs by qualified third-party certifiers.
Such industry-recognized apprenticeship programs will supplement, rather than supplant, the existing registered apprenticeship system.
In support of the Secretary’s goal to expand apprenticeship, close the skills gap, and support a competitive workforce, ETA will support efforts to make apprenticeship a “go-to” and valued human capital solution in any industry to ensure businesses hire and keep workers with the skills they need to compete.
The Department has made implementation of the Executive Order an APG for FY 2018-19.
To address those challenges, Job Corps is conducting unannounced visits to centers with an elevated risk profile.
ETA designs grant competitions, where applicable, to specifically promote credential attainment.
ETA also provides technical assistance to grantees on resources and strategies for increasing the attainment of industry-recognized credentials.
For example, ETA updated its electronic tools to include information on credentials related to each occupation – from shortterm certificates to apprenticeship to licensure and certifications – and the quality or value of specific certifications.
ETA’s priority for the Trade Adjustment Assistance program (TAA) is to return to approximately 40-day average petition processing times according to statutory requirements, and to ensure eligible workers can apply for benefits and services as soon as possible in order to return to work in good paying jobs.
Average Processing Time for completing TAA investigations was 107.8 days in FY 2017 – much longer than the statutory 40 day target.
ETA has taken steps in FY 2018 to reduce processing times for investigations by adding temporary staffing.
Since FY 2016, the backlog of open investigations has been reduced from over 1200 to below 210, and it’s anticipated that the numbers will continue to decline as ETA continues to modify its business processes to eliminate unnecessary tasks.
Since 2009, TAA has included a wage supplement in the form of Reemployment Trade Adjustment Assistance (RTAA).
This benefit encourages eligible workers age 50 and older to accept new jobs more rapidly by offsetting the earnings losses from losing their previous jobs with up to $10,000 in wage supplements.
These supplements go to workers who find reemployment and earn less than $50,000 a year.
From PY 2010 to PY 2016, the proportion of trade participants who are receiving this benefit has increased from 3 percent to 16 percent.
In PY 2016, approximately $31.2 million in RTAA benefits funds were provided to support 5,640 recipients.
In FY 2017, OFLC consolidated case processing responsibilities for all program types across its three processing centers to facilitate deployment of staff to program work that is in highest demand during peak application filing periods.
For example, the bulk of H-2B applications are filed within a few days of the initial date for submissions in order to “beat” the semi-annual H-2B visa cap of 33,000.
To synchronize resources with demand, the Department’s FY 2018 budget requested legislative authority to establish, collect, and retain fees to cover the operating costs of the foreign labor certification programs.
A noteworthy achievement for VETS is the increase in the share of veterans who received intensive services from JVSG specialists – from 25 percent in PY 2011 to 88.7 percent in PY 2016.
VETS has identified a risk in their ability to track and report performance outcomes from JVSG grantees.
Participant-level data for new WIOA outcome measures will be three quarters lagged and since JVSG relies upon ETA’s WIPS system for these data, it faces the same risks to performance accountability identified for ETA Strategic Objective 1.1.
The Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP) and ETA remain committed to developing strategies designed to increase access for adults and youth with disabilities to, and the use of, American Job Centers’ services.
These strategies include facilitating a partnership between the public workforce system and the health care system as part of ODEP’s efforts to keep ill and/or injured workers at work and/or return them back to work as quickly as medically possible to ensure their labor force attachment.
BLS reached 100 percent of the underlying timeliness, accuracy, and relevance targets for all of its Principal Federal Economic Indicators for the last five years (FY 2013-2017).
In addition, BLS measures dissemination through the average number of BLS website page views each month, but in FY 2017, fell under its target of 16.4 million by averaging approximately 15.5 million page views each month.
In FY 2018, BLS will continue work on redesigning the website to ensure that BLS data products are readily accessible to its customers through the Internet and to meet users’ needs.
BLS also measures mission achievement by measuring customer satisfaction with the BLS website through the ForeSee Experience Index (FXI), formerly known as the E-Government Satisfaction Index; the FY 2017 year-end score was 75, which was slightly below the FY 2016 result and FY 2017 target of 76.
BLS saw a 13 percent decrease in respondents to the FXI survey and lower scores particularly in the areas of content and functionality, when compared to fourth quarter results in FY 2016.
BLS faces declining survey response rates, primarily due to competing surveys, less willingness on the part of respondents to participate, and concerns about safeguarding respondent confidentiality.
BLS is addressing this challenge by upgrading strategic communications, offering alternative response modes to reduce burden, and using more alternative data sources.
Finally, BLS continues to promote the sharing of existing economic data among BLS, the Census Bureau, and the Bureau of Economic Analysis, and to improve the nation’s economic statistical system by aligning each agency’s data outputs and developing new ways to track emerging economic trends.
BLS is addressing this challenge by monitoring and responding to new developments related to data sharing.
The WB also developed a brief guide to WIOA that details strategies for improving low-income women’s access to the education and support services they need to succeed.
The WB also published an issue brief with the results from the Working Women’s Survey, which collected information about women’s decisions to exit the workforce, such as family care and household responsibilities.
Fall protection continues to be the number one violation cited by OSHA.
Falls are the leading cause of death in the construction industry and account for 20 percent of all serious injuries.
In FY 2017, OSHA continued to focus on preventing fall hazards through inspection targeting.
OSHA partnered with the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, the Center for Protection of Workers’ Rights (CPWR), and the Department of Defense on Safety Stand-Downs, voluntary events for employers to talk directly to employees about safety.
The National Campaign to Prevent Falls in Construction Final Report indicated that thousands of employers received certificates by providing over 1 million workers and over 1.5 million military and civilian personnel fall prevention training.
OSHA also has national and local emphasis plans (NEPs and LEPs), as well as a Strategic Plan that directs Compliance Safety and Health Officers (CSHOs) to those establishments with the most significant risk of fall hazards.
In FY 2017, preliminary data shows that OSHA conducted about 10,380 inspections of worksites as a result of these programs, and about 8,032 fall-related violations were abated.
OSHA tracks two measures to monitor its effect on federal employee safety.
The Federal agency total injury/illness case rate fell from 3.08 per 100 employees in FY 2010 to 2.00 in FY 2017.
Federal agency lost time injury/illness rate (also per 100 employees) fell from 1.44 to 1.07 over the same period.
OSHA contributed to these improved results by providing compliance assistance to federal agencies and inspections of federal establishments with high numbers of lost time cases.
OSHA Whistleblower Investigations increased by 76 percent from FY 2010 to FY 2017 (from 1,904 in FY 2010 to 3,348 in FY 2017).
In response to the growing demand for whistleblower investigations, OSHA realigned the program to create a stand-alone directorate.
OSHA also launched the Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Program in FY 2016, which allows for voluntary resolution of the complaint, and the Quality Review Tool (QRT), which is used for auditing purposes that include case file reviews.
In FY 2017, the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) exceeded its APG of reducing worker fatality rates in mining.
The five-year rolling average rate has fallen about nine percent over the last two years – from 0.0126 fatal injuries per 200,000 hours worked in FY 2015 to 0.0116 in FY 2017.
MSHA also achieved its goal of reducing all injury rates; the five-year rolling average rate fell 15 percent over the same period – from 2.56 injuries per 200,000 hours worked in FY 2015 to 2.17 in FY 2017.
MSHA is responding to changes in the coal mining industry and the demographics of MSHA’s labor force.
MSHA has realigned three Coal district offices in locations where coal mining activity has declined into other coal districts and field offices.
MSHA utilized voluntary reassignments and relocation incentives to reallocate personnel to other coal offices and to MSHA program areas with identified staffing needs/gaps, most notably the Metal and Nonmetal Mine Safety and Health program.
The realignment also resulted in a reduction of MSHA coal inspectors and reallocation of resources to other high priority MSHA requirements.
WHD increased agency-initiated investigations from 27 percent of all investigations in FY 2010 to 51 percent of all investigations in FY 2017.
WHD also focused its investigations and resources better than ever on workplaces with violations.
The percentage of agency-initiated investigations with no violations fell to 14 percent, down from 29 percent in FY 2012, while the percentage of complaint investigations with no violations fell to 15 percent, down from 21 percent in FY 2012.
This indicates that agency-initiated investigations have been as accurate as complaint-based investigations in finding employers with violations.
Since FY 2015, EBSA has implemented performance measures designed to increase the effectiveness of its enforcement program, focusing on National Projects and the Major Case Enforcement Priority.
In increasing the investigative time spent on Major Cases, a significant portion of the agency’s enforcement resources were concentrated on those cases likely to have the greatest impact on the protection of plan assets and participants’ benefits.
In FY 2017, Major Cases produced $609 million in monetary results and accounted for 89 percent of total monetary recoveries.
Protecting Retirement, Health, and Other Benefit Plans for Workers, Retirees, and Their Families” was identified as a DOL Top Management and Performance Challenge in FY 2017.
Given the number of plans that the agency oversees relative to the number of its investigators, EBSA has to devise ways to focus its available resources on investigations, audits, and other reviews that it believes will most likely result in the deterrence, detection, and correction of ERISA violations.
To that end, EBSA created the Sample Investigation Program (SIP) to measure overall compliance with the civil provisions of ERISA and the impact of EBSA investigations on compliance rates of investigated employee benefit plans.
Additionally, pension assets that are held in otherwise regulated entities (e.g. banks) can escape full audit scrutiny by third-party CPAs or CPA firms, who may express “no opinion” on the financial statements even if their audits raise concerns.
EBSA has no enforcement authority over these third-party auditors, but is able to refer CPAs who perform significantly deficient audit work to state licensing boards for potential disciplinary action.
EBSA is developing proposed changes to strengthen the requirements for limited scope audit certifications from banks and insurance companies and developing changes to the Form 5500 financial statements and schedules to improve reporting of alternative and hard‐to‐value assets and to improve group health plan reporting.
While EBSA will continue to contract with qualified non-governmental organizations to provide audit services for the Thrift Savings Plan (TSP), the agency also requested $2,000,000 in FY 2018 to improve the Department’s focus and oversight in areas where weaknesses with TSP have been identified but not adequately mitigated.
In FY 2017, the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) negotiated $23.9 million in financial remedies on behalf of more than 11,600 victims (workers) affected by discrimination.
These results include resolving 19 cases of pay discrimination and recovering more than $10.7 million in back pay and salary adjustments for 1,605 workers.
About one-third of OFCCP’s settlements of discrimination cases now involve issues of pay discrimination, while in prior years the agency was addressing only a handful of such cases annually.
All of the pay discrimination notices of violation issued by OFCCP in FY 2017 were related to systemic pay findings.
Also, 79 percent of the construction compliance evaluations were associated with a high-impact mega construction project – up from 31 percent in FY 2015.
These projects have the potential for greater success in increasing the representation of minorities, women, individuals with disabilities, and protected veterans in skilled trades through effective recruitment and training.
In FY 2017, working through grantees in over 10 countries, ILAB provided education or vocational services to more than 17,000 children engaged in or at high risk of entering hazardous child labor and helped to increase capacity to address child labor and forced labor in 22 countries.
In addition, ILAB promoted a fair global playing field for U.S. workers and businesses by helping improve the technical capacity of governments to enforce their labor laws in 19 countries.
In FY 2017, the average number of days to resolve union election complaints was 64.7 days, the lowest in the 2012-2017 period.
The percentage of targeted audits that result in a criminal case rose from 13.81 percent in FY 2012 to 18.75 percent in FY 2017.
In FY 2018, OLMS will continue leveraging relationships with the 41 national and international unions participating in the Voluntary Compliance Partnership (VCP) program.
This program is designed to improve compliance with filing deadlines, increase electronic filing, and ensure that unions are adequately bonded.
By doing so, VCP enables investigators to devote more of their time to high priority investigations.
OLMS continues to implement patches to its 17-year old electronic Labor Organization Reporting System (e-LORS), which cannot support common functions like content search.
Also, much of the system was “hard-coded,” necessitating manual fixes to the source code that increase the risk of errors leading to a system crash.
OLMS’ ability to fully leverage available data is hampered by the absence of an automated data analytics capability; the use of a client server architecture limits the ability to leverage cloud and mobile computing; and the risk to system security increases as the legacy application remains constant when the threat space changes.
Re-employment of injured workers under the Federal Employees’ Compensation Act (FECA) program declined from 91.5 percent in FY 2012 to 88.0 percent in FY 2017 due, in part, to the expiration of the Presidential Protecting Our Workers and Ensuring Reemployment (POWER) Initiative that helped focus federal agencies on return-to-work efforts.
Results for key Longshore and Energy program measures continued positive trends.
First payment of compensation within 30 days for non-Defense Base Act cases rose from 85 percent in FY 2012 to 88 percent in FY 2017.
For cases not sent to the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health when a hearing was not held (approximately 70 percent of all claims), the average number of days from filing date to final decision was reduced from 177 in FY 2012 to 169 in FY 2017.
The average number of days to issue Black Lung claims increased 262 days from FY 2012 to 332 days in FY 2017.
However, OWCP managed to reduce pending claims by 17 percent over the past two years.
The Black Lung program faces a challenge with the sustainability of the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund.
The Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 extended the current coal excise tax rates of $1.10 per ton on underground-mined coal and $0.55 per ton on surface-mined coal, but this is set to expire in December 31, 2018.
The OIG identified Monitoring and Managing Pharmaceuticals in the FECA Program as a Top Management and Performance Challenge in 2017.
In response to a dramatic increase in claimants, prescriptions, and expenditures for compounded drugs, OWCP instituted controls for compounded medication such as two-tiered pricing structure and a prior authorization process by requiring the submission of a Letter of Medical Necessity (LMN) by the claimant’s physician prior to authorization of any compounded medication, leading to a significant decrease in costs.
OWCP is currently paying approximately $2 million per month for compounded drugs.
The chargeback bill to the employing agencies dropped from $3.2 billion in Chargeback Year (CBY) 2016 to $2.9 billion in CBY 2017.
OWCP also implemented a LMN for new opioid prescriptions in August 2017.
The OIG and DOL identified Reducing Improper Payments as a DOL Top Management and Performance Challenge and Major Management Challenge, respectively, for FY 2017.
The Department is working with the Office of Personnel Management to improve communication that will address dual entitlement issues that lead to improper payments.
In addition, the program is working on a Computer Matching Agreement with the Social Security Administration (SSA) to improve the Department’s ability to reduce FECA benefits when an individual is concurrently receiving benefits from SSA.
OWCP recently implemented a prior authorization process that already resulted in a marked decreased in compounded drug claims.
Finally, OWCP hired additional staff for FECA program integrity and contracted with a data analytics firm to assist in developing technology and tools to detect and monitor inherent risk in claims, payments, and providers.
ETA has also provided a total of $694.6 million in supplemental funding in FYs 2011-2016 to support states’ efforts in implementing core integrity activities and to support modernization of state UI information technology systems, which also contribute to their ability to ensure program integrity.
Due to declining claims workloads and the resulting reductions to state administrative funding, many states have had to reduce staff and are struggling to meet program performance standards.
The UI program requires timely payments of benefits once a person is found eligible and states may not stop benefits payments without required procedures.
These structural factors create improper payments under the Federal definition, since the payments cannot be stopped until the proper due process is provided.
In addition, there are lags in the current data sources used by states to identify individuals that continue to claim benefits after returning to work, which further contribute to the inability to prevent these types of improper payments.
Finally, states are facing capacity issues in dedicating staff to conduct random work search audits.
ETA designated two states as High Priority (in need of intensive technical assistance with benefit payment issues) for FY 2016 and another four states in FY 2017.
On-site visits with each High Priority state are conducted by an expert review team made up of National, Regional, and State subject matter experts (SMEs) on the issue areas identified as needing improvement.
Each designated state receives a formal Monitoring Report that identifies findings, areas of concern, and best practices.
States are advised of the different strategies and tools and are highly encouraged to implement and use those strategies and tools to improve their program performance to be removed from this designation.
State corrective actions are developed and monitored through quarterly reviews.
To continually improve the efficiency and effectiveness of its programs, DOL uses results-based, data-driven management techniques.
Each DOL agency prepares an annual Operating Plan that details the strategies and resources it will apply to reach goals and objectives at all levels of the organization.
Departmental leaders review performance against those operating plans each quarter to monitor progress and hold agencies accountable for implementing the plans, achieving milestones, and making adjustments as needed.
This review process has focused Departmental leadership on strategic management of core functions through the use of program performance and budget data.
Identification and discussion of key measures; annual and seasonal targets; and how budgets, workload, and strategies affect results have helped clarify priorities and improve performance against benchmarks.
The GPRMA requires that federal agencies identify and address in their APPs Major Management Challenges (MMCs) – defined as programmatic or management functions that have greater vulnerability to waste, fraud, abuse, and mismanagement and where failure to perform well could seriously affect the ability of an agency or the federal government to achieve its mission or goals.
MMCs may include issues the GAO identifies as high risk or Top Management and Performance Challenges for DOL identified by the Office of Inspector General (OIG).
3) Securing and Maintaining Legacy Information Systems.
17 The Deputy Secretary is the accountable official for each of these challenges, which are described briefly below.
As noted by OIG, “OMB has recognized the UI [Unemployment Insurance] program as being at high risk for improper payments…. Fraud continues to be a significant threat to the integrity of the UI program, as identity thieves and organized criminal groups have found ways to exploit program weaknesses.” 18 To address the improper payment challenges in the UI program, the Department has a continuously evolving, comprehensive strategic plan in place to work with states that targets the largest root causes of UI improper payments.
A key component of the Department’s strategic plan is the establishment of a national UI Integrity Center (Center), operated by the National Association of State Workforce Agencies (NASWA), through a cooperative agreement with the New York State Department of Labor.
However, the Department notes that certain structural issues inherent to the UI program, as identified in FY 2016 by an independent technical workgroup of UI subject matter experts, statisticians, and economists, hinder the reduction of a significant portion of the improper payments.
These structural issues, which are in place for policy reasons, include the requirement for certain due process steps before stopping payment of benefits.
These due process steps require fact finding and the opportunity to be heard by both parties.
Payments are required to continue until a final determination is made.
We also note that lags in current data sources used by states to identify claimants collecting benefits after returning to work create improper payments as well.
OIG also notes that “the Department also remains challenged in identifying the full extent of improper payments in the FECA [Federal Employees’ Compensation Act] program, and OIG continues to have concerns regarding the completeness of the claims universe used to determine DOL’s published FECA improper payment estimates.”
The concerns relate to the FECA program’s exclusion of two subsets of cases in its sampling methodology: initial payments made in the first 90 days of the compensation claim, and compensation payments made on non-imaged claims initiated prior to November 2000.
As noted in the Department’s response to the OIG reports, the Agency developed this methodology in consultation with the OIG and approved by OMB.
This methodology is also consistent with the Office of Personnel Management’s estimation methodology.
OWCP believes that including these marginal population segments would not create a statistically significant difference in its estimation, nor would it be cost effective.
Summary level information about how DOL is addressing improper payments for both programs is in the OWCP Strategic Objective 3.1 and ETA Strategic Objective 3.2 sections of the Strategic Review Progress Update in this document.
Additional information about measures and remediation efforts is available in the Improper Payments Reporting Details section of the FY 2017 AFR (https://www.dol.gov/sites/default/files/media_0/_Sec/2017annualreport.pdf).
As noted in the Strategic Review Progress Update under ETA Strategic Objective 1.1, OIG has also identified safety and security at Job Corps centers as a DOL Top Management and Performance Challenge.
ETA has taken significant steps to increase security at Job Corps Centers including implementation of a revised, Zero-Tolerance Student Conduct Policy which established higher behavioral standards, clarified the meaning of infractions, and implemented a new structure for behavioral interventions in response to minor infractions.
Job Corps has taken a strategic approach to risk management to identify centers with high levels of programmatic risk.
Those factors include safety, student conduct, and zero tolerance.
Job Corps executed announced and unannounced assessments of centers that resulted in a record number of contractual actions.
Job Corps has established the Division of Regional Operations and Program Integrity to coordinate regional operations and activities.
This new division functions to ensure consistency, strengthen quality assurance, and improve communication and coordination across the Job Corps system.
Conducted Regional Office Center Assessments (ROCAs) and added unannounced Center Culture & Safety visits to enhance center oversight.
Leverage the contract process and the contract itself as a vehicle to drive behavior change, increase compliance, and measure accountability.
In 2011, OIG cited numerous problems with Job Corps’ cost per student metrics.
To improve cost controls, ETA has revised the award and incentive fees for Job Corps Operations Contracts.
Center operations contracts with a cost and technical incentive were first awarded in 2015, and currently seven are performing.
It is too soon to determine the impact of the cost incentive.
Since the initial awards, ETA increased the minimum cost incentive fee (for savings) from two percent to three percent and increased the maximum cost incentive fee from 3.6 percent to 4.0 percent.
Cost sharing for under- or overruns was also revised from 20 percent (contractor) and 80 percent (government) to 50 percent each.
Increasing the cost incentive fee and creating equity in the cost sharing will further incentivize contractors to control costs, thereby creating savings for the Government.
Securing data and information systems is a continuing challenge for all federal agencies, including DOL.
This challenge is further compounded by the presence of legacy information technology systems in DOL’s operating environment.
These legacy systems represent increased risk of hardware or software failures, complications from non-support for end-of-life products, and the unacceptable lack of current security patches.
Identifiable information.
Whether the negative impacts are man-made, as is the case with hackers of an unpatched legacy system, or simply the natural failure of unsupported, irreplaceable legacy system components, the risks are significant.
Given the realities outlined above and taking full account of DOL’s business environment and resource constraints, DOL remains committed to this effort to address the highest risk legacy systems, applying focused and purposeful attention to developing and implementing appropriate mitigation strategies.
The Chief Evaluation Office (CEO) in the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy works closely with agency staff to design, fund, and implement program evaluations.
The results from evaluations inform policy and improve DOL’s performance-based management initiatives in support of the GPRMA.
For more information see http://www.dol.gov/asp/evaluation/.