This document explains how the Department of Labor (DOL) improves the lives of American workers through the management of its agencies and programs.
As required by the Government Performance and Results Modernization Act of 2010 (GPRMA), it provides information on planned and actual performance and progress in achieving goals and objectives identified in the DOL FY 2018-2022 Strategic Plan.
Also as required by GPRMA, it includes a Strategic Review Summary of Progress (Summary) that assesses evidence of progress, challenges, and risks for each objective at one of three levels: Noteworthy Progress, Adequate Progress, or Area for Improvement.
The next four chapters present the Summary, an Analysis and Future Plans section, and measure tables with targets and results for three Strategic Goals and one Management Goal.
These four goals are supported by eighteen Strategic and Management Objectives (1.1, etc.—each the responsibility of one DOL component agency) that reflect DOL’s vision and mission.
This report, which also serves as DOL’s FY 2021 Annual Performance Plan, updates measures and targets for FY 2020 and establishes targets consistent with those reflected in the FY 2021 Congressional Budget Justification.
Some measures are deleted or modified between annual updates.
To present the most current information, this plan provides complete information for the budget year measures only—in this case, those retained or added in FY 2021—including actual performance for the five preceding years, if available.
Strategic objective measure tables list applicable measures, targets, results, and status (whether or not results reached or exceed the target, indicated by Y or N).
Where “baseline” appears in the target cell for new indicators, no data were available for establishing a numerical target.
If results improved over the prior year but did not reach the target, “I” appears in the status cell.
The last column identifies the level of success and plans to improve results.
Vision: Helping American workers gain and hold good, safe jobs.
Mission: To foster, promote, and develop the welfare of the wage earners, job seekers, and retirees of the United States; improve working conditions; advance opportunities for profitable employment; and assure work-related benefits and rights.
1.1 Create customer-focused workforce solutions for American workers.
1.2 Provide veterans, service members, and their spouses with resources and tools to gain and maintain employment.
1.3 Develop evidence-based policies, practices, and tools to foster a more inclusive workforce to increase quality employment opportunities for individuals with disabilities.
1.4 Provide timely, accurate, and relevant information on labor market activity, working conditions, and price changes in the economy.
1.5 Formulate policies and initiatives to promote the interests of working women.
2.1 Secure safe and healthful working conditions for America’s workers.
2.2 Prevent fatalities, disease, and injury from mining, and secure safe and healthful working conditions for America’s miners.
2.3 Secure lawful wages and working conditions for America’s workers.
2.4 Improve the security of retirement, health, and other workplace-related benefits for America’s workers and their families.
2.5 Promote fair and diverse workplaces for America’s federal contractor employees.
2.6 Promote a fair global playing field for American workers and businesses by effectively enforcing U.S. trade agreements and combating global child labor and modern slavery.
2.7 Promote union financial integrity, transparency, and democracy.
3.1 Provide workers’ compensation benefits for workers who are injured or become ill on the job.
3.2 Support states’ timely and accurate benefit payments for unemployed workers.
Improve human resources efficiency, effectiveness, and accountability.
Provide modern technology solutions that empower the DOL mission and serve the American public through collaboration and innovation.
Maximize DOL’s federal buying power through effective procurement management.
Safeguard fiscal integrity, and promote the effective and efficient use of resources.
ETA Strategic Objective 1.1 – Create customer-focused workforce solutions for American workers.
The Employment and Training Administration (ETA) oversees the provision of employment assistance, labor market information, and education through programs authorized by the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act of 2014 (WIOA)—for adults, dislocated workers, youth, Job Corps, employment services authorized by the Wagner-Peyser Act, amended by title III of WIOA, and National Programs; Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) authorized by the Trade Act of 1974, as amended; Foreign Labor Certification activities authorized by the Immigration and Nationality Act; the Senior Community Service Employment Program authorized by the Older Americans Act; and Apprenticeship programs authorized by the National Apprenticeship Act.
By Sept 30, 2021, the Department of Labor (DOL) will have enrolled 1 million new apprentices.
Insurance (UI) program, authorized under the Federal Unemployment Tax Act and Title III of the Social Security Act (see Strategic Objective 3.2).
The public workforce system contributes to our nation’s global competitiveness and economic productivity by providing lifelong learning opportunities and a wide range of employment services.
The workforce system provides critical services to a broad array of customers at all skill levels.
These services include career counseling, case management, assessments that identify transferable skills, and skill development.
The DOL Office of Inspector General (OIG) identified “Helping Adults and Youth Succeed in the Labor Market” as one of DOL’s Top Management and Performance Challenges for FY 2019: “Past [OIG] audits have found that participants were often placed into jobs unrelated to their training or jobs that required little-to-no training.”
This challenge was identified prior to WIOA implementation.
WIOA established the credential attainment rate as one of six required primary indicators of performance and required that credentials be industry-recognized.
ETA is monitoring and analyzing credential attainment data in state reports on a quarterly basis.
For competitive grant programs, ETA designs grant competitions, where applicable, to specifically promote credential attainment.
ETA also provides technical assistance to grantees on resources and strategies for increasing the attainment of industry-recognized credentials.
For example, ETA updated its electronic tools to include information on credentials related to each occupation—from short-term certificates to apprenticeship to licensure and certifications—and the quality or value of specific certifications.
Finally, ETA and the U.S. Department of Education are working to ensure that all WIOA programs have consistent approaches to counting credentials earned.
On June 15, 2017, President Trump issued Executive Order 13801, Expanding Apprenticeships in America, which directed the Secretary of Labor to promote the establishment of industry-recognized apprenticeship programs by qualified third-party certifiers.
Issued Notice of Proposed Rulemaking regarding the process for recognizing Standards Recognition Entities (SREs).
Launched 5th Annual National Apprenticeship Week.
Awarded $183 million in H-1B Funding Opportunity Announcement (FOA) to scale apprenticeship through sector-based strategies.
Awarded FY 2018 congressionally appropriated funds to expand opportunities related to registered apprenticeship and submitted a plan to OMB and Congress for FY 2019 funds.
Announced FOA entitled, “Apprenticeships: Closing the Skills Gap.”
Implemented new tools (e.g., partnership finder) on Apprenticeship.gov.
DOL established expansion of apprenticeships as an Agency Priority Goal (APG) and is on track to meet the target of adding one million new apprentices over the four years ending September 30, 2021.
The results for this effort are displayed in the table below as the Number of New Apprentices starting FY 2018 (10/1/2017).
The WIOA transition presented an opportunity for ETA and states to improve the performance accountability framework and data collection and program reporting processes, as well as to modernize information systems.
ETA developed the Workforce Integrated Performance System (WIPS) to align performance reporting for formula and most discretionary grantees.
ETA also worked with states and Federal partners to transition the interstate wage record system to align with WIOA.
The State Wage Interchange System (SWIS) will fully replace the Wage Record Interchange System (WRIS/WRIS2) in FY 2020.
ETA’s innovative work is recognized by Results for America’s Invest in What Works Federal Standard of Excellence for building the infrastructure necessary to best use data, evidence, and evaluation in budget, policy, and management decisions.
To enhance the body of evidence on employment and training programs, ETA established new evaluation tools.
For example, ETA developed the Evaluation and Research Hub to help states understand their research and evaluation capacity prior to carrying out an evaluation.
ETA also updated its research and evaluation public-facing website and publications database, enhancing the user interface and improving the speed and scope of searches conducted on the site.
OIG continued to identify “Providing a Safe Learning Environment at Job Corps Centers” as a DOL Top Management and Performance Challenge for FY 2019 while noting that DOL finalized its multi-year, comprehensive center safety and security strategic plan in March 2019.
The plan describes Job Corps’ goals and its strategy and timelines for achieving those goals.
It also incorporates measures for assessing its performance in relationship to its goals, guiding decision-making, and establishing implementation priorities.
In FY 2018, by adding temporary staff and modernizing its business processes, ETA eliminated the backlog of Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) program investigations that resulted from the 2015 TAA Program legislation and reduced investigation processing times to alleviate long wait periods for workers looking to obtain reemployment services.
Nevertheless, median processing times increased from 50 days in FY 2018 to 61 days in FY 2019.
The increase is a result of a decrease in investigations staff due to strict agency budget constraints.
Timely resolution of permanent labor certification applications continued to improve in FY 2019.
In FY 2014, processing times for applications not selected for integrity review and applications selected for integrity review were 203 days and 452 days, respectively.
By the end of FY 2019, processing times were down to 76 days and 210 days, respectively.
However, OIG still identifies “Maintaining the Integrity of Foreign Labor Certification Programs” as a Top Management and Performance Challenge for DOL.
Increased demand across all four labor certification programs continues to raise the risk for application processing delays.
The problem is particularly acute with respect to the peak H-2B filing season.
Immediately upon opening the semi-annual H-2B certification process on January 1, 2019, there was an unprecedented demand for more than 97,800 workers requested for 33,000 available visas.
Additionally, the iCERT system experienced over 22,900 server login attempts on January 1, 2019, in contrast with only 721 attempts in approximately the same time period for the 2018 filing season.
This unprecedented volume of simultaneous system users—30 times the number compared to last year—ultimately caused the iCERT system to fail.
The iCERT system was restored by January 7 and—in conjunction with implementation of the new cloud-based Foreign Labor Application Gateway—controls were implemented for all programs to prevent recurrence.
In order to help alleviate the strain placed on DOL’s technology systems and network infrastructure, ETA’s Office of Foreign Labor Certification implemented a procedural change on July 3, 2019, to randomly assign H-2B applications based on the date of filing and the requested start date of work (instead of using a receipt date and time stamp approach).
4) facilitate greater efficiencies and cost savings by issuing labor certification decisions electronically.
In addition to IT Modernization solutions, ETA continues to pursue authorization, through its annual budget formulation process, to establish and retain fees to cover the operating costs for foreign labor certification programs.
This proposal aligns DOL with the funding structures used by the Departments of Homeland Security and State to finance their application-processing activities related to these programs.
Employing a similar model for foreign labor certifications would eliminate the need for congressional appropriations and create a funding structure responsive to market conditions.
ETA is working with the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) by participating in two workgroups to support Cross-Agency Priority Goal 8: Results-Oriented Accountability for Grants.
One workgroup is examining how agencies may better utilize Single Audit5 data, and another workgroup plans to survey agencies to gather additional information concerning performance data.
Since Program Year 2016,6 the WIOA core programs and ETA’s other WIOA-authorized and partner programs have been required to report on six WIOA primary indicators of performance: employment in the 2nd quarter after exit, employment in the 4th quarter after exit, median earnings in the 2nd quarter after exit, credential attainment, measurable skill gains, and effectiveness in serving employers.
DOL is collecting two years of baseline data for each WIOA primary indicator prior to setting targets with the states, using a statistical adjustment model as part of the negotiation process.
ETA has aligned performance reporting definitions and calculations and implemented a streamlined performance reporting system for WIOA and other DOL partner programs.
Fourteen workforce grant programs will use a common record layout (the Participant Individual Record Layout or PIRL) to report program participant service and outcome information.
Using one system enhances data reliability and accuracy.
2) advance modern work-based learning solutions to provide high-quality alternatives to college for youth and adults.
In FYs 2018-19, almost 480,000 individuals nationwide began a registered apprenticeship program.
For participants engaged in work-based learning, ETA has provided extensive technical assistance to State workforce practitioners, including apprenticeship and business outreach staff, and Apprenticeship Directors to share information on how resources like WIOA formula grants and TAA funds can be used to support work experience, pre-apprenticeship programs, on-the-job training, and supports for apprentices.
One outcome from this technical assistance was the development of an apprenticeship toolkit for workforce practitioners and dissemination of a Fact Sheet explaining the TAA benefits that may coordinate with Apprenticeship participation.
In FY 2019, OTAA provided technical assistance documents and webinars to help states to leverage apprenticeships in serving TAA recipients.
States have begun to explore flexibilities to support services and training for apprentices using WIOA, TAA, business contributions, and community partner funds.
The President’s 2017 Executive Order, Buy American and Hire American, touches on three temporary worker programs for which DOL shares administrative or enforcement responsibilities: H-1B, H-2B, and H-2A.
Within the “Hire American” directive, the Order calls on DOL to fully enforce the protections in the laws governing temporary worker visas and to prevent any abuse of these programs.
Additionally, the President directed federal agencies to review all nonimmigrant visa programs and propose new rules and guidance to eliminate fraud and abuse as part of his initiative to protect U.S. workers.
A continuing challenge for the foreign labor certification programs has been balancing the quality review of applications while meeting statutory and regulatory processing timeframes in the context of shifting volumes and legislative changes.
As a result of the significant increases in the filing of H-2B (temporary non-agricultural) applications in the first few weeks of calendar year 2016, only 25.5 percent of applications were resolved within 30 days before the date of need.
In response, in FY 2017, ETA’s Office of Foreign Labor Certification (OFLC) implemented an Interoperability Plan designed to facilitate reassignment of staff to respond to shifts in application filing—leading to an improvement in timely H-2B processing to 73.9 percent by the end of FY 2019.
In FY 2019, OFLC implemented a new case processing system for the H-2B program.
Due to projections of increased incoming applications and the multi-stage implementation of a new IT system, however, the target for FY 2020 has not increased.
The Veterans’ Employment and Training Service (VETS) coordinates efforts to assist veterans seeking employment and employers seeking skilled workers—to provide America’s veterans better job opportunities.
VETS administers several programs to meet the employment and education needs of veterans, transitioning service members, and eligible spouses.
The Jobs for Veterans State Grants (JVSG) program provides funding to states for Disabled Veterans’ Outreach Program (DVOP) specialists and Local Veterans’ Employment Representative (LVER) staff.
The Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program (HVRP) addresses one of the most vulnerable populations by reintegrating homeless veterans into society and the workforce.
DOL’s Transition Assistance Program (TAP) Employment Workshop and Career Exploration and Planning Track (CEPT) Workshop provide tools to support a successful transition from military to civilian employment.
Pursuant to the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA) and the Veterans’ Employment Opportunities Act of 1998, VETS investigates complaints received from individuals who believe their employment or reemployment rights under USERRA and federal employment preference rights under Veterans’ Preference were violated.
Lastly, VETS operates the Honoring Investments in Recruiting and Employing (HIRE) Veterans Medallion Program—the only federallevel veterans’ employment award that recognizes a company or organization’s commitment to recruiting, employing, and retaining veterans.
In PY 2017, the Jobs for Veterans State Grant Program transitioned to the standard WIOA measures and discontinued the use of the intensive services measure.
During PY 2018, JVSG placed 58 percent of participants into unsubsidized employment by the second quarter after program completion.
In FY 2018, DOL revised the Transition Assistance Program Career Technical Training Track curriculum and changed the name to the Career Exploration and Planning Track.
CEPT is an additional optional two-day workshop focused on exploration of apprenticeships and industryrecognized credentials for transitioning service members and their spouses; this course supplements the required DOL Employment Workshop.
The National Defense Authorization Act of 2019 (NDAA) was signed into law in August 2018.
The Act makes revisions to TAP, including the structure of the existing Employment Workshop and CEPT courses.
In FY 2019, VETS awarded a new TAP services contract.
In response to the HIRE American Military Veterans Act of 2017, VETS established the HIRE Vets Medallion Program.
In 2018, VETS established the standard operating procedures and criteria for the award and presented demonstration medallions to 239 recipients.
In 2019, 427 award recipients were announced during a ceremony held at DOL on November 6; a full list of awardees can be found at: https://www.hirevets.gov/awardees.
DVOP specialists provide individualized career services to veterans with significant barriers to employment, transitioning service members, and wounded, ill, or injured service members and their caretakers.
VETS tracks the employment outcomes for those served by DVOP specialists, such as the employment rate in the second quarter after exit for veterans.
This measure is defined by WIOA; in PY 2018, VETS collected baseline data.
HVRP effectiveness is measured in part by the successful placement of homeless veterans into meaningful employment.
In PY 2018, HVRP placed 55.9 percent of participants against a target of 61 percent.
VETS made a policy update in PY 2017 that permitted grantees to “carry over” participants into a subsequent grant cycle, if one was awarded.
This change allowed grantees to enroll participants well into the fourth quarter of the program year without fear of consequence of low-performance outcomes.
The intended outcome of the policy change was to create a stronger incentive among grantees to enroll more veterans experiencing chronic homelessness and to smooth the transition to measuring WIOA performance indicators, which examine longer-term employment and earnings outcomes than the traditional HVRP measures.
While the policy update resulted in the largest recorded annual HVRP enrollment, it also resulted in lower placement rates compared to previous years.
The total number of homeless veterans placed into employment was nearly identical to last year, but the placement rate declined due to grantees enrolling more participants late in the program year and continuing services into the following program year.
VETS manages its USERRA investigations to ensure each complaint is appropriately investigated in terms of quality and timely completion.
The quality is determined by measuring how well VETS developed and investigated the allegations in each complaint.
A sample of closed cases is reviewed quarterly; in FY 2019, 98 percent of the closed USERRA cases met VETS’ quality standard.
The Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP) promotes policies and practices, and coordinates with employers and all levels of government, to increase the number and quality of employment opportunities for individuals with disabilities.
ODEP employs strategies to help employers meet their business objectives by fully integrating the skills and talents of job seekers and employees with disabilities.
Additionally, ODEP uses data and evidence to promote the adoption and implementation of policy strategies and effective practices to increase the number and quality of job opportunities for people with disabilities.
Based on research and evaluation, ODEP develops or identifies effective policy and practices, conducts outreach to share this critical information, and provides technical assistance to all levels of government and employers to aid them in adoption and implementation.
In FY 2019, ODEP demonstrated significant success in leveraging state intermediary membership organizations to promote state-level adoption and implementation of evidence-based policies and effective practices.
ODEP produced 48 of its 66 policy outputs from this state intermediary work; through this work, state legislatures and governors across the country introduced legislation, executive orders, and other policies designed to improve employment outcomes for people with disabilities.
ODEP collaborates with state legislative and administrative intermediary organizations, through the State Exchange on Employment and Disability (SEED), to promote state-level adoption and implementation of ODEP’s evidence-based policies and practices.
ODEP faces ongoing challenges, such as budgetary constraints and competing priorities, in getting states to adopt policy recommendations and continues to explore options to overcome these challenges.
The analysis documented ODEP’s approach in engaging states to adopt policies and examine the barriers and facilitators to their implementation, and the preliminary outcomes of SEED.
ODEP will use the SEED implementation analysis to understand the implications of the steps the agency has taken so far to mitigate barriers and improve communication with the intermediaries.
In FY 2019, ODEP issued 110 implementation tools to aid entities in adopting and implementing proven practices.
For example, ODEP assisted Rhode Island in expanding its Disability Business Enterprises program.
The state has set a goal of procuring three percent of its purchases from business owners with disabilities that have been verified by agencies such as the Department of Veterans Affairs or the Social Security Administration.
ODEP also developed a number of implementation tools such as the Apprenticeship Inclusion Model (AIM) Resources Library, the AIM TA Plan Tool, and the AIM TA Site Assessment Tool to support the efforts to expand DOL’s apprenticeship programs to individuals with disabilities.
The ODEP funded Job Accommodation Network produced a series of training modules to educate supervisors and managers in workplaces on topics such as “Just-In-Time Training Module on Accommodations Individuals with Hidden Disabilities” and “Just-In-Time Training Module on Service Animals in the Workplace,” which support employers and enhance the employment opportunities for individuals with hidden disabilities and those who need service animals in the workplace.
In FY 2019, ODEP focused its investments on initiatives that are of higher priority—for example, the Retaining Employment and Talent after Injury/Illness Network (RETAIN) Demonstration Projects that will test the impact of early intervention strategies on stay-at-work/return-to-work outcomes of individuals who experience an injury or illness that could result in a work disability while employed.
ODEP is funding SEED to promote adoption and implementation of ODEP’s policies and practices at the state level, and advance ODEP’s policy development and dissemination efforts.
ODEP projects fewer policy outputs and implementation tools in 2020 than in 2019 because the RETAIN projects, which are in an early planning and pilot stage, represent a significant investment that will not immediately produce policy outputs or implementation tools at the pace produced by several prior initiatives.
BLS Strategic Objective 1.4 – Provide timely, accurate, and relevant information on labor market activity, working conditions, and price changes in the economy.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) is the principal federal statistical agency responsible for measuring labor market activity, working conditions, and price changes in the economy.
Its mission is to collect, analyze, and disseminate some of the nation’s most sensitive and important economic data to support public and private decision-making.
Like all federal statistical agencies, BLS executes its statistical mission with independence.
BLS serves the general public, the U.S. Congress, DOL and other federal agencies, state and local governments, and business and labor by providing data products that are accurate, objective, relevant, timely, and accessible, as well as technical assistance and consulting services.
Policies and decisions based on BLS data affect virtually all Americans, and the wide range of BLS data products is necessary to fulfill the diverse needs of a broad customer base.
BLS is committed to maintaining the highest level of scientific integrity in producing official statistics.
BLS complies with the Statistical Policy Directives and the Standards and Information Quality Guidelines from OMB, as well as the National Research Council’s Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency.
Together, these form the foundation for achieving and maintaining scientific integrity within and among the principal statistical agencies.
BLS also conforms to the conceptual framework of the Interagency Council on Statistical Policy’s Guidelines for Reporting Performance by Statistical Agencies and the “Strengthening Federal Statistics” chapter of the Analytical Perspectives volume in the President’s Budget.
BLS reports the full cost to produce its data products.
BLS also measures accuracy, timeliness, relevance, dissemination, and mission achievement.
These six criteria are common among statistical agencies because they represent critical aspects of a statistical program’s performance.
Using these common concepts as a basis for measuring and reporting on statistical agency outcomes helps inform decision makers more consistently about the performance of statistical agencies.
BLS reached 100 percent of the underlying timeliness, accuracy, and relevance targets for its Principal Federal Economic Indicators (PFEIs) with three exceptions over FYs 2015-19.
In FY 2019, BLS reached 75 percent (6 out of 8 measures) of the underlying PFEI relevance targets.
In FY 2019, the result of approximately 13.7 million average page views each month fell short of the target of 15 million.
BLS also measures mission achievement through customer satisfaction with the BLS website through the ForeSee Experience Index (FXI); the FY 2019 year-end score was 75, which was lower than the FY 2018 result of 77.
Please note that BLS revised its reporting methodology in FY 2019 to provide a cumulative result rather than the score for 4th quarter, as was done previously.
For comparison purposes, the cumulative score for FY 2018 was 76.
BLS continues to address the challenges posed by declining survey response rates.
Response rates are affected by competing surveys, less willingness on the part of respondents to participate, and concerns about safeguarding respondent confidentiality.
To mitigate this, BLS is upgrading strategic communications; providing additional training in survey refusal prevention techniques; offering alternative response modes to reduce the burden, including expanding electronic data interchange collection from large multi-state respondents; and leveraging alternative data sources and technologies, such as web scraping and auto coding.
BLS has been focused on updating the Consumer Price Index (CPI) geographic area sample to reflect changes in population based on the 2010 Decennial Census.
Given the breadth of the CPI Geographic Revision, adequate staffing is essential to complete this initiative in a timely manner and to maintain the accuracy of CPI data.
To mitigate the risk posed to production and data quality, BLS is proactively managing its hiring process to meet the CPI’s staffing needs for the geographic revision.
In FY 2019, BLS reached 75 percent (6 out of 8 measures) of the underlying relevance targets for all of its PFEIs, missing the Current Employment Statistics (CES) National monthly and annual series (published and unpublished) maintained, and the Producer Price Index (PPI) Indexes published monthly.
The CES program missed its target due to insufficient sample size in certain industries requiring CES to consolidate series for publication purposes.
The PPI program missed its target due to attrition in old samples and from a backlog of survey units due to staffing shortages, which led PPI to publish less detail for some industries to reflect fewer establishments and prices in the new samples.
In FY 2020, CES and PPI will adjust their outyear targets accordingly.
The BLS website has experienced a decline in page views compared to previous years.
There are several factors that could be contributing to this decline, and BLS has been investigating these factors to assess how best to move forward.
One potential factor is that BLS customers are accessing BLS data via intermediaries and 3rd party sources (for example, through a news source) rather than the BLS website directly.
Technology trends and data accessibility via modern methods, such as Application Programming Interfaces (APIs), potentially have impacted the number of website page views.
BLS uses Google Analytics to track the average number of BLS website page views each month.
While this tool is effective at providing information on the number of human visitors, one of the limitations is that it does not register and report on APIs retrieving information from its website.
Given that API usage has affected this measure, BLS explored methods and tools to track API requests in FY 2019.
BLS has established a baseline of API usage statistics in FY 2019 and will monitor trends or changes going forward.
Beginning in FY 2020, BLS will include API requests in the Dissemination measure.
The FY 2019 year-end customer satisfaction score of 75 was above the average score for federal agencies (74) that participate in the ForeSee survey, but was slightly lower than the FY 2018 BLS result of 77.
In FY 2020, BLS will continue redesigning the website to ensure that BLS data products are readily accessible and to meet users’ evolving needs and exploring methods that better capture ways in which data are accessed outside of traditional website page views.
WB Strategic Objective 1.5 – Formulate policies and initiatives to promote the interests of working women.
The Women’s Bureau (WB) conducts research to formulate practices and policies aimed at increasing economic and employment opportunities and advancement for the 75 million working women and their families in the U.S. WB identifies trends, data gaps, policy and programmatic needs, and strategic mechanisms to safeguard the interest of working women.
These efforts allow WB to inform and educate individuals and organizations at the local, state, and national levels about the issues facing women in the labor force.
In FY 2019, WB awarded nearly $1.5 million in Women in Apprenticeship and Nontraditional Occupations (WANTO) grants to three organizations to help recruit, train, and retain women in pre-apprenticeship and apprenticeship programs.
The WANTO grants will help women pursue careers in manufacturing, infrastructure, cybersecurity, health care, and other industries.
Additionally, WB awarded nearly $2.5 million in Re-Employment, Support, and Training for the Opioid Related Epidemic (RESTORE) grants to organizations in five states to provide skills development and employment services to women affected by the opioid crisis.
Also in FY 2018, in collaboration with VETS and the White House, WB launched an interactive map to assist military spouses in identifying options for obtaining and transferring professional licenses and credentials.
In conjunction with the White House, WB held a national convening and 10 regional listening sessions to discuss approaches to expanding access to child care for working families.
In February 2019, the WB Director moderated a discussion at the White House with Advisor to the President Ivanka Trump and leading child care experts to share innovative ideas and models on how to expand access to child care.
WB initiated a new project to produce a public-use database of child care costs based on local area data.
Additionally, in 2018, in conjunction with the White House, Council of Economic Advisers, U.S. Small Business Administration, and U.S. Department of the Treasury, WB began developing an e-learning platform to connect women business owners with the tools and skills they need to scale their businesses.
In FY 2019, WB conducted research and developed new products to help expand opportunities for women to access and thrive in apprenticeship programs; assist women affected by opioid abuse in enhancing their skills and obtaining family-sustaining jobs; reduce occupational licensing barriers to employment for military spouses; assess working families’ access to affordable, quality child care; and expand opportunities for women in entrepreneurship.
WB exceeded its target for the number of policy and research deliverables, producing a total of 21 issue briefs, reports, and other resources.
In FY 2020, WB will recognize its 100th anniversary and continue to highlight the work the Administration is doing to advance opportunities for women and serve as a reliable and up-to-date source of information and research on Administration initiatives and data on women and the workforce.
WB plans to develop web resources depicting the results of the American Time Use Survey Leave and Job Flexibilities Module, and undertake one or more inter-agency collaborations to search public-health datasets for information shedding light on the connections between women’s use of opioids and labor force participation.
In FY 2021, WB will streamline programs and eliminate grant funding to reduce duplication with other grants elsewhere in the Department.
OSHA Strategic Objective 2.1 – Secure safe and healthful working conditions for America’s workers.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) was established by the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 with the mission to ensure employers provide American workers safe and healthful working conditions.
OSHA ensures the safety and health of America’s workers by setting and enforcing workplace safety and health standards; delivering effective enforcement; providing training, outreach, and education; and encouraging continual improvement in workplace safety and health.
Through these efforts, OSHA aims to reduce the number of worker illnesses, injuries, and fatalities and contribute to DOL’s broader goals of promoting the competitiveness of our nation’s workforce.
Fall protection continues to be the number one violation cited by OSHA.
Falls are the leading cause of death in the construction industry and account for 20 percent of all serious injuries.
By September 30, 2021, increase trenching and excavation hazards abated by 12 percent compared to FY 2017 through inspections and compliance assistance at workplaces covered by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA).
OSHA also has national and local emphasis programs, as well as a strategic plan to direct Compliance Safety and Health Officers (CSHOs) to establishments with the most significant risk of fall hazards.
In FY 2019, preliminary data show that OSHA conducted 10,570 inspections of worksites as a result of these programs, and 8,096 fall-related hazards were abated.
OIG has identified “Protecting the Safety and Health of Workers” as a DOL Top Management and Performance Challenge for FY 2018.
OSHA’s greatest challenge is determining the best use of its resources to help protect worker safety and health (particularly in high-risk industries), verifying the abatement of construction hazards, and preventing the underreporting of injuries by employers.
OSHA has taken measures to address this challenge.
OSHA employs a triage process on severe injury reports to focus inspection resources on the most serious cases.
Those employers who are not inspected after submitting a severe injury report are still expected to conduct a rapid response investigation and submit a report to OSHA that describes the root cause of the event causing the injury or illness.
Employers are also expected to take steps to address any identified hazards.
Severe injury reporting data are also used to identify unknown occupational hazards.
The agency addresses these hazards through enforcement, consultation, and outreach.
OSHA’s enforcement policies require documentation of hazard abatement and training of enforcement staff in abatement verification policies and procedures.
In addition, OSHA incorporates various inspection procedures to verify abatement of hazards, identify employers with past violations, and support the issuance of repeat and willful citations.
In FY 2019, OSHA’s Compliance Assistance Specialists and other field staff conducted more than 1,000 outreach activities that addressed OSHA’s recordkeeping and reporting requirements.
Citations issued to employers for not complying with the severe injury and illness reporting requirements increased from 764 in FY 2016 to 909 in FY 2019.
The number of severe injury reports has also increased each year since the reporting requirements went into effect.
In FY 2016, OSHA received 10,816 severe injury reports; by FY 2019, that number had increased to 12,245—an increase of more than 13 percent.
In FY 2019, OSHA worked with OMB to implement a Customer Experience Plan related to the Voluntary Protection Programs (VPP) that included both a plan and public-facing dashboard.
In FY 2020, OSHA will continue to publish existing customer service data.
OSHA also plans to continue progress toward implementation of the VPP Customer Service Dashboard, pending design decisions and the implementation of and sufficient response to the VPP Customer Service Survey.
OSHA’s compliance officers strategically prioritize enforcement resources to target high hazard industries and irresponsible employers.
Corporate Wide Settlement Agreements and the Severe Violator Enforcement Program are additional tools OSHA uses to target establishments that require improvement across a number of locations.
In FY 2018, OSHA established an APG to increase hazards abated in trenching and excavation by 10 percent from the FY 2017 baseline.
In FY 2019, OSHA exceeded this target by abating 2,710 hazards.
OSHA has renewed the APG for FY 2020- 2021, setting a more ambitious goal of 12 percent above the FY 2017 baseline.
OSHA seeks to reduce injuries and fatalities by targeting workplaces where there are potential trenching/excavation hazards for inspections as well as outreach.
OSHA will work with industry associations and the public utilities who hire a significant portion of the work to create a public-private effort to impact these fatalities.
Increased inspection activity focusing on trenching/excavation hazards should result in fewer injuries and fatalities—the ultimate outcome for DOL and American workers.
Safety training is a critical piece of OSHA’s strategic effort to prevent workplace fatalities, injuries, and illnesses.
OSHA conducts training programs at the OSHA Training Institute (OTI), administers the OTI Education Centers Program, and administers the Outreach Training Program.
In FY 2019, OSHA provided training for 1,627,368 individuals.
VPPs are another important component of OSHA’s compliance assistance activities.
This program recognizes employers and workers who have implemented effective safety and health management systems and who maintain belowaverage injury and illness rates in their respective industries.
The program also brings OSHA and employers together to cooperatively and proactively prevent future fatalities, injuries, and illnesses.
In FY 2019, OSHA completed 361 VPP approvals and re-approvals.
OSHA also administers and enforces 23 whistleblower protection statutes that protect workers who experience retaliation for reporting violations of the law.
Principally, this includes Section 11(c) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, which prohibits employers from retaliating against employees who bring workplace hazards to the attention of the employer or the Agency.
The additional 22 whistleblower protection provisions protect workers in a variety of industries who speak out against unsafe and/or unlawful behavior, including violations of transportation, consumer protection, or financial reform laws.
In FY 2019, OSHA completed 3,091 docketed whistleblower investigations, awarding more than $16 million to complainants, including 34 reinstatements.
MSHA Strategic Objective 2.2 – Prevent fatalities, disease, and injury from mining, and secure safe and healthful working conditions for America’s miners.
The Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) protects the safety and health of the nation’s miners through enforcement of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 (Mine Act), as amended by the Mine Improvement and New Emergency Response Act of 2006.
MSHA’s mission is to prevent death, disease, and injury from mining and to promote safe and healthful workplaces for the nation’s miners.
This mission is carried out through the promulgation and enforcement of mandatory safety and health standards; mandated inspections, which require four complete inspections annually at active underground mines and two complete inspections annually at active surface mines; miner training; and technical compliance assistance activities.
By September 30, 2021, reduce the reportable injury rate associated with powered haulage equipment, the primary cause of miners’ injuries, by four percent per year based on a rolling five-year average per 200,000 hours worked.
MSHA has undertaken several measures to prevent mining deaths including increased monitoring and strategic enforcement through targeted inspections at mines with identified problem areas; a Pattern of Violations program; special initiatives such as focusing on inexperienced miners and miners working alone; and outreach efforts such as “Safety Pro in a Box,” which provides guidance to the metal/nonmetal mining industry on best practices and compliance responsibilities.
In FY 2019, the five-year rolling average of fatal injuries per 200,000 hours worked decreased to 0.0101, a 46 percent decrease from FY 2010, when the measure was first reported; and the lowest in U.S. mining history.
The five-year rolling average of all injuries per 200,000 hours worked decreased to 2.17 in FY 2019, which is 15 percent lower than the FY 2015 result.
Also in FY 2019, MSHA completed 86 percent of investigations of miner requests for temporary reinstatements within 20 days of receipt.
MSHA completed 92 percent of its Mine Act section 105(c) investigations of miner discrimination complaints within 60 days of receipt.
In FY 2018, MSHA revised and began to vigorously enforce its Scofflaw Program that seeks to improve health and safety conditions at active mines by leveraging the legal actions available when civil penalties are not being paid.
As of the end of FY 2019, 81 mine operators have either taken steps to enter into payment agreements or satisfied their delinquent debts, resulting in the recovery of $3.7 million in fines.
In “Protecting the Safety and Health of Workers,” a DOL Top Management and Performance Challenge in FY 2019, OIG identified a number of management and performance challenges facing MSHA, including the underreporting of injuries by operators, an increase in black lung cases, and reducing the number of powered haulage accidents.
MSHA has taken action to address each of these areas.
In the past ten years, for example, MSHA has conducted over 4,500 audits of 30 C.F.R. Part 50 (Notification, Investigation, Reports and Records of Accidents, Injuries, Illnesses, Employment, and Coal Production in Mines) to identify underreporting of injuries by operators and issued more than 4,800 citations for violations of such underreporting.
With regard to black lung disease, MSHA strictly enforces regulatory standards for both respirable coal dust and respirable silica (quartz) and has made the reduction of miners’ exposure to quartz a top agency priority.
The prevention of powered haulage accidents has been a MSHA priority since FY 2018, with an initial focus on three areas: large equipment striking smaller equipment; seat belt usage; and conveyor belt safety.
To date, the initiative has involved soliciting stakeholder input on best practices for keeping miners safe when working around powered haulage equipment.
Also in FY 2019, MSHA developed guidance for reducing inspection hours in active, non-producing mines, which will be incorporated into the annual refresher training provided to agency enforcement personnel.
In FY 2019, MSHA exceeded its target to reduce the five-year rolling average of fatal injuries per 200,000 hours worked.
The five-year fatality rate was 0.0101, the lowest in U.S. mining history.
MSHA also exceeded its target to reduce the all injury rate based on a five-year rolling average per 200,000 hours worked.
The five-year injury rate was 2.17, which is 15 percent lower than the FY 2015 result.
Reduced fatalities and injuries are attributed to a number of factors beyond enforcement, including better use of technology, safer mining practices, and improved training.
MSHA’s Agency Priority Goal reflects efforts to reduce workplace hazards that represent a primary cause of fatalities and injuries.
In FY 2019, accidents caused by powered haulage equipment, which is a category of moving machines used to transport miners or haul materials in mines, contributed to 32 percent of fatalities and 9 percent of total injuries.
MSHA continues to promote best practices to prevent injuries and fatalities associated with powered haulage accidents.
The Powered Haulage Initiative website includes pages highlighting large equipment blind spots, seat belt usage, and conveyor safety.
Inspectors at all field offices continue to focus on conveyor safety during mine visits, discussing best practices and distributing hardhat stickers and brochures.
Also, in FY 2019, MSHA identified fatalities related to contractors as an area of focus and has begun a compliance assistance initiative to address these deaths.
MSHA continues to promote its outreach efforts through social media, the Agency’s public website, msha.gov, and quarterly stakeholder calls.
Lastly, MSHA awarded nearly $400,000 in grant funding through its Brookwood-Sago grant program to support education and training opportunities for miners that focused on powered haulage safety.
The Wage and Hour Division (WHD) is responsible for administering and enforcing laws that establish the minimum standards for wages and working conditions.
WHD enforces and administers the minimum wage, overtime pay, and child labor provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA); the prevailing wage requirements and wage determination provisions of the Davis Bacon Act and Related Acts, Service Contract Act, Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act, Walsh-Healey Act, and Copeland Act; the wages and working conditions under the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act; the Family and Medical Leave Act; the Employee Polygraph Protection Act; and the garnishment provisions of the Consumer Credit Protection Act.
WHD also enforces the field sanitation and temporary labor camp standards in agriculture and certain employment standards and worker protections of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
Collectively, these labor standards cover most private, state, and local government employment.
They protect over 143 million of America’s workers in more than 9.8 million establishments throughout the U.S. and its territories.
WHD focuses its enforcement and compliance assistance efforts to achieve the greatest impact.
The agency uses data and evidence to identify areas and industries in which serious violations may be widespread and often organizes educational and enforcement initiatives in those areas.
WHD complements enforcement with outreach and education to employers.
By partnering with industry and employers to produce meaningful compliance assistance, WHD can increase compliance with the laws it enforces.
By combining enforcement with education, more workers in this country can obtain stable and secure income and responsible businesses can succeed.
WHD maximizes resources by using an evidence-based, multi-pronged approach to improve compliance, including compliance assistance to employers; investigations in high-violation industries; engagement and education of private and public stakeholders; and the use of press releases, its website, and social media to inform employers, workers, consumers, and the public about its work and about the resources available to them.
These methods have produced record-breaking results.
In the last 5 years, WHD has helped more than 1.3 million workers and recovered more than $1.4 billion dollars in back wages.
In FY 2019 alone, WHD collected over $322 million in back wages—a record for the second year in a row.
WHD enforcement actions in FY 2019 found, on average, approximately $1,025 for each employee due back wages.
In FY 2018, WHD updated its approach to enforcement in nonimmigrant visa programs, such as H-1B, consistent with the President’s Executive Order 13788 on Buy American and Hire American.
WHD conducted more than 3,700 outreach events and presentations in FY 2019, providing critical information and compliance assistance to thousands of employers, employees, and industry associations.
This represents a new record for the number of events conducted in a single year (for the second year in a row), reflecting the agency’s commitment to providing employers the information and the tools they need to comply with the law.
WHD increased agency-initiated investigations from 27 percent of all investigations in FY 2010 to 52 percent of all investigations in FY 2019.
Data show that agency-initiated investigations have particularly positive results for low-wage workers who are less likely to file complaints and are more likely to work in industries with a high risk for violations.
WHD also focused its investigations and resources better than ever on workplaces with violations.
The percentage of agency-initiated investigations with no violations fell to 13 percent, down from 30 percent in FY 2010, while the percentage of complaint investigations with no violations remained at 14 percent, down from 26 percent in FY 2010.
This indicates that agencyinitiated investigations have been as accurate as complaint-based investigations in finding employers with violations.
In FY 2018, WHD launched the Payroll Audit Independent Determination (PAID) program, which provided an efficient avenue for employers to resolve specific types of violations of the FLSA and for employees to timely receive the back wages they are due.
As one of several compliance tools, the value of the self-audit tool derives from its potential to deliver more back wages to employees with significantly fewer enforcement hours than a full investigation.
The self-audit tool did not replace investigations, but rather, provided another option for district offices to effectively manage resources and broaden their reach within the regulated community.
During FY 2019, WHD concluded 69 PAID cases, representing less than one percent of all compliance actions.
A total of $3,987,895 in back wages was paid to 7,394 employees in PAID cases.
PAID self-audits returned more back wages to employees in less time than compliance actions overall.
During FY 2019, back wages per case for PAID cases ($57,796) were more than four times the average back wages per compliance action ($11,999).
Back wages per enforcement hour for PAID cases ($2,871) were nearly ten times greater than back wages per enforcement hour for all compliance actions ($297).
During FY 2019, PAID self-audits averaged 20 hours of investigator time per case as compared to 40 hours per compliance action agency-wide.
PAID self-audits reach employers that WHD would not typically prioritize for enforcement, including government establishments and industry sectors with higher wage occupations.
The program design and implementation are built on existing protocols and practices and involve a significant outreach effort.
Moving forward, the agency will continue using and evaluating self-audits, consistent with the goals, priorities, and data-driven practices of the agency.
WHD’s legacy IT systems are outdated.
Although WHD has implemented various solutions to fund certain technology enhancements, it remains at a high risk of outdated technology eroding efforts to modernize business processes and carry out the range of compliance strategies necessary to address compliance systemically.
The agency is focused on building a modern, multi-tier, cloud-based system using low-code business process management solutions.
The agency will achieve significant efficiency gains while eliminating the costs and risks of operating outdated systems.
WHD continues to balance enforcement with compliance assistance.
WHD will continue to track the percent of agency-initiated violations and “no violation” rates, as indicators of whether the agency is selecting the right employers to investigate, and will report the number of outreach hours spen in compliance assistance.
The goal is to increase impact through direct engagement with industry leaders and the use of more modern compliance assistance methods.
EBSA Strategic Objective 2.4 – Improve the security of retirement, health, and other workplace-related benefits for America’s workers and their families.
The Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA) is charged with protecting nearly 154 million workers, retirees, and their families who are covered by approximately 710,000 private retirement plans, 2.4 million health plans, and similar numbers of other welfare benefit plans.
Together, these plans hold estimated assets of $10.6 trillion.
EBSA employs a comprehensive, integrated approach encompassing programs for enforcement, compliance assistance, interpretive guidance, legislation, and research.
In FY 2019, the agency recovered over $2.5 billion for direct payment to plans, participants and beneficiaries.
EBSA’s enforcement program seeks to detect and correct violations that result in monetary recoveries for employee benefit plans, participants, and beneficiaries or secure other corrective remedies including, but not limited to, significant broad-based reforms for large plans or common service providers.
Since FY 2015, EBSA has focused on National Projects and the Major Case Enforcement Priority so that it can have the greatest impact on the protection of plan assets and participants’ benefits.
In FY 2019, EBSA spent 27 percent of total investigative staff time on Major Cases, and Major Cases produced $1.94 billion in monetary results—an increase of 83.5 percent from FY 2018.
In FY 2019, EBSA enforcement also recovered another $82.5 million through non-Major Cases.
EBSA conducted 330 national and regional compliance activities in FY 2019, a 2.5 percent increase over the 322 activities it conducted in FY 2013.9 EBSA also conducted 128 health-related national and regional compliance activities, exceeding its target of 54.
In FY 2019, EBSA’s Benefits Advisors obtained recoveries of $510 million through their efforts, contributing to the agency’s total recoveries of over $2.5 billion for direct payment to plans, participants, and beneficiaries.
Protecting Retirement, Health, and Other Benefit Plans for Workers, Retirees, and Their Families” was identified as a DOL Top Management and Performance Challenge in FY 2018.
This challenge is a function of the vast number of plans and plan actors that the agency oversees, as compared to its small staff of investigators.
The Major Case initiative leverages this small agency’s positive impact on the vast universe of regulated entities.
EBSA’s scope and workload is projected to increase as a result of the President’s October 2017 Executive Order to expand access to Association Health Plans, and the August 2018 Executive Order on expanding access to multiple employer retirement plans.
In FY 2018, EBSA issued regulatory guidance regarding Association Health Plans and other related reforms.
EBSA introduced several initiatives in FY 2018 to increase collaboration among regional offices.
These initiatives include increased emphasis on cross-regional cases, the development and deployment of subject matter experts, and the use of Specialty Teams.
Increasing collaboration among regional offices will lead to a more efficient use of investigative talent and expertise, cross-training opportunities for investigators across regions, increased consistency in enforcement policies, and better identification of issues and trends affecting the regulated community on a national basis.
Additionally, EBSA will continue to contract with qualified non-governmental organizations to provide audit services for the Thrift Savings Plan (TSP).
The agency believes it is critical to improve DOL’s focus and oversight in areas where weaknesses with TSP have been identified but not adequately mitigated, and its efforts have aimed to develop greater accountability and oversight of the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board.
In FY 2019, EBSA continued to focus its enforcement resources on National Enforcement Projects and the Major Case Enforcement Priority.
The Major Case Enforcement Priority concentrates a significant portion of the agency’s enforcement resources on cases likely to have the greatest impact on the protection of plan assets and participants’ benefits.
EBSA also employs metrics to evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of investigative time.
Because Major Case results can be highly volatile from year to year, EBSA based its enforcement measures on careful consideration of historical data.
EBSA’s FY 2019 results reflected the volatility of Major Case recoveries.
The majority of FY 2019 recoveries came from a single initiative, the Terminated Vested Participant Project (TVPP).
The TVPP cases have obtained unusually large recoveries for participants and beneficiaries while expending minimal investigative resources.
Without the exceptional results of the TVPP initiative, EBSA’s FY 2019 results would have been in line with EBSA’s projected targets for the year, rather than dramatically exceeding them.
In EBSA’s view, the TVPP results are anomalous, and TVPP recoveries will begin to decline over the next two to three years, as plan fiduciaries and sponsors improve their recordkeeping and notification practices with respect to “missing” terminated vested participants.
In addition, EBSA expects the anticipated expansion of Multiple Employer Welfare Arrangements (MEWAs) to have a substantial impact on its enforcement workload, without a corresponding increase in significant monetary recoveries.
The focus of MEWA enforcement efforts will be as much on shutting down fraudulent operations and correcting plan mismanagement as recovering plan losses.
If past history is any indication, even where losses have occurred, it will be much more difficult for the agency to recover losses from solvent breaching fiduciaries than is true of the TVPP cases.
When EBSA shuts down a fraudulent operation or stops plan mismanagement, it prevents future breaches and losses; but such preventive results are not captured in metrics focused on monetary recoveries.
As a result, EBSA expects its reported monetary recoveries to decline over the coming years.
OFCCP recognizes the importance of striking a balance between its enforcement efforts and compliance assistance activity.
The agency is strengthening contractor engagement through the use of additional compliance resources, tools, and national training.
OFCCP’s workforce right-sizing process, which reduced FTE from 729 in FY 2013 to 478 in FY 2019, lowered operating costs while continuing to improve consistency and collaboration in compliance evaluations; expand compliance assistance and education to contractors; and obtain record remedies to workers in compliance evaluations.
During this time, OFCCP restricted hiring to filling critical vacancies in response to attrition, eliminated all but three GSA lease vehicles, and improved overall cost center management.
In a 2016 study of OFCCP compliance evaluations (GAO-16-750 Equal Employment Opportunity: Strengthening Oversight Could Improve Federal Contractor Nondiscrimination Compliance), the Government Accountability Office (GAO) recommended that OFCCP make changes to its contractor scheduling list to focus its compliance efforts on contractors with the greatest risk of noncompliance.
OFCCP implemented this recommendation by releasing the FY 2019 scheduling list, which includes one-third of the establishments from the top three industries that had the highest rate of discrimination violations.
GAO also recommended that OFCCP improve information provided to federal contractors to enhance their understanding of their requirements as well as provide timely and uniform training to OFCCP staff.
In response, OFCCP is issuing on a rolling basis improved contractor compliance materials, and revising its staff training and development protocols.
OFCCP has changed to a strategy of conducting more focused reviews of compliance, prioritizing larger systemic cases, and maximizing remedies to reach more contractors.
This has enabled OFCCP to achieve speedier resolutions and corporate wide conciliations.
In FY 2021, OFCCP will continue to recognize high performing contractors through programs such as the Voluntary Enterprise-wide Review Program (VERP).
VERP enables the agency to blend its compliance evaluation and compliance assistance activities to work with high performing contractors toward a mutual goal of sustained, enterprise-wide (corporate-wide) compliance, outside of OFCCP’s neutral establishment-based scheduling process.
This Program helps OFCCP be more effective in achieving its mission to protect workers, promote diversity, and enforce the law by focusing on contractors less likely to be in compliance.
The FY 2019 performance measure counted systemic pay discrimination as a percent of all pay discrimination cases and ignored non-pay discrimination.
The new FY 2020 performance measure will include all forms of discrimination (hiring, compensation, promotions, and terminations) across all industries and will be computed based on all closed cases.
For the construction industry, OFCCP is replacing mega construction projects as the primary source for scheduling compliance evaluations to a neutral, more robust scheduling methodology.
The agency created a database of Notification of Construction Award Program (NCAP), which collects information on all federally assisted construction projects of $10,000 or more.
The NCAP data are then merged with data on prime contractors and subcontractors.
The scheduling list will be compiled using neutral criteria and released in FY 2020.
OFCCP will track progress on this effort through a new measure, Number of Construction Evaluations Completed.
The Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB) promotes a fair global playing field for workers and businesses in the United States and around the world by enforcing trade commitments, strengthening labor standards, and combating international child labor and forced labor.
ILAB seeks to ensure that countries enforce their labor laws and adhere to internationally recognized worker rights so as to prevent exploitation of workers abroad and any risk that American workers are harmed by global competition based on such exploitation.
The majority of ILAB’s work involves engagement with other U.S. government agencies; foreign governments; and employers, workers, and other civil society organizations to strengthen the rule of law with respect to labor rights globally and support the creation of quality jobs in the United States.
In FY 2019, ILAB engaged with 62 countries in technical cooperation through technical assistance, technical exchanges, or other forms of collaboration.
In FY 2019, ILAB-funded initiatives provided education or vocational services to more than 9,000 children engaged in or at risk of entering hazardous child labor and provided livelihood services to more than 11,000 families to reduce their reliance on child labor.
These initiatives increased capacity in over 35 countries to address child labor, forced labor, and other violations of workers’ rights through outcomes such as improved labor laws and policies, implementation of child labor monitoring systems, and institutionalization of training and research on these topics.
In FY 2019, ILAB staff engagement with partners and ILAB-funded technical assistance led to improved enforcement of labor laws and labor-related trade commitments to the United States in 12 countries.
ILAB worked closely with interagency partners, governments, businesses, and workers to improve enforcement of labor-related trade commitments.
This included standards on child labor, forced labor, and worker rights issues in Colombia, Cote d’Ivoire, Ghana, Honduras, Jordan, Mexico, and Peru.
In addition, ILAB closely monitored, analyzed, and reported on the efforts of over 150 countries and territories to adhere to their international commitments to address the worst forms of child labor.
ILAB published this work in its 2018 Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor (Trade and Development Act or TDA Report) and an accompanying Sweat & Toil smartphone app.
The TDA Report also included over 1,900 suggested actions for countries to take to improve their efforts to eliminate child labor—1,200 of which focus on the need to strengthen laws and enforcement.
In addition, ILAB released Spanish and French versions of Comply Chain, a smartphone mobile application to help employers in the United States and abroad develop robust social compliance systems to identify risks and remediate violations of child labor and forced labor in their supply chains.
ILAB lacks long-term trend data on standard outcome indicators across its portfolio of technical assistance projects, with the exception of its longstanding child labor country capacity indicator.
However, ILAB has long-term data on a number of output indicators, such as number of children and households served through its child labor technical assistance projects.
In the area of ILAB’s child labor research, ILAB collected and made available to the public for additional analysis datasets (from 2014 to present) containing information on child labor and forced labor worldwide from ILAB’s congressionally-mandated reports.
The datasets contain summaries of countries’ efforts to eliminate child labor, statistics on child labor, information on goods produced with child labor or forced labor, information on laws countries have adopted and international conventions they have ratified related to child labor, and suggested actions governments can take to end child labor.
ILAB is assessing whether it can shift additional resources into conducting additional internal analysis of this data to determine trends over the years.
In FY 2018, ILAB piloted several metrics in an effort to better capture and analyze the outcomes and outputs of its work.
In FY 2020, ILAB implemented a broad mix of metrics to better capture the impact of its work, including four quarterly measures and three annual measures.
In the FY 2020 Operating Plan, ILAB introduced a new outcome indicator that focuses on how high-intensity ILAB engagements with foreign governments and multilateral institutions correlate with actions to improve protection of labor rights.
Outcomes achieved in FY 2019 include the adoption of new or improved laws, regulations, or policies against child labor in Burkina Faso, Burma, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Suriname, Uruguay, and Vietnam; the establishment of electronic data systems to improve labor enforcement in Colombia, Costa Rica, Haiti, Philippines, and Vietnam; the launch of child labor monitoring systems or tools in the mining sectors of Colombia, Ghana, and Haiti; institutionalization of labor inspectorate training or materials in Argentina, Belize, Costa Rica, Colombia, Peru, Philippines and Malaysia; and institutionalization of data collection on child labor in Mexico, Panama, and Vietnam.
In FY 2020, ILAB anticipates that the passage of the Administration’s top trade priority, the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), will require significant focus on the USMCA labor provisions, both through monitoring and technical assistance, as well as additional enforcement responsibilities.
In FY 2021, ILAB plans to streamline operations by eliminating new grants in areas not related to USMCA, and reducing staff levels.
The Office of Labor-Management Standards (OLMS) administers the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959, as amended, and related laws.
These laws primarily establish safeguards for union democracy and union financial integrity and require public disclosure reporting by unions, union officers, union employees, employers, labor consultants, and surety companies.
By several measures, OLMS has done very well in harnessing limited resources—appropriations decreased from $47.8 million and 313 FTE in FY 2007 to $41.2 million and 194 FTE in FY 2019.
OLMS reduced the number of days to resolve union officer election complaints from 79 days in FY 2011 to 65.6 days in FY 2019.
The percentage of targeted audits that result in a criminal case rose from approximately 15 percent in FY 2011 to 19 percent in FY 2019, and the e-filing rate for required reports increased from 21.4 percent in FY 2011 to 85.3 percent in FY 2019.
OLMS continues effective target-setting practices, factoring in staff availability and caseload to roll up targets from the regions into the agency’s overall target.
In FY 2019, OLMS continued leveraging relationships with the 43 national and international unions participating in the Voluntary Compliance Partnership program.
This program is designed to improve compliance with filing deadlines, increase electronic filing, and ensure that unions are adequately bonded—enabling OLMS investigators to devote more of their time to high-priority investigations.
OLMS continues to implement patches to its 20-year-old Electronic Labor Organization Reporting System (e.LORS), which uses a client-server architecture that prevents the ability to leverage cloud and mobile computing technologies.
Also, much of the system, over time, has been disjointedly “hard-coded,” to meet maintenance needs necessitating piecemeal add-ins to the source code that increase the risk of a total system crash.
The system is characterized by an inflexible application architecture, constrained complex workflow processes, retention of specifically skilled contractors, outdated application software, and an inefficient database design.
OLMS’ ability to fully leverage and share available data publicly is further hampered by the absence of an automated data analytics capability.
Finally, due to its age, the e.LORS system remains increasingly vulnerable to cybersecurity incidents.
OLMS is participating in a joint DOL proposal to obtain dedicated funding to accomplish these modernization tasks through the federal Technology Modernization Fund.
Timely resolution of election complaints accelerates restoration of democratic voice and a democratically-operated union.
OLMS continues to finetune methods for further reducing its elapsed days, including use of a team-based approach for handling election cases when resources permit; and early engagement with the Office of the Solicitor in cases that may result in litigation.
Targets balance the changes OLMS can make to its processes with outside factors that can affect resolution of these types of cases, such as cooperation from the unions being investigated.
OLMS’ investments in expanding the number forms available electronically, outreach to facilitate electronic filing of union financial reports, and a rule that required electronic filing of the Form LM-3 and LM-4 reports for fiscal years beginning on or after January 1, 2017, led to great progress in transparency.
OLMS will continue this effort by making additional LM forms available for electronic filing over the course of FY 2020.
OWCP Strategic Objective 3.1 – Provide workers’ compensation benefits for workers who are injured or become ill on the job.
The role of the Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs (OWCP) is to provide workers’ compensation benefits for workers injured or ill on the job.
OWCP implements four statutory federal workers’ compensation programs that provide monetary, medical, and return-to-work benefits for work-related injuries and illnesses to federal employees, coal mine workers, nuclear weapons workers, longshore and harbor workers, contractors serving overseas, and certain other designated employee groups.
The agency adjudicates claims, administers the benefit funds authorized for these purposes, and provides oversight of claims resolutions by responsible parties.
Results for key Longshore and Energy program measures continued positive trends.
In the Longshore program, the first payment of compensation within 30 days for non-Defense Base Act cases remained at or above 88 percent from FY 2015 to FY 2019.
For Energy program cases not sent to the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health when a hearing was not held (approximately 70 percent of all claims), the average number of days from filing date to final decision improved from 169 in FY 2015 to 155 in FY 2019.
In FY 2019, OWCP reduced the number of black lung claims pending more than 365 days from 20 percent at the beginning of the Aged Case Elimination (ACE) Project to 12 percent, and the pending claims inventory was reduced by 7 percent.
Also in FY 2019, the Black Lung program issued more Proposed Decisions and Orders (PDO) than claims received.
The average number of days to process Black Lung claims increased from 234 days in FY 2014 to 304 days in FY 2019.
OIG identified “Managing Medical Benefits in OWCP, Including Opioids” as a DOL Top Management and Performance Challenge in 2019.
In response to a dramatic increase in the number of claimants, prescriptions, and expenditures for compounded drugs from FY 2011 to FY 2016, the Federal Employees’ Compensation Act (FECA) program instituted controls for compounded medication such as a tiered pricing structure and a prior authorization process by requiring the submission of a Letter of Medical Necessity (LMN) by the claimant’s physician prior to authorization of any compounded medication.
The FECA program’s actions led to a significant decrease in expenditures on compounded medication from an average of $23.1 million per month during the first half of 2016 to less than $56,000 per month for all of FY 2019.
The program also implemented an LMN for new opioid prescriptions in August 2017 and established an APG for FY 2018-19 to address this issue.
In FY 2019, preliminary results showed that OWCP reduced initial opioid prescriptions with durations over 29 days for federal employees with work-related injuries by 64 percent from the FY 2016 baseline.
In the FY 2017 audit of DOL’s consolidated financial statements, independent auditors identified a need for improvement in the review of Energy program liability estimates as a material weakness.
In FY 2018, OWCP hired a federal actuary to ensure that the Agency utilizes technical knowledge regarding actuarial science.
OWCP resolved the issues behind this finding and received a clean audit opinion during FY 2018 and FY 2019.
In FY 2020, OWCP will continue the development and implementation of the OWCP Workers’ Compensation System, an integrated claims processing and management system for all four programs.
Also in FY 2019, OWCP supported the President’s Management Agenda (PMA) Cross-Agency Priority (CAP) Goal 4 Improving Customer Experience (CX).
OWCP identified dashboards and measures, conducted and analyzed the CX organizational self-assessment, met with OMB-identified industry organizations with proven CX practices, and developing an action plan to increase OWCP’s CX capacity and CX program maturity.
In FY 2020, OWCP will continue reporting its quarterly CX results, conduct the annual CX selfassessment and identify its CX strengths and opportunities for improvement, and implement its High-Impact Provider Action Plan to achieve FY 2020 milestones.
In FY 2020, the Energy program will continue to analyze and audit home health care billing practices to identify fraud and abuse.
The Energy program completely centralized all program integrity activities and new standards for FY 2020 reflect the program’s emphasis on these audits and ongoing reporting.
The Black Lung program will continue to focus on efficient claims inventory management with a special emphasis on claims pending for more than 365 days.
ETA Strategic Objective 3.2 – Support states’ timely and accurate benefit payments for unemployed workers.
The federal-state Unemployment Insurance (UI) program, authorized under the Federal Unemployment Tax Act and Title III of the Social Security Act, provides temporary, partial wage replacement for unemployed workers, providing them with income support when suitable work is unavailable.
To be eligible for benefits, unemployed workers must meet eligibility requirements established by state laws that conform to federal law, including that they are involuntarily unemployed, and are able, available, and actively seeking work.
The federal role is to set broad policy for the program, establish performance measures and standards, provide technical assistance and training to states, monitor state performance, promote conformity and compliance of state laws and operations with federal law; and fund the administration of state and federal UI programs.
States that do not meet minimum standards are required to develop corrective action plans.
Timely payment of UI claims improved over the last five years, with the percentage of intrastate first payments made within 21 days increasing from 83.3 percent in FY 2015 to 85.8 percent in FY 2019.
In FY 2019, detection of recoverable overpayments improved to 57.4 percent from 54.1 percent in FY 2018.
In FY 2019, the UI system made significant progress in reducing improper payments.
The UI improper payment rate dropped to 10.61 percent – over two percentage points below the FY 2018 level of 13.05 percent.
DOL has a new APG to reduce the rate to 9.0 percent (below the 10 percent threshold set in the Improper Payment Elimination and Recovery Act) by the end of FY 2021.
States are required to make timely payments of UI benefits “when due” and they may not stop payments without due process.
These structural factors, though essential to the program, create improper payments under the federal definition.
In addition, there are lags in the data used that further contributes to states’ inability to prevent these types of improper payments.
DOL has established an APG for reducing improper payments.
Many states continue to struggle with high improper payment rates due to nuances in their state laws and limited resources.
There are also improper payments that are out of their control to prevent.
3) preventing fraud by providing data sources to states, including a front-end identity proofing tool through its Integrity Data Hub.
In its September 2017 report, ETA Should Do More to Help States Curtail Unemployment Insurance Tax Avoidance Practices, OIG reported that 24 states do not have sufficient trust fund reserves to withstand a normal recession for a one-year period.
ETA is also promoting state adoption of strategies to address prohibited tax avoidance schemes.
ETA continues to work aggressively with states to implement a dynamic Integrity Strategic Plan that includes strategies and actions to address the leading root causes of UI improper payments and fraud.
The plan focuses on providing intensive services to the states with the highest rates that also have the greatest impact on the national rate.
While work search errors are challenging, this error rate experienced a significant decline of 1.7 percentage points compared to the 2018 result.
Other root causes for improper payments also declined from FY 2018—Benefit Year Earnings errors declined by 0.13 percentage points and Separation errors declined by 0.23 percentage points.
In October 2017, ETA collaborated with the UI Integrity Center in the implementation of an Integrity Data Hub (IDH) that allows participating states to submit UI claims for cross-matching and analysis to support the detection and prevention of UI fraud and improper payments.
One of the initial datasets offered through the IDH is the Suspicious Actor Repository (SAR) that enables states to share specific data elements associated with known fraudulent UI claims.
Twenty-one states are now regularly cross-matching UI claims against IDH data sources and are submitting suspicious claimant data to the SAR.
States have reported a total of $9.08M in prevented fraudulent benefits through their use of IDH.
During the past year, the IDH has continued to evolve in both functionality and state participation.
Additional functionality that provides for the collection of expanded claims data, foreign Internet Protocol detection, and cross-matching capability to identify UI claims data being used across multiple states has been implemented and is available to states through the IDH.
In FY 2020, the IDH will further expand its functionality by providing an identity verification service, fraud alerting capability, and a centralized incarceration cross-match for state use.
Additionally, ETA is working with states to address work search improper payments and to help claimants comply with state work search requirements.
Developing a model state work search law and framework that builds on the Pathway to Reemployment Framework and encouraging states to consider the adoption of the broader array of work search activities that support rapid reemployment and support claimant compliance with work search requirements, including documentation.
Implementing improved communication and messaging to claimants on UI eligibility requirements in simple and understandable media such as requiring UI claimants to view a short eligibility video online prior to their first weekly claim.
The video should outline claimant reporting requirements, provide information on how to report any earnings accurately, and how to properly document work search activities.
Working with DOL’s Chief Evaluation Office to pilot and evaluate messaging tools with states using behavioral science techniques focused on improving claimant compliance with work search requirements to prevent improper payments.
Recommending that states require claimants to document work search activities at the time of filing a continued claim for benefits.
This recommendation helps prevent a state from paying a benefit to a claimant who fails to provide work search evidence.
Additionally, this practice also provides the state with effective tools to help claimants with suitable job referrals and reemployment services.
Recommending that states expand acceptable state work search activities to support the goal of reemployment.
UI work search policy should reflect the agency goal of the earliest possible reemployment for unemployed workers and include activities such as registering for work, online workshops, Reemployment Services and Eligibility Assessment (RESEA) appointments, and attending job fairs or state-sponsored workshops that support rapid reemployment.
Providing guidance to states for leveraging the RESEA program to support claimant compliance with work search requirements through continued reinforcement and understanding of work search requirements, development of a reemployment plan that includes specific work search activities that meet work search requirements, and referrals to suitable employment.
In FY 2019, 34 states met or exceeded the first payment timeliness target.
Additionally, 28 states improved their first payment timeliness performance over the previous year.
ETA continues to provide intensive technical assistance and enhanced monitoring to states that are designated “High Priority” for poor overall performance including first payment timeliness.
OASAM Strategic Objective M.1 – Improve human resources efficiency, effectiveness, and accountability.
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management’s (OASAM) Office of Human Resources (OHR) provides leadership, guidance, and technical expertise on all human capital areas to DOL.
The OHR Director serves as DOL’s Chief Human Capital Officer (CHCO).
OHR oversees accountability reviews and implements accountability processes to improve HR efficiency, effectiveness, and compliance with laws and regulations.
The average time to hire a new employee increased from 98 calendar days in FY 2018 to 106 calendar days in FY 2019.
The Hiring Manager Satisfaction Index score decreased slightly from 74 percent in FY 2018 to 72 percent in FY 2019 and is now further below an 80-85 percent target.
By September 30, 2021, the Department of Labor (DOL) will transition from multiple administrative service providers to one for each functional area with a central reporting authority.
Between FY 2017 and FY 2019, DOL reduced its servicing HR Offices from 13 to 10 by consolidating the OSHA and MSHA HR Office with OASAM HR and transferring Atlanta HR staff and services to other OASAM Regional HR Offices.
In FY 2019, DOL continued its efforts to centralize HR services across the country by realigning all OASAM personnel performing services in regional HR Offices to the OASAM OHR.
OASAM HR Offices were assigned DOL agency-wide staffing assignments instead of geographically-based assignments to support the shift toward shared services.
In addition to realigning staff and closing HR Offices, DOL imposed corporate controls through the CHCO Office on employee movements, misconduct, performance management, and administrative investigations.
These actions have helped to shape future realignment plans.
DOL continues to make progress under the Enterprise-wide Shared Services initiative as a means to support further consolidate the HR portfolio.
The initiative established a future-state organizational design for DOL HR and a governance structure for shared services implementation.
Implementation of an HR shared services model at DOL will create greater consistency in the delivery of corporate HR products and services across DOL, reduce overall HR costs, gain efficiency in HR service delivery through economies of scale, and improve efficiency and effectiveness of HR service delivery through corporate strategies.
The implementation of an effective shared services solution for HR service will permit DOL program agencies to focus time and resources on mission-oriented outcomes.
By the end of FY 2020 Q1, there will be only three servicing HR Offices— OASAM, OIG, and SOL—after ETA, BLS, and OASAM have successfully consolidated their HR Offices into one OHR.
In support of DOL’s Strategic Plan and the Agency Priority Goal (APG), OASAM continued a four-phase implementation plan to transition DOL HR to an Enterprise-wide Shared Services delivery model in FY 2020.
A realigned HR service delivery model will improve strategic human capital planning, create greater consistency in the delivery of HR products and services across DOL, reduce overall HR costs, gain efficiency in HR service delivery through economies of scale, and improve efficiency and effectiveness of HR service delivery.
The implementation of an effective shared services solution for HR service delivery will permit DOL program agencies to focus time and resources on mission-oriented outcomes.
The shared services solution will allow agencies to shift from low-value to high-value work in support of the PMA CAP Goal 6.
Specifically, HRC will improve hiring outcomes and reduce burden on hiring managers particularly for mission critical positions.
OASAM will also support PMA CAP Goal 5, Sharing Quality Services, by adopting federal-wide HR solutions where feasible.
OASAM also achieved its FY 2018-2019 APG by beginning implementation of an enterprise-wide shared services model for DOL core administrative functions.
In FY 2020-2021, OASAM has established an APG to transition from multiple administrative service providers to one for each functional area with a central reporting authority.
The first phase, “Stand-up and Strategy,” involved significant engagement with staff at all levels (i.e., functional leadership, front-line staff, customers, and senior leadership) to build a collaborative partnership between providers and customer agencies.
The project team created a governance structure to inform senior leadership decision-making in terms of prioritization, phasing, and other key components of shared services delivery.
The Shared Services Executive Committee (SSEC) is supported by the HR Functional Project Team, comprised by the servicing HR Officers.
Through the collaboration and communication of these groups, the future-state HR organization design and concept of operations (CONOPs) were developed and approved in FY 2019.
The transition to DOL Enterprise-wide HR Shared Services that began in FY 2019 involved a planned and phased implementation of HR providers by service/functional area (i.e., talent acquisition, compensation and benefits, HR policy, and workforce development) into the new DOL HR organizational design.
This transition is aided by the “Discovery,” “Analysis and Planning,” and “Implementation” phases.
Discovery” includes conducting a DOL HR process inventory and prioritizing processes for business process reengineering efforts; and workforce and workload analysis, which will inform the organizational design details and future-state DOL HR staffing plan.
Analysis and Planning” includes planning and documentation for the future-state staffing plan and establishment of revised HR processes based on the prioritized business process reengineering efforts.
Implementation” includes execution of the transition to the new DOL HR structure utilizing all of the analysis and planning activities and documentation developed.
Each service/functional area will progress through the remaining phases, which conclude in Q1 FY 2020 with full implementation of all HR services/functional areas into the new DOL OHR organization.
Stakeholder engagement will continue throughout execution of this transition strategy to ensure that all HR leadership, practitioners and agency customers are informed and able to provide valuable input to drive continuous process improvement.
Currently, OASAM provides HR services for over 95 percent of the entire DOL population, which is an increase from 77.5 percent at the end of FY 2017.
OHR also supports PMA CAP Goal 3, People: Workforce of the Future by working toward improving employee performance management and engagement; reskilling and redeploying human capital resources; and enabling simple and strategic hiring practices.
These actions will enhance alignment and strategic management of the workforce.
OASAM Strategic Objective M.2 – Provide modern technology solutions that empower the DOL mission and serve the American public through collaboration and innovation.
OASAM’s Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) provides IT leadership, products, and support for DOL.
OCIO plays a critical leadership role in driving reforms in systems development, better managing technology spending, and succeeding in achieving real, measurable improvements in mission performance.
OCIO provides guidance to DOL in support of government-wide directives for capital planning, IT security, information management, and enterprise architecture.
OCIO leads the Department’s IT modernization efforts, which include consolidating, integrating, and updating the IT infrastructure (e.g., DOL legacy systems and applications); building cloud-based and mobile capabilities; implementing a DOL-wide data strategy and analytics program; modernizing DOL’s mission and business IT systems and applications; and enhancing the security of the IT infrastructure.
OCIO is building out the enterprise IT services platform to provide the necessary capabilities and enhancements to support agency mission and business applications, and providing the necessary resources to assist agencies in transitioning applications to the modernized infrastructure.
OIG identified a DOL Top Management and Performance Challenge on “Securing and Managing Information Systems,” identifying deficiencies in configuration management, contingency planning, third-party oversight, risk management, and continuous monitoring.
To address the OIG audit findings related to timely removal of separated DOL federal staff from IT systems, DOL established a provisioning and de-provisioning capability that automates the creation and disablement of network accounts.
Since October 2018, over 450 employees have been de-provisioned after leaving DOL.
DOL also implemented tools provided by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security for monitoring network traffic and conducting regular scans for security vulnerabilities.
DOL has consistently implemented its information security program with policies and procedures aligned with NIST standards (See FY 2019 FISMA Metrics).
Advanced Network and Data Protections”: 1 out of 3.
DOL maintains the highest rating of “Managing Risk” on the FY 2019 Cybersecurity Risk Management Assessment.
This recognizes that DOL institutes required cybersecurity policies, procedures, and tools, and actively manages its cybersecurity risks.
DOL faces IT management challenges in the areas of maintaining its current systems, modernizing or replacing legacy systems, and moving additional systems into the cloud.
OCIO has made progress by launching the DOL Cloud, implementing the DOL IT platform, and continuing consolidation and optimization of data center facilities.
OCIO has successfully transitioned central data center operations to a new co-location facility in order to enhance network and computing resources, provide greater access to leading cloud service providers, and provide greater availability of commercial IT service offerings for future consideration.
With ever-evolving technologies, DOL is consistently challenged to maintain an effective workforce and meet skills gaps in the competitive IT security sector.
OCIO has developed a personnel plan to obtain staff with qualifications, competencies, and training necessary to meet strategic and administrative objectives.
The plan involves transitioning all IT Specialist positions under a centralized reporting structure to better manage and retain the necessary skills and competency levels, to effectively implement formalized training and development programs, and to standardize career paths and compensation structures.
In parallel with these activities, DOL continues consolidation of DOL IT operations and has established a future-state organization design.
The new design provides a revised DOL IT governance structure that will effectively include all agencies in the IT investment decision-making process.
DOL is developing an IT shared services model to enhance delivery of IT capabilities at an enterprise level and allow DOL to leverage economies of scale, ensure adherence to federal standards and requirements, solidify CIO oversight, and provide an enhanced customer experience.
The shared services initiative will support DOL’s Strategic Plan and the Administrative APG and help agencies continue to shift from low-value to high-value work in support of PMA CAP Goal 6.
OASAM will also support PMA CAP Goal 5, Sharing Quality Services, by adopting federalwide IT solutions where feasible.
To meet these goals, in FY 2018, OASAM began a four-phase implementation plan to transition DOL IT beyond its current infrastructure capacity to an Enterprise-wide Shared Services delivery model, incorporating bureau mission-application support.
The project team created a governance structure including SSEC supported by the IT Functional Project Team (IT FPT), which comprised the senior agency IT leads and other subject matter experts.
3) IT governance.
In early FY 2019, through engagement and collaboration of the IT FPT and working groups, the future-state DOL IT organizational design and associated Concept of Operations was finalized.
DOL began the phased transition to DOL Enterprise-wide IT Shared Services to shift the accountability and authority of Agency IT from DOL agencies to a central authority under the CIO.
The first waves of administrative staff realignment from DOL agencies to OASAM started on October 1, 2019 with the successful transition of ETA IT into the DOL OCIO.
All DOL agencies will undergo a phased transition to the OCIO in FY 2020.
The Demand Management Process was developed with the goal of collecting, analyzing, and prioritizing new OCIO projects in the context of other ongoing and planned work.
This process will increase collaboration, transparency, and strategic planning in regards to OCIO projects and will help streamline workflows to catalog, evaluate, and plan future work.
In addition, the IT governance structure was finalized.
3) IT Performance Review Board (PRB) to review and evaluate performanc and results of IT investments against projected cost, schedule, performance, and expected mission benefits.
The IRB was formally kicked off on April 29, 2019 and the EARB was formally kicked off on October 10, 2019.
In December 2019, OCIO is kicking off the PRB.
In FY 2019, OCIO continued to support PMA CAP Goal 1, IT Modernization, by embracing modern technology solutions such as migrating major applications to the Cloud; working to continue to reduce cybersecurity risks; and building a modern IT workforce.
DOL will further develop the common enterprise platform to refine enterprise-wide standards, processes, and governance.
By leveraging a common platform, DOL will eliminate redundancies and accelerate IT modernization; increase accessibility; and enhance security.
OCIO also supports CAP Goal 2, Data Accountability & Transparency, by enabling agencies to make data available more quickly and to conduct advanced analytics through its Enterprise Data Analytics Platform.
In alignment with these CAP goals, OCIO embarked on a multi-year effort to create the DOL IT Platform to include cloud-hosted case management and data analytics capabilities.
In FY 2019 alone, these capabilities enabled DOL to launch the Correspondence Tracking System, Apprenticeship.gov, WHD CAPS 14c Data Entry Form, SeasonalJobs.dol.gov, ETA Foreign Labor Application Gateway (Visa Modernization Phase 1), OFCCP Compliance Management System, and the DOL OneWeb initiative.
In partnership with National Technical Information Service, OCIO established an enterprise data analytics capability that provides users with custom reports and visualizations, data from across organizational silos, and self-service analytics to enable evidence-based mission work.
In FY 2019, DOL deployed applications including the ETA Office of Foreign Labor Certification’s FLAG System.
In addition, DOL is developing a CXO dashboard to provide DOL executives with access to key administrative data.
Over the next 12 months, OCIO will deliver CXO dashboards to OHR, the Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO), the Business Operations Center, the Departmental Budget Center, and the Performance Management Center.
As part of OCIO’s push towards Cloud services, 23 applications (or approximately 10 percent of all applications) are being hosted in the DOL Cloud.
In FY 2019 OCIO supported CAP Goal 10, Federal IT Spending Transparency, by establishing a Technology Business Management community of practice to agree on IT Tower and Cost Pool categorization guidelines, and beginning the plan to develop service costs by aligning application costs to the new OCIO organizational structure.
In FY 2020, DOL will develop a roadmap and summary milestone schedule to enable alignment to related government-wide use cases, align data, and begin mapping financial data to services.
OCIO achieved a network and application services uptime of 99.96 percent in FY 2019 and will continue to maintain a network and application service uptime of 99.90 percent in FY 2020.
OASAM’s Business Operations Center (BOC), Office of the Chief Procurement Officer (OCPO) provides leadership, guidance, and oversight of all procurement policy and services.
To promote efficiencies, accountability, decrease costs, and more fully implement category management, DOL is consolidating all Department procurement activities within OASAM.
DOL met the FY 2019 OMB Category Management target for addressable spend through Best in Class (BIC) solutions with 100 percent.
Additionally, DOL exceeded the FY 2019 Category Management target for the cumulative percent reduction in unmanaged spend by shifting 36.2 percent of “unmanaged” spend to “managed” spend far exceeding the established 10 percent OMB goal for “tie 0” (unmanaged spend) contract reduction.
DOL was very close to the FY 2019 OMB Category Management target for Spend Under Management (SUM)—meeting 97.3 percent of the target.
DOL is utilizing the Enterprise-wide Shared Services initiative as a means to support further consolidation of the procurement portfolio to improve the efficiency, effectiveness, and quality of DOL’s acquisition environment.
To date, the initiative has established a future-state organizational design for DOL procurement and established a governance structure for shared services implementation.
Implementing a shared services model for procurement services will facilitate enforcement of procurement legislation, regulations, and policies and improve the consistency of acquisition services.
The shared services model will help DOL buy smarter and as a single enterprise, thereby increasing DOL’s BIC procurement vehicle usage and SUM goals.
Moreover, moving to a shared services environment will eliminate redundancies, increase efficiency, and make available funding that could be used in additional procurements.
The shared service environment will improve DOL’s buying power, leading to significant reductions in the price of goods or to better services at lower costs.
Finally, realigning procurement services will help enhance DOL’s compliance with federal government initiatives (e.g., category management and Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act).
In support of DOL’s Strategic Plan and the Administration APG, OASAM began a four-phase implementation plan to transition DOL procurement services to an Enterprise-wide Shared Services delivery model in FY 2018.
By centralizing procurement functions, DOL will achieve economies of scale; gain managerial oversight and efficiencies to more rapidly implement government-wide procurement directives; enforce procurement legislation, regulation, and policies; and strategically plan for customer needs.
An effective shared services solution for departmental procurement services will allow DOL program agencies to focus their resources on program delivery and mission outcomes.
The shared services solution will allow agencies to shift from low-value to high-value work in support of PMA CAP Goal 6.
An effective shared services solution will also leverage the government’s buying power, making it possible to obtain significant reductions in the price of goods and receive better services at lower costs.
Cost savings may then be redirected toward high-priority mission activities.
OASAM will also support PMA CAP Goal 5, Sharing Quality Services, by adopting federal-wide procurement solutions where feasible.
In the first (“Stand-up and Strategy”) phase, the project team created a governance structure to inform senior leadership decision making in terms of prioritization, phasing, and other key components of shared services delivery.
The SSEC is supported by the Procurement Functional Project Team, comprised of Heads of Contracting Authority (HCAs) for each of the procurement service providers.
Through the collaboration and communication of these groups, the future-state procurement organization design and concept of operations (CONOPs) were developed for leadership review and decision in FY 2019.
Remaining phases in the implementation of procurement providers by agency into the new DOL procurement organizationa design are identified and described in the corresponding Strategic Objective M.1 (HR) section (Discovery, etc.).
BOC will also support PMA CAP Goal 7, Category Management, by providing and promoting DOL-wide procurement vehicles and Best-in-Class contract solutions.
These vehicles will reduce redundancy in procurement vehicles for the same services and gain cost savings with DOL buying power.
In FY 2019, BOC exceeded the target of three new DOL enterprise-wide procurement vehicles, with six vehicles.
Also in FY 2019, BOC procured 41percent percent of its addressable spend through Best-in-Class solutions.
Addressable spend is a figure determined by OMB based on an analysis of DOL’s spend broken down by Product Service Code (PSC) and North American Industry Classification Code (NAICS), compared to the PSC codes and NAICS codes of established BIC vehicles.
Where DOL’s PSC and NAIC codes overlap with BIC PSC and NAICS codes, it is determined to be addressable spend.
BOC will also support PMA CAP Goal 11, Improve Management of Major Acquisitions, by strengthening talent capabilities; using modern and innovative acquisition flexibilities; and tracking investments using program management principles.
OCFO provides financial management leadership, direction, and guidance to the Office of the Secretary of Labor and all DOL program agencies on matters arising from financial statutes, as appropriate.
OCFO oversees DOL-wide accounting, financial management, and financial system, and leads DOL’s annual audit of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
OCFO also supports Administration efforts in PMA CAP Goal 5, Sharing Quality Services.
Accurate and timely financial information demonstrates DOL’s accountability to stakeholders and facilitates data-driven operational, budget, and policy decisions.
OCFO leads DOL’s annual financial audit and efforts to address findings resulting from the audit.
OCFO works closely with agencies who have identified Significant Control Deficiencies and those susceptible to improper payments.
This work is focused on OASAM OCIO, ETA, and OWCP.
OCFO continues to work with DOL agencies to track and manage corrective action plans in response to audit findings while strengthening internal controls.
OCFO is also working with agencies to improve their overall debt collection process and to improve their budget execution process such that the amount of cancelled appropriations decreases.
OCFO continues to work on centralizing all routine transactional accounting and financial management operations across DOL to achieve greater economies of scale and improved risk mitigation.
In FY 2019, OCFO eliminated one material weaknesses from its FY 2017 audit.
OCFO does not have any material weaknesses to eliminate in FY 2020 from its FY 2018 audit.
There were no material weaknesses identified during the FY 2019 audit; therefore, OCFO will not have any to eliminate in FY 2021.
OCFO supports DOL’s programs by providing reliable, relevant, and timely financial information and analysis.
OCFO will develop and maintain integrated accounting and program management systems through modernized financial systems.
OCFO provides DOL’s managers and decision makers with the financial management tools to drive high performance and accountability, and to responsibly manage financial resources.
A measure of spending efficiency is the “percent of discretionary appropriations cancelled after the five years period of obligation authority has expired.”
This measure indicates what dollars were not spent—1.69 percent for FY 2019.
To continually improve the efficiency and effectiveness of its programs, DOL uses results-based, data-driven management techniques.
Each DOL agency prepares an annual Operating Plan that details the strategies and resources it will apply to reach goals and objectives at all levels of the organization.
Departmental leaders review performance against those operating plans each quarter to monitor progress and hold agencies accountable for implementing the plans, achieving milestones, and making adjustments as needed.
This review process has focused Departmental leadership on strategic management of core functions through the use of program performance and budget data.
Identification and discussion of key measures; annual and seasonal targets; and how budgets, workload, and strategies affect results have helped clarify priorities and improve performance against benchmarks.
The PMA sets out a long-term vision for effective and modern government capabilities, with a focus on mission, service, and stewardship.
DOL is committed to implementing the applicable CAP Goals, as discussed throughout the document.
DOL has five APGs that support four Strategic Objectives and one Management Objective; each is identified in a text box on the first page of the relevant narrative section of this report.
More information about each goal is available on Performance.gov.
The GPRMA requires that federal agencies identify and address in their APPs Major Management Challenges (MMCs)—defined as programmatic or management functions that have greater vulnerability to waste, fraud, abuse, and mismanagement and where failure to perform well could seriously affect the ability of an agency or the federal government to achieve its mission or goals.
MMCs may include issues the GAO identifies as high risk or Top Management and Performance Challenges for DOL identified by OIG.
3) Securing and Maintaining Legacy Information Systems.
12 The Deputy Secretary is the accountable official for each of these challenges, which are described briefly below.
As noted by OIG, the estimated improper payment rate for the Unemployment Insurance (UI) program remains above the 10 percent threshold set in the Improper Payment Elimination and Recovery Act, and fraud “continues to be a significant threat to the integrity of the UI program, as identity thieves and organized criminal groups have found ways to exploit program weaknesses.”
OIG also recognizes the structural challenge of making timely benefits while ensuring claimants meet eligibility requirements each week.
A payment may later be determined improper as a result of the receipt of information that was not available at the time the payment was required to be made or as a result of the requirement that claimants be provided with due process prior to stopping payment of benefits.”13 Yet another source of improper payments is the lag in data sources used by states to identify claimants collecting benefits after returning to work.
DOL established an APG of reducing improper payments below 10 percent by September 30, 2021 and will continue aggressive work with states to address root causes.
DOL facilitated the implementation of the UI Integrity Data Hub (IDH) in FY 2018.
Since its inception, the IDH continues to evolve in both functionality and state participation.
Twenty-one states are now regularly cross-matching UI claims against IDH data sources and have reported $9.08 million in prevented fraudulent benefits through their IDH use.
In addition to the Suspicious Actor Repository available on the IDH since 2018, new functionality was implemented in FY 2019 on the IDH such as the collection of expanded claims data, foreign Internet Protocol detection, and crossmatching capability to identify UI claims data being used across multiple states.
In FY 2020, ETA and the UI Integrity Center will continue to encourage state use of the IDH as well as further expand its functionality by providing an identity verification service, fraud alerting capability, and a centralized incarceration cross-match.
In addition, the UI Integrity Center provides experts to identify customized solutions to state-specific causes of improper payments.
ETA is also actively working with states on a wide array of strategies to address work search improper payments.
These include development of a model state work search law, implementation of improved communications and messaging of work search requirements, and leveraging the Reemployment Services and Eligibility Assessments program to support claimant compliance with work search requirements through continued reinforcement and understanding of work search requirements, development of a reemployment plan that includes specific work search activities that meet state work search requirements, and referrals to suitable employment.
Additional information is in the ETA Strategic Objective 3.2 section of this document and the Improper Payments Reporting Details section of the FY 2019 AFR.
As noted in the Strategic Review Summary of Progress under ETA Strategic Objective 1.1, OIG also identified safety and security at Job Corps centers as a DOL Top Management and Performance Challenge.
ETA’s Job Corps has taken significant steps to increase security at Job Corps centers, including implementing a revised Zero-Tolerance Student Conduct Policy that established higher behavioral standards, clarifying the meaning of student conduct infractions, and implementing a new structure for behavioral interventions in response to minor infractions.
Job Corps has taken a strategic approach to risk management to identify centers with high levels of safety risk based on an assessment of certain factors.
Those factors include, but are not limited to, student conduct and zero tolerance implementation.
Job Corps also executed Regional Office Center Assessments (ROCA) that are comprehensive reviews of center operations, and Regional Office Targeted Assessments (ROTA) that are reviews of specific areas of concern at a center.
ROCA assessments include elements of center safety and security.
The findings of these two assessment approaches, and how contractors responded to them, may result in contractual actions.
Job Corps will continue using these contractor accountability tools.
Job Corps developed a framework for conducting physical security risk assessments at all of its centers.
2019, Job Corps created a comprehensive safety and security strategic plan, secured the services of physical security experts, implemented a multi-year framework for conducting security assessments, and surveyed or audited centers to ensure that they had emergency action plans and law enforcement agreements.
In FY 2020, Job Corps will conduct at least 20 physical security assessments and document physical security risks at centers, prioritize centers based on the severity of assessed vulnerability or risk, and request and allocate available funds for addressing center vulnerabilities and risks.
Additional centers will be assessed in FY 2021.
Job Corps will continue to provide and install security controls at its centers.
These controls include (1) surveillance equipment; (2) access control systems; (3) enhanced lighting; (4) walk-through and handheld metal detectors; and (5) barriers, fencing, and other ways to manipulate the physical environment to control and detect undesired behaviors.
For new centers or centers undergoing major rehabilitation, Job Corps is incorporating physical security considerations into the design process.
Taken together, the actions described will minimize center risks and achieve a desired level of protection for students and staff.
As noted in the Strategic Review Summary of Progress under OASAM Strategic Objective M.2 and OCFO Strategic Objective M.4, OIG has identified information security and management as a DOL Top Management and Performance Challenge.
OIG notes that while DOL has made progress, challenges remain.
These include information technology governance, information security, and modernization (replacing legacy systems and moving into secure cloud services).
Legacy systems increase risk of hardware or software failures from non-support for end-of-life products and the lack of current security patches.
Degradation of any of DOL’s mission-critical systems would imperil mission delivery, with potential impacts to worker safety, inviolability of sensitive economic data, or the confidentiality of citizens’ Personally Identifiable Information.
Whether the negative impacts are man-made, as is the case with hackers of an unpatched legacy system, or simply the failure of unsupported, irreplaceable legacy system components, the risks are significant.
DOL remains committed to its effort to address the highest-risk legacy systems by applying focused and purposeful attention to developing and implementing appropriate mitigation strategies.
DOL OCIO, in partnership with all agencies, has developed a modernization plan for IT systems and applications.
It has determined modernization sequencing plans for DOL systems and applications based on prioritization criteria that include years of operation, level of obsolescence and extent of end-of-life technologies, operational performance analysis, and overall operational and security risk assessment.
OCIO will continue collaborating with agencies in executing system modernization efforts to align with IT and cybersecurity requirements, adapt the DOL Cloud environment, and leverage the common IT platforms.
This will ensure both security of infrastructure and information and increased performance and capability in mission and business systems and applications.
DOL has established additional measures to focus on the ongoing performance and effectiveness of IT security operations.
To secure DOL’s sensitive information and improve data integrity, OCIO will focus on modernizing and standardizing DOL’s infrastructure.
Following government-wide guidance, OCIO will increase DOL’s overall IT security posture and shift IT investments to more efficient and secure computing platforms and technologies.
OCIO will create a centralized enterprise platform to improve service delivery by procuring commodity cloud services and establishing an enterprise cloud environment, allowing DOL component agencies to consume DOL cloud services.
To further secure and enhance the IT infrastructure, OCIO reduced DOL’s IT footprint through consolidating traditional data centers, promoting the use of Green IT, and reducing the cost of data center hardware.
To enhance safeguards to protect mission critical and sensitive information and reduce risk of unlawful breaches and unauthorized access, OCIO will defend the shared IT environment by rapidly completing technology assessments and using innovative technologies.
OCIO will coordinate with the Department of Homeland Security and OMB on implementing a Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation program.
DOL developed an inventory of legacy information systems and applications to be modernized.
Using key selection criteria (including congressional priority, mission criticality, application age, high value asset status, cloud or on premises hosting, web capability, public-facing, or support of DOL mission function), DOL developed a list of 50 systems to be modernized.
In FY 2020, DOL will focus on modernization of its top 10 applications.
WHD released their Electronic Case File in early October 2019 as a soft launch, with the goal of deploying to all offices in FY 2020.
This first module lays the foundation for their new case management system.
While WHD has been making incremental progress in replacing the WHISARD system, it is still dependent upon Technology Modernization Fund Platform Funding to replace WHISARD by FY 2022 as planned.
Under the direction of the Deputy Secretary in FY 2018, DOL began an aggressive approach to closing outstanding OIG recommendations, especially those older than two years.
In FY 2019, DOL began tracking the percentage of agreed-upon OIG recommendations from all previous fiscal years that have not been closed.
The baseline for this measure at the end of FY 2019 was 44 percent.
Each DOL agency has a plan to address additional open recommendations in FY 2020.
The Chief Evaluation Office (CEO) in the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy leads DOL’s evaluation agenda, working closely with agency staff to implement program evaluations to answer key questions, as detailed in the annual Evaluation Plan.
The results from evaluations inform policy and improve DOL’s performance-based management initiatives in support of the GPRMA.
Further, as described in DOL’s Evidence Submission as part of the Fiscal Year 2021 Budget submission, CEO coordinates key evidence-building activities (as per the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018, Public Law No. 115-435), including DOL’s Learning Agenda and Capacity Assessment.
For more information see http://www.dol.gov/asp/evaluation/.
Because this is primarily a planning document that uses historical information to inform future strategies and targets, it is organized around Departmental goals and measures for the budget year (FY 2021).
However, DOL is obliged to report results for measures with PY 2018 or FY 2019 targets published in the FY 2018 APR but not included in this year’s plan.
The following table lists these performance measures with their targets and results organized by Strategic Objective.
Results are not provided for measures that were collecting baseline data and therefore did not have targets.
The Department of the Interior (DOI) conserves and manages the Nation’s natural resources and cultural heritage for the benefit and enjoyment of the American people, provides scientific and other information about natural resources and natural hazards to address societal challenges and create opportunities for the American people, and honors the Nation’s trust responsibilities or special commitments to American Indians, Alaska Natives, and affiliated island communities to help them prosper.
The Department manages the Nation’s public lands and minerals, including managing more than 480 million surface acres of public lands (BLM – 246M; FWS – 96M; NPS – 85M; BIA – 56M), 700 million acres of subsurface minerals, and 1.7 billion acres of the Outer Continental Shelf.
The Department is the steward of 20 percent of the Nation’s lands, including national parks, national wildlife refuges, and the public lands.
It manages resources providing approximately 20 percent of the Nation’s energy; delivers and manages water in the 17 Western states and supplies 15 percent of the Nation’s hydropower energy; and upholds Federal trust responsibilities to 574 federally recognized Indian tribes, Alaska Native communities, and insular areas.
The Department also partners with states to manage wildlife, promote healthy forests and suppress fire, manage energy resource development (oil, gas, coal, hydro, geothermal, wind, and solar) on its lands and offshore areas, promote outdoor recreation (including hunting, fishing, bird watching, boating, hiking, and biking) and provide mapping, geological, hydrological, and biological science for the Nation.
This Annual Performance Plan and Report (APP&R) is prepared in compliance with the requirements of the Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA) Modernization Act of 2010, P.L. 111-352.
The APP&R provides an assessment of the Department’s progress toward achieving its Strategic Plan goals using a collection of key performance indicators, including the results over the past five years and targets for the next two years.
As part of this program performance assessment, the APP&R also displays corresponding funding investments and strategic actions planned for the next two years.
This information is used for planning and provides transparency and accountability to the public.
Means used to verify and validate measured values: All performance data reported in the Annual Performance Plan & Report and on http://www.performance.gov/ by the Department is subject to the data verification and validation standards initially published in 2003 and reissued in 2007 (see https://www.doi.gov/performance/data-validation-andverification).
Implementing organization heads or chief officials confirm in writing the validity of the data.
In the case of Agency Priority Goals, senior officials in the Department personally present the data on a quarterly basis to the Deputy Secretary.
Sources for the data: Program managers provide performance data based on their observations that can include extrapolations of selected representative samples or history adjusted for estimates of changing conditions.
These data are tracked and maintained in separate systems.
Following review by the providing bureau or office, data are collected, reviewed, integrated, and maintained by the Department’s Office of Planning and Performance Management in its Annual Performance Plan & Report (APP&R) that is available at the Department’s Budget and Performance Portal (www.doi.gov/bpp), and on the www.performance.gov website.
Level of accuracy required for the intended use of the data: Performance data reported in the Annual Performance Plan & Report and on http://www.performance.gov/ are used for management purposes, as a representative indicator of progress in relation to a target or goal established by the corresponding implementing organization.
Limitations to the data at the required level of accuracy: Performance data are subject to potential errors from the use of estimations and extrapolations (especially where direct measurement is impractical and/or too costly), individual observation, miscommunication, and/or failure to effectively employ the guidance described in the performance measure template or the “Indicator” description in http://www.performance.gov/.
However, based on multiple review levels and accuracy certifications, these limitations are not significant.
Annual Performance Plan and Report are described and documented in data measurement templates posted on the OMB MAX website, or described in the “Indicator” block for each Agency Priority Goal on http://www.performance.gov/.
Along with the implementing organization’s official assurance of faithfully employing the data verification and validation standards, submitted data are reviewed within the context of the scope and nature of the activity, plans, and experience to help confirm accuracy.
Following review and verification by the submitting bureau or office, the data are reviewed again (within corresponding trends and programmatic context) by the Department’s Office of Planning and Performance Management to determine if further consultation with the data provider is necessary to adjust or correct the reported data before publication.
Senior management and leadership consider this level of accuracy to be acceptable in their use of the data.
Experience in using the data, historical trend and programmatic context assessments, and bureau data quality certifications indicate that the limitations are considered minor and compensating measures are not considered necessary.
In addition to employing the Department’s data validation and verification standards, and internal reviews of submitted data, the best “test” of the data’s accuracy is in its use.
Agency Priority Goal updates are reviewed during quarterly status reviews where senior officials report their data directly to the Deputy Secretary and are made publicly available through http://www.performance.gov/.
Annual performance plan and report information is provided with historical, organizational, and supporting context to provide the reader with a fuller perspective of the data and is reviewed annually at the “strategic objective” level.
The Annual Performance Plan and Report is organized by the Mission Areas, Goals, and Strategic Objectives of the Department’s FY 2018-2022 Strategic Plan.
The APP&R provides the performance and funding details of each contributing bureau and program to present the progress made and plans for achieving each goal.
1. Identification of the relevant Mission Area, Goal, and Strategic Objective.
2. Program Performance Overview – a concise explanation of the progress made in implementing the strategic objective and attaining the related strategic goal.
This section also includes, where applicable, a summary of FY 2019 accomplishments, risks, and major management challenges.
3. Public Benefit – a review of what the public gains from our efforts.
4. DOI Strategic Plan Performance Measures – this section reports on the performance measures for achieving the goals in the Strategic Plan.
For each performance measure, actual performance is reported for FY 2015 through FY 2019.
In addition, performance targets are provided for fiscal years 2019, 2020, and 2021.
5. Bureau Supporting Performance Measures and/or Milestones – this section contains bureau-specific performance measures and/or milestones that support achievement of the goals and strategies.
For each measure or milestone, actual data are provided for FY 2015 through FY 2019.
Target data are provided for fiscal years 2019, 2020, and 2021.
6. Strategic Actions planned through FY 2021 – this section contains a bulleted list of strategic actions that highlight some of the key, significant activities planned through the budget year of FY 2021 to attain the performance targets associated with the Department’s FY 2021 budget request.
7. Key Funding Sources – this section contains estimates of funding budgeted for programs that support the goals and strategies.
Funding estimates are based on actual enacted amounts for FY 2015 through FY 2019.
Amounts for FY 2019, 2020, and 2021 are based on the Department’s 2019 appropriations, 2020 budget, and 2021 budget request, respectively.
Crosscutting principles: Senior executives provide leadership in achieving Presidential and Secretarial goals and are expected to: ensure cost-effective operations and quality service to the public; facilitate organizational cooperation and conflict resolution; ensure workplace environment conducive to employee productivity and safety; and hold individuals accountable for their actions.
Program Performance Overview: Overall, performance improved from FY 2018 to FY 2019, with three of eight strategic plan measures improving performance and four remaining level.
Water measure data improved between FY 2018 and FY 2019.
The USGS National Water Census exceeded its target due to an acceleration of progress in modeling ungaged streamflow nationally.
This progress will allow the National Water Census, through the Water Availability and Use Science Program, to focus more resources on developing methods to estimate daily water withdrawal associated with irrigation, thermoelectric, and public supply.
USGS will maintain the core functions of its missions and prioritize its activities to ensure the most essential scientific knowledge and tools are delivered to land managers, policy makers, and the public to inform decision-making.
Performance in the monitoring and assessing of the Nation’s water availability and quality shows steady improvement from FY 2015 through FY 2019.
This level of performance indicates programs are effectively applying funding toward needed research, monitoring, and assessments to inform decision makers about water availability and quality.
Public Benefit: The USGS conducts scientific monitoring and research to support management strategies that address the impacts of land use and environmental change on the availability and sustainability of resources.
The USGS supports management agencies by identifying conservation measures designed to preclude the need for listing species as endangered or threatened; recover listed species; and prevent or control invasive species and wildlife disease outbreaks.
The USGS conducts monitoring, assessments, and research to understand and predict changes in the quality and quantity of water resources in response to land-use and management scenarios.
Through advanced understanding and integrated modeling of processes that determine water availability, the USGS informs the balanced management of water resources for multiple purposes, including energy production, the sustainability of fish and other aquatic communities valued by society, and public enjoyment.
Deliver data to Federal and State managers and the public on distribution of aquatic invasive species through a Web-based platform that serves as an early warning and alert system for new invasions with tools to identify potential invaders after large storm events.
Provide data, technical expertise, and capacity to facilitate rapid response by states to new invasions of invasive plants and animals and develop species-specific controls to minimize application costs and ecological effects of treatments including targeted chemicals for Asian carp and zebra and quagga mussels, pheromones (chemical substances) for sea lamprey, and microbes to control mosquitoes, common reed, and cheatgrass.
Test and refine new molecular and remote sensing technologies including environmental DNA (eDNA), drones, and infrared remote sensing to identify invasive species early in an invasion when chances of eradication success are highest.
Support early detection and rapid response for invasive reptiles such as Burmese pythons and Argentine black and white tegus in Florida, boa constrictors in the U.S. Virgin Islands, and brown treesnakes in Guam, including the Brown Treesnake Rapid Response Team.
Improve the power of early detection tools and develop containment and control methods as part of the intergovernmental team preventing the spread of Asian carp into the Great Lakes and reducing their effects elsewhere in the Nation.
Conduct population assessments for the following: Great Lakes forage fish used by states, tribes, and provinces to manage a $7 billion commercial and recreational fishing industry; migratory birds used by National Flyway Councils to manage waterfowl hunting in the United States in cooperation with Canada and Mexico; and North American bats to understand impacts of the invasive fungal disease white-nose syndrome on control of insects that threaten agriculture and human health.
Provide maps of real-time and forecasted plant and animal activity used by resource managers to predict and manage invasive species, insect pests, wildlife disease, recreational opportunities, and habitats within and across protected areas.
Develop scientific information and tools for use by Interior bureaus and other federal, state, and tribal agencies to design and site energy, transportation, and other infrastructure to reduce conflict with wildlife and comply with laws and regulations.
Provide research and decision support tools to address the science needs of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service’s 7-year work plan for species listing decisions.
Develop science and tools to identify habitat required to maintain target populations of federally listed species, candidate species, migratory species, and other species of management concern.
Provide surveillance, diagnostics, source tracking, and management tools including vaccine development for nationally significant wildlife diseases such as avian influenza in birds, white nose syndrome in bats, and chronic wasting disease in large game species such as deer and elk.
Provide science to inform decisions about planning, managing, and using coastal areas for purposes as varied as resource management, economic development, and hazard mitigation.
Provide research and decision support tools to manage Interior lands to reduce the risks of fire, invasive species, wildlife disease, and harmful algal blooms.
Provide information on the most cost-effective and successful land and water conservation and restoration practices to support Interior lands and trust responsibilities.
Provide integrated science to improve degraded large-scale ecosystems which provide surrounding communities with services such as clean water, flood control, and natural resources for multi-faceted economies based on outdoor recreation, commercial seafood harvest, and tourism.
Conduct research on water availability; synthesizing, predicting, and reporting information at regional and national scales; enhancing the Nation’s water modeling and prediction capability; and compiling and reporting water information in ways that are useful to States.
Develop and deliver the National Integrated Water Availability Assessment (IWAA), a near-real time census of water resources that will evaluate water availability for human and ecological use, infrastructure, security, and economic optimization.
Work on a pilot Regional IWAA in the Delaware River Basin focused on the impacts of severe drought on water availability for human and ecological uses.
Implement the first full regional IWAA in the headwaters of the Colorado and Gunnison River Basin in collaboration and coordination with the Next-Generation Water Observing System (NGWOS) and the Integrated Water Prediction (IWP) program.
Continue support for completion of the National Water Census water budget component baseline estimates by 2022.
Integrate water quality models, such as those that look at changes in nutrients, water reuse, sediment, pesticides, and emerging toxins like those produced by harmful algal blooms (HABs), into national and regional IWAAs.
Evaluate water availability indicators and trends, inclusive of both quantity and quality, and the factors driving observed trends in water availability.
Develop and apply models that estimate withdrawal related to water use.
Operationalize field-scale evapotranspiration (ET) estimation techniques; develop new techniques to evaluate ecological flows in headwater streams; and continue to focus on drought research, including determining the changing importance of snowmelt in the hydrologic cycle.
Support long-term, nationally consistent monitoring of sediment, nutrients, and pesticides at 113 stream sites located on large inland and coastal rivers, as well as in small agricultural, urban, and minimally disturbed reference watersheds.
Program Performance Overview: The Department of the Interior has determined that performance toward this objective is making noteworthy progress.
Stewardship of land, water, species, and habitat performance measures showed generally stable trends over the past several years.
Programs that were able to sustain performance generally did so because of a focus of resources on high priority activities, multi-year efforts coming to fruition, or sustained results from prior-year efforts remaining intact.
The Department met or exceeded the 2019 targets for 10 of the 14 Strategic Plan performance measures in these two strategies to improve land and water health and recover and sustain species.
Favorable weather, the ability to direct funds to priority projects, additional partner support, and the deployment of invasive species strike teams and volunteers led to better-than-expected performance in many areas.
Public Benefit: The Department provides stewardship for more than 480 million surface acres of public lands, together with associated waterways and plant and animal species.
Land in desired condition is valued for recreational opportunities (including fishing and hunting), and vast open spaces, which contribute to public enjoyment and health.
Maintaining or improving the condition of stream and shoreline miles benefits fish populations, enhances wildlife habitat, and contributes to a balanced ecology.
The Nation’s forests, mountains, wetlands, grasslands, and deserts host biological diversity that is critical to overall ecosystem health, and species survival and well-being.
The Department is working to compile more information on critical habitat, estimated costs of recovery and the economic impact of its threatened and endangered species listings to provide a more complete picture to states, tribes, and the public.
Collaborate with private landowners and other conservation partners to voluntarily protect, conserve, and restore their lands to keep working lands in traditional uses while improving habitat, and water quality to benefit species.
Work with state and federal partners, using early detection, rapid assessment, containment, rapid response, and control efforts, to prevent the spread of Asian Carp into the Great Lakes and the expansion of Asian Carp’s range in the upper Mississippi, Ohio and Missouri River basins.
Conduct the environmental review of Gulf Coast restoration projects funded by Deepwater Horizon and RESTORE Act funds so that projects can move through the review process in a timely fashion.
Combat illegal wildlife trafficking through strengthening law enforcement, reducing demand for illegally traded wildlife, and expanding international cooperation and commitment to address the threat.
Develop and conduct science-based strategic and essential conservation actions to maintain sustainable populations of wildlife.
Restore and maintain habitats to support populations of native wildlife and plants.
Work with states, tribes, and other partners to conserve big game winter range and migration corridors.
Implement on-the-ground conservation in priority areas in partnership with others while providing access to energy resources and minerals.
Work closely with state fish and wildlife agencies on wildlife resource issues, including support for implementation of State Wildlife Action Plans, which establish broad-scale wildlife priorities and identify the species and habitats of greatest conservation need.
Address the population of wild horses and burros above the appropriate management level by increasing adoptions and sales, including incentivizing adoptions, seeking authority to transfer animals to local, state, and other federal agencies for use as work animals, as well as extending the use of contraceptives and spaying and neutering animals before returning them to the range.
Work with leading universities and U.S. Geological Survey scientists to better refine wild horse and burro population growth suppression methods and overall herd management techniques.
Conduct natural resources conservation and protection and complete a strategic selection of projects to focus resources toward the National Park Service’s most critical high-priority natural resource needs in parks.
Protect bats by conducting measures to control and manage White-Nose Syndrome and protect cave ecosystems.
Dedicate special effort to the management of invasive quagga and zebra mussels, which threaten delicate aquatic ecosystems, renewable energy generation, and recreational opportunities including fishing and boating.
Evaluate strategies to continue efficient management of invasive species and their impact to project operations and address increasing concerns of quagga and zebra mussels in reservoirs.
Collaborate with the California Department of Food and Agriculture to target invasive species infestations in the Redding, Calaveras, Chowchilla, and Tulare areas that could be a threat to resources near conveyance systems of the Central Valley Project.
Implement riparian restoration on non-Department lands in partnership with other agencies.
Reassess and monitor the implementation of the Platte River program's Land, Adaptive Management, and Integrated Monitoring and Research plans.
Assess and monitor water quality parameters at the Palo Verde Diversion Dam on the lower Columbia River, in accordance with National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit plan and aquatic application plan.
Refine and implement long-term water reliability strategies to meet optimum refuge water supply, ensuring that each year the 19 Central Valley Project refuges receive water of specified quantity, timing, and suitable quality to support their wetland and aquatic environments.
Focus effort to maintain the Long-Term Experimental and Management Plan Environmental Impact Statement operation of Glen Canyon Dam in cooperation with NPS, USGS, and the Department of Energy Argonne National Lab.
Re-assess and advance the Middle Rio Grande Collaborative Program agreement to provide funds for the purchase of water and support Rio Grande silvery minnow during periods of low flow in the Middle Rio Grande River.
Restore abandoned mine lands to improve environmental quality and reduce the potential for exposure of hazards to the public.
Sustain training and technical assistance to states and tribes for area-wide reclamation planning.
Provide technical support and assistance to states and tribes to help develop and support best practices in mining and reclamation.
Ensure prompt problem identification and resolution at mine sites to prevent off-site impacts.
Program Performance Overview: The Department is providing a much-needed capability in the West to deliver water through its reservoirs and dams, and support water supplies through new water storage and conservation activities.
Performance is trending upward for the number of acre-feet of water conservation capacity enabled through the Bureau of Reclamation’s (BOR) priority goal conservation programs, though construction for improving water storage takes years to be completed.
Reclamation strives to keep its facilities in good condition, ensuring a reliable supply of water and stretching existing water supplies that can be made available for other uses.
In 2019, 85% of Reclamation’s facilities were evaluated as being in good condition, an increase of one percent from the previous fiscal year.
Reclamation prioritizes infrastructure assets based on detailed design criteria, including engineering need, a consequence of failure, financial considerations, efficiency opportunities, scheduling, and others.
Many rural communities face significant challenges in financing the cost of replacing or upgrading aging and obsolete facilities and systems.
The water conservation programs - WaterSMART, Title XVI, CALFED, Yakima River Basin Water Enhancement, and Upper Colorado River Recovery Implementation - contribute by increasing the available water supply and contribute to the Department’s broader objective of achieving a more sustainable, secure water supply.
In FY 2019, Reclamation funded projects that will enable additional water savings of 118,902 acre‐feet.
Cumulatively, projects funded from 2010-2019 have contributed 1,352,679 acre-feet of water conservation capacity.
Bureau of Indian Affairs performance for the Division of Water and Power (DWP) exceeded 2019 national goals for the maintenance of water projects and the number of functional irrigation canal miles.
Improved weather conditions increased the amount of activity completed as maintenance crews were able to deploy to field locations to perform planned projects within established timelines.
The program continues to expand collaboration between the central office and regions to secure data in a timelier manner.
DWP promotes self-determination, economic opportunities, and public safety through the sound management of irrigation, dam, and power.
Additionally, this program funds tribal water projects to provide Tribes the necessary technical research, studies, and other relevant information to serve as informed and prudent managers of water resources.
Public Benefit: Reclamation is the largest supplier and manager of water in the 17 Western states, bringing water to more than 31 million people.
Reclamation also provides 140,000 Western farmers with irrigation water for 10 million acres of farmland which produces 60 percent of the Nation’s vegetables and 25 percent of its fruits and nuts.
Reclamation’s facilities also provide substantia flood control, hydropower, recreation, and fish and wildlife benefits.
The Western U.S. is one of the fastest growing regions of the country, and urbanization has created demands for water, power, and recreational facilities.
Changes in water supplies, water demands, and the increased duration and frequency of droughts have the potential to affect Reclamation’s ability to fulfill its mission.
DWP provides stakeholders with quality services and improved accountability, including the protection and preservation of life, property, and trust resources.
Furthermore, the program fosters communication, cooperation, and consultation among Federal, state, tribal, and local organizations related to water resources, irrigation power, dam safety, security, and emergency management activities.
Utilize ranking systems for prioritizing maintenance, environmental, conservation, and planning activities to meet all of Reclamation's water challenges; address aging infrastructure maintenance needs and ensure the delivery of water and power.
Assess the energy-saving benefits resulting from water conservation and the use of renewable hydroelectric energy.
Seek new WaterSMART grant proposals and provide cost-shared funding for water conservation and efficiency projects.
Issue WaterSMART grants funding opportunity for water marketing activities.
Launch WaterSMART grants funding opportunity for Small‐Scale Water Efficiency Projects.
Advance the implementation of section 4009(c) of the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation Act (P.L. 114-322) through the Title XVI Program.
Monitor safety and implement required modifications with state-of-the-art design upgrades to ensure safety of dams.
Verify and validate data used to report facility operations and maintenance (O&M) information, including major rehabilitation and replacements data and annual O&M costs.
Install wide-head turbines to improve efficiencies.
Issue grants and/or interagency agreements for threatened and endangered species recovery activities to provide significant benefits to the impacted species of California’s Central Valley Project.
Program Performance Overview: Performance in FY 2019 was fair on average except for work hours worked in a national park unit, which is down 12% due primarily to the government shutdown, continued challenges with hiring and staffing positions to manage volunteer activities, and changes in field unit application of reporting guidelines.
The measures for non-DOI lands vary widely from year to year depending on the projects that finish that year and partner support and engagement.
In 2019, targets for these measures are different from past years due to internal reorganizations and reallocation of resources, but in some cases show positive results over some prior years.
On DOI lands, the acres restored or improved using partnerships are tabulated in the measure for acres in desired condition within Goal 1, Strategy 2 “Provide stewardship of land, surface water, streams and shorelines.”
Many other activities with partners also bring benefits to both DOI and non-DOI lands, waters, and species and other metrics throughout the Department capture these activities.
Working closely and cooperatively with state and local governments and private landowners is a proven tool for achieving resource management objectives.
Public Benefit: Public-private partnerships provide opportunities for greater engagement of people and organizations in caring for and managing the natural, historical, cultural, and physical resources across the Department’s 480 million surface acres of public lands.
This can be especially beneficial for our national park units, National Wildlife Refuges, wildlife management areas, and national conservation lands.
Support can come from other federal or state agencies, tribal nations, volunteers, non-profit organizations, educational institutions, corporations or foundations through sponsorship or philanthropy.
Some programs within the Department also work on stewardship of non-DOI lands providing technical and financial assistance to private landowners, tribes, and schools on a voluntary basis to help meet the habitat needs of federal trust species.
For example, since 1988, the Partners for Fish and Wildlife program within FWS has worked with more than 45,000 landowners and thousands of conservation partners to successfully restore over four million acres of wetland and upland habitat and over ten thousand miles of streams to benefit numerous fish and wildlife species.
The National Wildlife Refuge System will recruit and mobilize more than 38,000 volunteers that contribute nearly 1.4 million hours annually to conservation and recreation programs.
Collaborate with private landowners and other conservation partners to voluntarily protect, conserve, and restore their lands to keep working lands in traditional uses while improving habitat, and water quality to benefit species.
Work with state and federal partners, using early detection, rapid assessment, containment, rapid response, and control efforts, to prevent the spread of Asian Carp into the Great Lakes and the expansion of Asian Carp’s range in the upper Mississippi, Ohio, and Missouri River basins.
Work with local partners on ecosystem restoration efforts in the Klamath Basin, Chesapeake Bay, Everglades, and California Bay Delta.
Cultivate partnerships with federal and non-federal entities to support resource management.
Examples include NPS coordination of the Cooperative Ecosystem Studies Unit (CESU) national network for research, technical assistance, education, and capacity building, as well as administration of the Rivers, Trails, and Conservation Assistance (RTCA) and National Natural Landmarks (NNL) programs to support conservation and recreation.
Foster interest in volunteerism through volunteer.gov, NPS.gov, and social media channels.
Program Performance Overview: The Department is undertaking the challenge to redesign and improve its planning processes in ways that can best meet the sometimes-conflicting uses for public lands.
The improved land use planning processes will engage our state and local government partners and provide the public with the maximum possible input into the planning process and result in the best possible public access to public lands and waters.
Public Benefit: The Department’s land use and management plans ensure that the public lands are managed in accordance with the intent of Congress as stated in several authorities including, but not limited to: the Federal Land Policy and Management Act (FLPMA), the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), the Endangered Species Act, the National Wildlife Refuge System Administration and Improvement Acts, the Organic Act of 1916 (National Park Service), and the Alaska National Interest Land Conservation Act (ANILCA).
A common thread through all three bureaus’ (BLM, FWS, NPS) missions is the need to accommodate and promote the use and enjoyment of the public lands for both present and future generations.
There are lands deemed important for their scenic, recreational, hunting, fishing, scientific, historical, archaeological, or wildlife conservation values.
Other lands are made available for multiple use and sustained yield that recognizes the Nation’s need for domestic sources of minerals, food, timber, and fiber.
Program Performance Overview: The USGS conducts national-focused Earth-system science, along with its many partners, to deliver an understanding of the Earth’s complex geologic structure, biology, and hydrology.
Products include geologic maps, three dimensional geologic models, interpretive studies, and scientific publications, all of which are essential for informed public policy decision making and economic development.
Overall, performance improved from FY 2018 to FY 2019, with most strategic plan performance measures improving.
Mapping is expected to improve through FY 2021 due to modest increases in funding.
This improvement in performance indicates that national coverage is increasing for baseline geological maps, research, and assessments for informing land manager and policymaker decision making.
The USGS’s Three-Dimensional Elevation Program (3DEP) provides up-to-date topographic information and precise three– dimensional representations and models of natural and man-made features.
In 2019, the measure exceeded its target due to Target exceeded due to unexpected hurricane and wildfire supplemental funds, higher than anticipated funding levels from non-federal partners, and an increase in the amount of lidar data acquired by others and contributed to 3DEP compared to previous years.
By FY 2021, the USGS plans to acquire 3DEP-quality topographic information for over 81 percent of the Nation.
Public Benefit: The USGS is the lead civilian mapping agency for the Nation and supports the conduct of detailed surveys and the resulting distribution of high-quality and highly accurate topographic, geologic, hydrographic, and biogeographic maps and data.
Remote sensing satellites and aircraft monitor the Earth providing information that is broad, precise, impartial, and easily available.
For more than 45 years, Landsat satellites have collected data over the planet’s land surface to support global research studies.
These data constitute the longest continuous record of the Earth’s land surface as seen from space.
High-resolution elevation information in geologic maps and geospatial products enable precise planning of civil engineering and transportation infrastructure, versatile urban planning, improved flood projection, timely and accurate emergency response, effective hazard identification and mitigation, and detailed environmental analyses.
Conduct analysis of long-term drivers, patterns, and impacts of sea-level change on coastal regions and infrastructure in support of natural resource management.
Continue to collect high-resolution light detection and ranging (lidar) elevation data to achieve the first-ever cycle of nationwide lidar coverage by 2027 to support topographic map production.
Revise 95 percent of topographic maps for Alaska by the end of 2021 using the updated elevation and hydrography data.
These new maps and data are used in a broad range of applications including infrastructure planning, recreation, navigation safety, hazards mitigation, and Arctic wildlife assessments.
Continue acquisition of high-resolution hydrography data (NHDPlus HR) for the Nation to support flood risk management; infrastructure improvements; and energy resource management and complete 86 percent of the Nation's NHDPlus HR data by the end of 2021.
Make available, through the National Geologic Map Database, detailed geologic maps covering an additional 20,000 square miles of the continental United States above the 2019 coverage and not previously covered by such detailed maps, in partnership with State Geological Surveys, to support the objectives of Secretarial Order 3359 for national energy and mineral exploration.
Design, build, and interpret an integrated three-dimensional geologic framework for the Nation based on new and prior geologic mapping at regional to local scales to improve mineral, energy, earthquake and landslide hazards assessments, ground water analyses, and infrastructure development.
Enhance the USGS’s high performance computing capabilities to support USGS and Interior computational and management challenges, and enable more timely data transfer, analysis, and delivery of completed research results to support smart decisions on Secretarial priorities related to natural resource assessment and use.
Support the use and development of field-based technology and related standards for purposes of expediting and expanding digital field data capture and real-time interpretation, data preservation, and dissemination.
Continue development of the USGS’s National Biogeographic Map to provide analytical tools for the examination of selected species, habitats, protections, and habitat conditions.
Prioritize efforts to preserve, expose, and reuse valuable physical geoscience samples (e.g., drilling cores and rock and sediment samples) and data (e.g., borehole logs, GIS databases, and maps).
NGGDPP would provide support for approximately 15 state data preservation projects.
Reach the goal of 840 total scientists using the USGS advanced research computing (ARC) capabilities through intensive outreach and training.
This represents an increase of nine percent from 2020 in the number of scientists using ARC to improve scientists’ capabilities to model, simulate, and predict changes to complex natural systems at regional and national scales.
The ARC program has also begun limited cooperation with other DOI bureaus, providing high performance computing services to them, and expects this partnership to expand over the next several years.
Work to make detailed geologic maps publicly available for 54.8 percent of the U.S. through the National Geologic Map Database by optimizing the use of geological and geophysical surveys and national digital geospatial datasets to expand opportunities for the development of subsurface geologic interpretations, increase the interpretive resolution of surface mapping and boost geologic mapping productivity.
Continue efforts on the Earth Mapping Resources Initiative (Earth MRI) to improve knowledge of the geologic framework in the United States and to identify areas that have the potential to contain undiscovered critical mineral resources.
Update the National Land Cover Database to track land cover change from 1992 through 2019.
Currently, the database identifies changes through 2016.
The 2016 database was released in FY 2019).
This provides land managers information to support resource management plans and assessments.
Conduct research and applications designed to understand and reduce risk from natural disasters, including developing evacuation response scenarios to tsunamis and characterizing and monitoring the wildland urban interface risk from wildfire.
Continue to develop the Landsat 9 ground and flight systems in close collaboration with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) with a target launch in fiscal year 2021 to replace Landsat 7 which is running out of fuel.
Continue operation of Landsat 8 satellites to monitor water use, moisture content in soil and vegetation, and provide valuable insight on changing terrestrial surface conditions.
Investigate and adapt unmanned aircraft technology to support many science needs (e.g., surface water dynamics, groundwater surveys, coastal erosion, fault line surveys, microclimate studies, wildlife surveys, coal mine reclamation, and harmful algal blooms) in difficult to access areas, at lower human risk and at lower cost than traditional methods.
Support volcano monitoring and wildland fire response; work with the Intelligence and Defense Communities to improve wildland fire detection; provide high resolution, commercial data from Department of Defense contracts to Federal Civil Agencies; and support the USGS Director in his role as Chair of the Civil Applications Committee.
Program Performance Overview: The Department is modernizing policies and leveraging science and technology to strengthen America’s energy security, promote development of our Nation's vast energy resources, and expand production of both offshore and onshore conventional and renewable U.S. energy resources consistent with the National Outer Continental Shelf Oil and Gas Leasing Program, the America First Energy Plan, and the Executive Order on Promoting Energy Independence and Economic Growth.
To elevate this effort during the next two years, the Department has selected the BLM for an Agency Priority Goal (APG), “By September 30, 2021, the Bureau of Land Management will process 90 percent of fluid minerals Applications for Permits to Drill (APDs) within 90 days.”
In addition, the Department has selected BSEE for an Agency Priority Goal, “By September 30, 2021, the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement will conduct 12 facility-based risk inspections and 6 performance-based risk inspections.”
In 2019, the BLM made 18,497,904 acres of public lands available for federal oil and gas leasing, which is almost 1.7M over the target.
The BLM issued a new policy in 2018 which streamlined the federal leasing process and set new timelines for expressions of interest; these changes are expected to enhance the number of future federal oil and gas leases that the BLM plans to issue.
In Fiscal Year 2019, the BLM Coal Program, held 3 successful coal lease sales (Alabama, North Dakota, and Utah) containing 2,429.53 acres and 33.7 million tons receiving a total bid of $12.74 million.
In addition to the 3 coal leases sales, the BLM offered two lease modification in Utah consisting of 790 acres and 5.7 million tons for total bonus of $2.4 million.
Federal coal sold from BLM administered leases in Fiscal year 2019 resulted in the collection of over $504 million from over 302 million tons.
BLM has scheduled additional LBA sales and LMA offers in FY 2020.
The BOEM met its FY 2019 performance target by conducting two oil and gas lease sales pursuant to the 2017-2022 National Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) Program: Region-wide Gulf of Mexico Sale 252 (March 2019), and Region-wide Gulf of Mexico Sale 253 (August 2019).
In FY 2019, BOEM also held a highly competitive offshore wind lease sale that generated over $405 million dollars and issued three additional renewable energy leases located offshore Massachusetts.
The Department utilizes science to inform safe and environmentally responsible domestic energy development; this includes the USGS Energy Resources Program, BOEM’s extensive offshore research program, and BSEE’s risk-based inspections, all of which support safe energy resource discovery, responsible development, and a fair market return for the nation’s resources.
Strong performance in this area was bolstered by the collaborative work between BSEE and BOEM to establish appropriate permitting and oversight processes to ensure safety of offshore operations, implementation of BSEE's Risk-Based Inspection Program, and BLM’s focus on high priority inspections.
Public Benefit: The Department oversees vast resources that expand the production of energy in the U.S., promote energy security, and help drive job growth and the economy.
Six Department bureaus (BLM, BOEM, BSEE, USGS, FWS and BOR) play key roles in our work to promote safe and reliable domestic energy exploration, development, and production.
Advance the Administration’s priority of Generating Revenue and Utilizing Our Natural Resources by streamlining a variety of processes, such as Applications for Permits to Drill (APDs), which will simultaneously address concerns over permitting backlogs.
Update the National Fluid Lease Sales System (NFLSS) to simplify and streamline the leasing process, alleviate unnecessary impediments and burdens, and expedite the offering of lands nominated for lease.
Improve and streamline land-use planning, increasing efficiencies and decreasing time for completion allowing for a reduced APD backlog, streamlined permitting process, and a fair return to the taxpayer through stronger inspection and enforcement.
Build upon ongoing activities to implement an overall strategy that includes refining and updating the Automated Fluid Minerals Support System, creating Right-of-Way Strike Teams, establishing APD targets, and increasing interagency coordination.
Coordinate cadastral survey, lands, and realty programs to enhance efficient processing of oil and gas activities.
Advance the Administration’s priority of Generating Revenue and Utilizing Our Natural Resources by streamlining permitting for Federal coal development and rights-of-way, which will simultaneously address concerns over backlogs.
Provide assistance from the BLM Energy and Minerals Task Force to BLM State and Field offices to expedite the leasing and permitting of energy minerals including updating surface and sub-surface data layers and Public Lands Survey System data.
Process Lease by Application, Lease Modification Applications, and trespass cases to ensure that the public receives fair market value for its non-renewable coal resources.
Inspect Federal and Indian leases to ensure compliance with the use authorizations, regulations, and ensure maximum or ultimate economic recovery of the public's non-renewable resources.
Take appropriate action when Federal or Indian coal has been mined without approvals (coal trespass actions).
Process pending applications for new wind, solar and geothermal projects.
Focus on streamlining review processes.
Support the Administration’s America-First Offshore Energy Strategy and seek opportunities to minimize unnecessary regulatory burdens.
The 2019-2024 National Outer Continental Shelf Oil and Gas Leasing Program is currently on hold.
Until the new National OCS Program is approved, BOEM will continue to implement the 2017-2022 Outer Continental Shelf Oil and Gas Leasing Program – region-wide Gulf of Mexico Sales 254, 256, 257, 259 and Cook Inlet Sale 258.
Effectively process exploration and development plans, meeting the established timelines of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act.
Continue to fund data collection efforts, baseline and impact studies in support of planning, decision-making, and identifying best practices for offshore oil and gas, exploration and development and long-term monitoring efforts.
Continue to engage with Federal, academic, and other partners on environmental studies.
Fund studies to examine actual and potential effects of offshore activities to support NEPA reviews and development of mitigation measures.
Continue to develop resource assessments to inform OCS conventional energy leasing decisions, including the planned 2021 National Assessment of Undiscovered Oil and Gas Resources of the U.S. Outer Continental Shelf.
Continue to conduct economic analyses to inform conventional energy fiscal term decision-making for the sales included in the 2017-2022 National OCS Oil and Gas Leasing Program.
In consultation with intergovernmental task forces, continue to identify additional areas that appear suitable for renewable energy development on the Atlantic and Pacific OCS.
Conduct thorough environmental reviews and consultations of potential OCS leasing areas offshore the Atlantic and Pacific coasts, adjusting as necessary depending on funding availability.
Continue noncompetitive lease and rights-of-way (ROW) grant processes to support lease and grant issuance.
Continue to contract environmental studies and fund data collection efforts that identify best practices and inform the Bureau’s decision-making.
Continue providing intergovernmental task force support and opportunities for public involvement in Atlantic and Pacific coastal states.
Continue to develop and publish refinements to the offshore renewable energy regulations, as well as guidelines for their interpretation.
Conduct comprehensive engineering, geotechnical, and environmental reviews of Renewable Energy site assessment and project plans.
Conduct post-lease review and monitoring of leased offshore renewable energy projects and activities.
Continue to engage in active outreach efforts with key stakeholders, including other Federal agencies, the fishing and maritime communities.
Undertake technical assessments and sponsor research on new technologies to stay current with expanding operations and evaluating technological advances that allow for production from high pressure/high temperature formations and other frontier areas.
Review existing standards, regulations and permitting, with a focus on reforming overly burdensome regulations while sustaining or increasing safety and environmental protection and eliminating processes and regulations that no longer serve their purpose in supporting safe development given innovations in technology and attendant changes in industry project planning processes.
Institutionalize transparency and engagement with the regulated community through standards development, and continuous improvement to the SEMS program, Offshore Energy Safety Institute, Safe OCS and BAST-Best Available and Safest Technologies.
Minimize financial and environmental liabilities from offshore energy exploration and development by ensuring that operators timely decommission wells and facilities that have no future use.
Strengthen our inspection program by implementing an inspection strategy that is based on annual planning and incorporates regulatory compliance, risk assessments, management systems and performance-based techniques or methodologies.
Keep pace with technological innovations that enable development and production in frontier areas and resolve technological challenges such as development in high pressure/high temperature environments.
Maintain diligent oversight of end-of-life facilities and reservoirs to ensure maximum resource recovery, safe operations and strengthened decommissioning/idle iron compliance.
Champion oil spill preparedness principles and practices including the verification of current industry capabilities and the advancement of oil spill response research and technologies.
Refine permitting review strategies to support timely development and accurately reflect the risks and phases of development of the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS).
Foster active engagement with renewable energy stakeholders with a goal of supporting a safe, robust, and technically innovative offshore wind energy industry on the OCS.
Work with all federal and other partners to design energy projects that will facilitate energy development while protecting the environment.
Invest funds to streamline energy project consultation and permitting with public and private partners.
Release additional USGS assessments of undiscovered, technically recoverable oil and gas resources in U.S. and non-U.S. basins, including in strategic areas of national interest, including the Section 1002 Area of ANWR.
Continue the underlying geological, geophysical, and geochemical research that underpins the assessments.
Expand unconventional oil and gas research efforts on the geologic causes of variability in the recovery of petroleum and water and studies of baseline water quality.
Research geothermal resources aimed at improving the viability of Enhanced Geothermal Systems (EGS) and studying environmental impacts of geothermal energy development on Federal lands.
Support gas hydrate studies with the Coastal-Marine Hazards and Resources Program and contribute to Department of Energy (DOE) and industry-sponsored cooperative gas hydrate projects.
Develop priorities and plans to increase access to geology, energy and minerals data through a national data repository, as recommended by the National Academies of Science, Engineering and Medicine’s 2018 strategic review of ERP, and in close coordination with MRP, other USGS programs, and State Geological Surveys.
Program Performance Overview: The Bureau of Reclamation is the second largest producer of renewable hydropower in the United States and operates 52 hydroelectric power facilities, with 14,700 megawatts of capacity.
Reclamation generates an average 40 billion kilowatt-hours of electricity each year.
In 2019, 94% of Reclamation’s hydropower facilities were evaluated as being in good condition, an increase of six percentage points from the previous fiscal year.
Also, the amount of hydropower capability in megawatts installed increased from 37 in 2018 to 44 in 2019.
Reclamation employees identified previously existing deficiencies contributing to low Facility Reliability Rating (FRR) scores and successfully corrected the most significant deficiencies using a risk‐based prioritization methodology.
Reclamation administers a comprehensive power operations and maintenance program to ensure hydropower facilities are reliable, safe, economical, and efficient.
Reclamation coordinates with Department of Energy and power customers to strategically identify, fund, and implement capital and technological investments that deliver operational benefits and reduce risk.
Program performance is measured by hydropower facility availability during peak electricity demand periods.
Public Benefit: The Bureau of Reclamation works to promote domestic energy production by enabling new energy generation from hydropower, facilitating the construction of new or upgraded transmission networks, helping to create new industries and supply chains, driving economic growth and job creation, and helping provide more energy from domestic sources.
Collaborate with the Department of Energy and the Army Corps of Engineers through the Memorandum of Understanding for Hydropower framework to help meet the Nation’s need for reliable, affordable, and environmentally sustainable hydropower.
Support the development of non-federal hydropower through the Lease of Power Privilege and Federal Energy Regulatory Commission licensing processes.
Leverage Reclamation’s Hydropower Efficiency Research Systems initiative to improve operational efficiencies at Reclamation power plants.
Assess opportunities for federal and non-federal hydrokinetic, conventional, and pumped storage hydropower development.
Collaborate with stakeholder groups and regulatory agencies to improve and streamline non-federal hydropower permitting processes.
Provide power operations and maintenance-related support services and collaboration with other Federal, tribal, state, and local governments, power industry constituencies, and other interested parties.
Support hydropower data acquisition, analysis, and archiving initiatives to improve operational performance, asset management, and regulatory compliance at Reclamation power plants.
Assess progress of initiatives in deferred maintenance reporting, power related security, and risk-based asset management studies.
Program Performance Overview: The Department promotes economic development and environmental protection through responsible, science-informed management of mineral resources.
The BLM conducts environmental analysis of complex issues necessary to authorize use on BLM public lands to meet the increasing demand for non-energy solid leasable minerals, especially potash and phosphate.
The science provided by the USGS Mineral Resources Program (MRP) facilitates resource discovery and provides essential information and analyses for strategic, evidence-based economic and geopolitical decisions.
BOEM’s Marine Minerals Program provides sand and gravel resources to protect and improve coastal infrastructure and the environment.
To date, BOEM has conveyed the rights to nearly 165 million cubic yards of Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) sediment by executing 58 negotiated agreements for projects in eight states that have restored over 360 miles of coastline.
BLM will continue to explore efficiencies for non-energy mineral exploration and development to ensure the Nation is able to meet the demand.
To achieve the President's Executive Order 13817 and Secretarial Order 3359, the Department's budget includes funding to help spur critical mineral resource development in the United States.
Efforts will include developing advanced topographic, geologic, and geophysical data as well as mineral resource assessments generated by USGS into BLM land-use planning.
The data is needed to locate U.S. critical mineral resources, inform private-sector domestic development, reduce dependence on foreign sources, and support job creation and technological innovation.
Inclusion of this data in land use planning will improve decisions that increase the ability of the private sector to develop these resources, particularly critical mineral resources.
Public Benefit: Non-energy minerals, including potassium, phosphorus, sodium, potash, lead, and zinc, clay, sand, gravel, and building stone, are vital components of basic industry and life in the United States and support local infrastructure and economic development.
As the Nation continues to depend on minerals to manufacture products we rely on every day, from our cell phones and laptops to our cars, the Department will continue to leverage research and assessments to understand and maximize the use of national and global mineral resources while balancing the Nation’s mineral needs with the protection of the human, terrestrial, marine, and coastal environments.
Continue program reform efforts by improving alignment of staffing resources, work prioritization, and partnerships with the Department’s Division of Mineral Evaluation to successfully achieve corrective actions to ensure that mineral materials are sold at fair market value.
Issue Records of Decision for the two FEISs recently released for new phosphate mines in Idaho that will sustain current production.
Assist another phosphate mining company with submittal of another mine application and begin preparing an EIS.
Expand the appropriate use of categorical exclusions and other federal or state agency environmental assessments to reduce the need for BLM to prepare new and duplicative environmental assessments needed for permitting decisions.
Continue to work on the Mineral Tracking System which will be used to support the automation and tracking of licenses, leases, permitting and inspection capabilities of the solid minerals program.
Continue to incorporate the latest advancements in technology for management of all mineral programs, including appropriate use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles.
Provide updated training and guidance for BLM mineral professionals and managers.
Gain efficiencies through the collection of baseline data earlier in the Mining Law Administration (locatable) permitting process.
Currently the BLM is undergoing regulation updates for 3809 that is intended to include protocols for early communications prior to plan submittals, that may allow early initiation of long-term studies, such as baseline data.
Seek opportunities in the Mining Law Administration program to centralize and focus resources through the development of strike teams to work on the review and processing of large-scale mineral authorizations.
As the BLM cooperates with the USFS as they update their regulations, which will provide better consistency between the agencies, the BLM continues to review USFS protocols, such as strike teams, that may have application to the BLM.
Such teams may address large, controversial projects, in whole or in part, to maintain a consistent application of policy and regulation.
Respond to every request for the use of OCS sand and gravel for coastal restoration and beach nourishment.
Conduct thorough environmental reviews of potential uses of sand borrow areas through NEPA and other environmental consultations.
Fund cooperative agreements in collaboration with coastal states as appropriate to identify, analyze and distribute OCS sand related data supporting the use of OCS sand for beach nourishment and coastal restoration.
Continue to develop a comprehensive National OCS Sand Inventory and Marine Minerals Information System (MMIS), along the Atlantic, Pacific and in the Gulf of Mexico that will inform the Bureau's decision-making and long-term response for coastal restoration.
Continue to develop a BOEM Critical Minerals Strategic Plan and begin to develop a National Offshore Critical Mineral Inventory.
Conduct research to understand the genesis and distribution of the critical mineral resources throughout the Nation by collecting, preserving, and disseminating geological, geochemical, and geophysical data and initiating qualitative and quantitative mineral assessments.
Implement Executive Order 13817, Secretarial Order 3359, and the interagency Critical Minerals Strategy by conducting critical mineral assessments, updating the list of critical minerals on a biannual basis, and implementing a prioritized nationwide program of topographic, geologic, and geophysical mapping to enhance understanding of the Nation’s mineral resource potential to better manage the supply of critical minerals.
Continue implementation of a Quality Management System (QMS) for Mineral Resources Program-funded laboratories.
Program Performance Overview: The Department collects, disburses and verifies Federal and Indian energy and other natural resource revenue collected from issuing leases on Federal lands (and offshore on the outer continental shelf).
These resources include oil, gas, coal, and access to renewable energy resources such as solar, wind, and geothermal.
To ensure the appropriate accountability and compensation to the American public for the extraction and use of these resources, it is important that a fair and appropriate amount of funds are collected and that such transactions are implemented accurately, responsibly, and in a timely manner.
The Office of Natural Resources Revenue (ONRR) maintains a high level of achievement for timely disbursement of federal and Indian revenues.
Over the last five years, ONRR averaged a timely disbursement rate of nearly 99 percent.
ONRR also performs compliance activities to ensure the Department collects revenue due from oil and gas produced on federal lands and water.
The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) supports timely collection and disbursement of mineral and renewable energy revenues.
Data driven procedures help to ensure bid adequacy by using a two-phased review system for offshore leasing.
Similarly, the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) uses risk-based methodologies to help ensure metering accuracy at higher risk hydrocarbon sites, i.e. those that experience high volumes of throughput and/or have a history of noncompliance.
Public Benefit: The Department employs data driven procedures to verify, collect, and disburse energy and natural resources revenue and ensure that appropriate financial benefit is obtained on behalf of the American people.
Revenues collected from leases on Indian lands directly benefit members of Indian communities.
Distributions to the Land and Water Conservation Fund, the Historic Preservation Fund, and the Reclamation Fund all help ensure that America’s natural resources, landscapes, and rich history are available and enjoyed by current and future generations.
States use the distributed funds to support large capital projects such as schools, roads, and public buildings.
The Administration’s proposed Public Lands Infrastructure Fund would dedicate, over a 5-year period, a portion of energy revenues to address deferred maintenance in national parks, national wildlife refuges, public lands, national forests, and Indian schools.
Revenues not allocated to specific purposes remain in the U.S. Treasury and serve to reduce Federal deficits.
Provide geospatial analysis capability to ONRR employees to ensure accurate collection of mineral and leasing revenues.
Award the Information Technology Systems contract and continue operations and maintenance of ONRR’s mission critical Minerals Revenue Management Support System (MRMSS), which supports all ONRR efforts in the collection, analysis, disbursement and verification of revenues.
Continue to develop and share energy data with the Department’s Business Integration Office and the Bureau of Land Management.
Continue business process reengineering by defining business and functional requirements that will support future system development.
Continue to implement, refine and update BOEM’s fair market value evaluation processes to ensure the government receives the fair market value for outer continental shelf resources.
Prioritize inspection and verification activities to ensure accurate accounting of oil and gas from facilities with high production volumes.
Program Performance Overview: The National Park Service established fee structure guidelines in 2006 to standardize rates across the country.
The resulting tier system assigns each park unit to a tier and associated entrance fee schedule based on the type of site and the amenities provided for the public.
As part of its commitment to improve the visitor experience, the NPS updated its entrance fee pricing mode in June 2018.
The NPS plans for all entrance fee parks to be in line with the new pricing structure by January 1, 2020.
Public Benefit: The nation’s public lands offer many excellent locations for public recreation in the outdoors at national parks and monuments, National Wildlife Refuges, BLM public lands and other locations, in historic sites and buildings and at national treasures such as the Statue of Liberty.
Facilities, including roads, visitor centers, bathrooms, historic buildings, and museums enable visitors to enjoy their public lands and sites.
All the land management bureaus have backlogs of deferred maintenance.
The Department will continuously review its fee structure to determine how best to accommodate visitors’ enjoyment while collecting fees that help to offset some of the maintenance costs required to keep visitor-facing infrastructure in good shape.
All such reviews of fees and changes will remain consistent with Congressional direction that has been provided through a series of laws including the Federal Lands Recreation Enhancement Act.
Support positive visitor experiences by providing enhanced outdoor recreation opportunities and visitor services, managing visitorfacing facilities, engaging in habitat restoration to improve wildlife-related recreation, and providing public safety services.
Implement new technologies to ensure financial integrity of collections.
Continue to engage stakeholders in efforts to evaluate, update, and standardize fees with the goal of setting fair and equitable rates.
Program Performance Overview: Over the past four years, performance has varied between a high of 100% and a low of 49% of timber resources made available for sale due to litigation stemming from environmental issues and fluctuations in the housing market and transportation costs, affecting the BLM’s ability to sell timber and utilize the by-products.
The Department is working to employ sound forestry practices that address the increased risk of wildfire exacerbated by damage from invasive insects.
In 2019, the BLM exceeded its target for Allowable Sale Quantity (ASQ) - Oregon offered 212 Million Board-feet (MMBF) was from lands designated for sustained-yield harvest and the Allowable Sale Quantity.
In addition to exceeding the ASQ target, the total combined ASQ and non-ASQ offered sale volume increased in 2019.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs’ Forestry program exceeded 2019 national goals for the percent of the sustainable harvest of forest biomass and timber sales prepared and offered for sale or free use.
This is the second full year for this measurement.
The percentage of allowable cut prepared and offered in 2019 is comparable to 2018.
This is consistent with projections and can be attributed to comparable timber markets and a willingness on the part of Tribes to sell timber.
Management activities within forestlands are governed by forest management plans which outline ecologically and biologically sustainable forest management practices commensurate with tribal goals and objectives.
Forest management activities include timber sales, timber stand improvement (thinning), prescribed burning, and reforestation.
Public Benefit: Timber and by-product sales contribute to the economic stability of local communities and industries.
Timber and byproduct sales also lead to increased forest health through restoration and fire resiliency.
Forests and woodlands provide timber and other forest products, create recreational opportunities that support local economies, serve as valuable wildlife habitat, play an important role in carbon storage and clean water and air, provide an essential source of revenue and jobs for tribes, and play an important role in sustaining tribal cultures and traditions.
Ensure the health and resilience of the Nation’s public forest lands as well as the availability of traditional forest products, such as timber through responsible land management.
Continue to seek strategies to improve efficiency, especially in issuing forest product permits, acres of forest restored through sales, biomass utilization, and timber volume offered.
Create career development paths to improve employee skills and enhance retention.
Increase timber sale layout capacity through the Timber Strike Team, a mobile team of highly trained foresters that assists local units which are unable to meet harvest preparation targets due to insufficient workforce and lack of expertise.
Promote active forest management through the support of SO 3372; Indian Energy Act/Tribal Biomass Demonstration Project.
Improve forest health, reduce wildland fire risk, and create tribal employment through the further deployment of Portable Infrastructure Projects.
Program Performance Overview: The process of monitoring grazing permits is returning to previous levels of performance, following years of litigation which led to a backlog in renewals.
The return to a slightly higher permit/lease processing rate is due to the Department’s increased focus on more complex grazing permit processing requirements and making greater use of the authority provided under section 402(c) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act, which allows expiring permits to be renewed without being fully processed.
In 2019, the BLM exceeded its grazing target by improving and streamlining the grazing permit process, thereby achieving greater efficiencies and service to permittees while striving to meet land condition objectives, including continuing or expanding recent demonstration projects for Outcome-Based Grazing Authorizations.
Under the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the Division of Natural Resources exceeded the national target for percent of grazing permits monitored, with the assistance of the regional staff who provided technical support to agency staff in the management of permits.
Cooperative efforts with tribes as well as the collaboration between seasonal and regional staff, led to positive performance results.
Public Benefit: Livestock grazing contributes to food production and adds to local economic stability, and it can be used in certain areas to maintain and improve land health by reducing hazardous fuels, treating invasive weeds, and minimizing the impact of catastrophic wildfires.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs, Division of Natural Resources, provides coordination, management, planning, oversight, and monitoring for the development and protection of trust natural resources, as well as proving the direction and guidance for all activities related to the planning and management, conservation, development, and utilization of soil, water, farmland, and rangeland.
The diversity is also responsible for the bureaus’ national resources damage assessment and restoration program.
Continue to streamline the grazing permit process and provide greater flexibility to the American rancher.
Process Outcome-Based Grazing Authorizations, which allow livestock operators more flexibility to make livestock use adjustments in response to changing conditions such as drought or wildland fire.
Work with ranchers to address excessive fuels buildup.
Targeted grazing, which focuses on intensive grazing in a limited, strategic area, has been useful in influencing wildland fire behavior by breaking up large expanses of relatively homogeneous fuels that burn uniformly with strategically placed buffers of reduced fuels.
Continue to utilize an integrated vegetation management approach using multiple tools, e.g. mechanical, biological, cultural, chemical and fire to control noxious weeds and invasive plant species, reduce fuels, and improve rangelands for livestock, recreation, and wildlife habitat.
Coordinate with Agencies and regions to outline agriculture and resources infrastructure improvement needs.
Assist regions in the completion of noxious plant inventories and control plans.
Focus invasive species funding on the protection of tribal resources, and on partnerships that include Tribes in landscape-level planning.
Promote agriculture and rangeland protection & enhancement through a Bureau of Indian Affairs and USDA's Natural Resources Conservation Service and Farm Service Agency Memorandum of Understanding.
Program Performance Overview: This Strategic Plan strategy supports and highlights Secretarial Orders 3356 and 3366, to further expand public access to lands and waters administered by the Department, for hunting, fishing, recreational shooting, and other forms of outdoor recreation.
The Department met or exceeded the 2019 targets for all performance measures related to hunting, fishing, and other recreation on DOI lands.
To elevate this effort during the next two years, the Department has selected the FWS for an Agency Priority Goal (APG), “By September 30, 2021, the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service will expand hunting and fishing opportunities on 2.25 million acres of National Wildlife Refuges and National Fish Hatcheries, and open or expand an estimated 1,200 opportunities.”
In 2019, the FWS expanded hunting, fishing, and other recreation opportunities on an additional 1.4 million acres of National Wildlife Refuges and National Fish Hatcheries, surpassing the target by more than 1 million acres.
As practiced on refuges, hunting and fishing do not pose a threat to wildlife populations, and in some instances, are necessary for sound wildlife management.
For example, deer populations will often grow too large for the refuge habitat to support.
If some of the deer are not harvested, they destroy habitat for themselves and other animals and die from starvation or disease.
The harvesting of wildlife on refuges is carefully regulated to ensure an appropriate balance between population levels and wildlife habitat.
In addition, the National Fish Hatcheries continue to be a valuable tool in managing fisheries and providing outdoor recreation opportunities to America’s 58 million recreation anglers who spend $46 billion annually in pursuit of their favored pastime.
The Bureau of Land Management estimates that over 95 percent of the nearly 250 million acres of BLM-managed public lands are open to hunting.
In 2019, the BLM completed 8 legal public access transactions to facilitate additional access to recreation opportunities on its public land.
There are 76 areas managed by the National Park Service that permit hunting.
A total of 51,097,000 acres, representing approximately 60% of the total acreage of the NPS system, are open to hunting at various times during the year.
Of the 246 NPS units with fish living in surface water, 213 (over 85%) have waters open to fishing.
The recreation areas developed because of Bureau of Reclamation water projects are among the Nation's most popular for water-based outdoor recreation.
Reclamation has approximately 6.5 million acres of land and water, most of which are available for public outdoor recreation.
The 187 developed recreation areas managed by Reclamation or a non-federal recreation partner draw over 24 million visits annually.
These recreation areas provide 549 campgrounds, 454 boat launch ramps, and more than 5,500 miles of shoreline.
Public Benefit: Outdoor recreation is integral to a healthy lifestyle for millions of Americans.
Visitors to the Department’s public lands and waters take advantage of the physical, mental, and social benefits that outdoor recreational experiences provide.
Americans can hunt and fish on public lands managed by the Department as part of its multiple-use policy which also includes hiking, camping, climbing, boating, wildlife viewing, and other outdoor pursuits.
Hunting, fishing and other outdoor activities contributed $156 billion in economic activity across the United States according to the FWS National Survey of Fishing, Hunting and Wildlife-Associated Recreation.
More than 101 million Americans, or 40 percent of the United States’ population 16 and older, pursue wildlife-related recreation, which supports 480,000 American jobs.
Increase activities that support conservation stewardship in alignment with Secretarial Order 3356 that calls for improving game and habitat management and increasing outdoor recreation opportunities, particularly for hunters, anglers, and sportsmen.
Such activities include opening acres of national wildlife refuges to hunting and fishing opportunities while aligning regulations with the states to better increase access and strike a regulatory balance.
Foster recreational fishing through sustained hatchery production in support of enhancing opportunities for the 58 million recreational anglers in the U.S.
Welcome more than 55 million visitors to the Refuge System to enjoy educational and interpretive programs, hunting, fishing, wildlife observation, and photography.
Support outdoor recreation opportunities through collaborative and community-driven efforts and outcome-focused investments to preserve and enhance rural landscapes, urban parks and rivers, important ecosystems, cultural resources, and wildlife habitat.
These activities incorporate the best available science, a landscape-level understanding, and stakeholder engagement.
Provide recreation opportunities for tens of millions of visitors, including but not limited to hiking, biking, camping, hunting, fishing, skiing, horseback riding, snowmobiling, and off-highway vehicle usage.
Collaborate with public and private partners to provide recreation opportunities.
Implement and support Secretarial Orders 3356 and 3366, which support and expand hunting and fishing access and opportunities, enhance conservation stewardship, improve wildlife management, ensure that public lands and waters are open for hunting, fishing and recreational access, and increase outdoor recreation opportunities for all Americans.
Implement and support Secretarial Order 3376, Increasing Recreational Opportunities through the use of Electric Bikes, for the purpose of increasing recreation opportunities for all Americans, especially those with physical limitations, and to encourage the enjoyment of lands and waters managed by the BLM.
Program Performance Overview: Visitor satisfaction with the quality of experiences on public lands remains very high.
In 2019, the Department continued its high level of performance in the recreation and visitor experience measure.
Survey results show that almost all (about 95%) visitors are satisfied with their experiences at parks, refuges and other public lands and waters.
Collectively, satisfaction is 98 percent for visitors served by facilitated programs.
Public Benefit: Outdoor recreation is integral to a healthy lifestyle for millions of Americans.
Visitors to the Department’s public lands and waters take advantage of the physical, mental, and social benefits that outdoor recreational experiences provide.
Heritage and cultural sites provide insights into our past and the background of our Nation.
Develop visitor programs, materials, and services that generate interest in natural, cultural, and historical structures and artifacts.
Support innovative community engagement at 14 priority urban refuges and 30 urban partnerships to encourage city dwellers to enjoy the outdoors and connect them with nature.
Maintain the visibility of Refuge System as an inexpensive, family-friendly place for Americans to reconnect with America’s natural and cultural resources.
Engage communities in meaningful, collaborative ways to create “stepping stones of engagement” for new audiences to connect with outdoor experiences both on Service lands (Wildlife Refuges) and partner lands.
Continue maintenance and improvements to visitor facilities, including parking areas, kiosks, interpretive signs, trails, and boardwalks.
Provide recreation opportunities for tens of millions of visitors, including but not limited to hiking, biking, camping, hunting, fishing, skiing, horseback riding, and snowmobiling and off-highway vehicle usage.
Collaborate with public and private partners to provide recreation opportunities.
Increase use of realty acquisition tools (such as easements, donations, fee simple acquisition, and exchanges) to provide access to public lands for recreational opportunities.
Assess and improve the Bureau’s recreation-related websites to identify local opportunities for families to access and enjoy public lands, streamline trip planning and reservation services, and offer updated, engaging, and relevant visitor information.
Implement and support the requirements of the John D. Dingell, Jr.
Conservation, Management, and Recreation Act.
Distribute Every Kid Outdoor passes to 4th graders at outdoor education events and schools to encourage visits to public lands.
Partner with youth conservation corps to improve access and recreational opportunities on public lands.
Increase use of realty acquisition tools (such as easements, donations, fee simple acquisition, and exchanges) to provide access to public lands for recreational opportunities.
Assess and improve the Bureau’s recreation-related websites to identify local opportunities for families to access and enjoy public lands, streamline trip planning and reservation services, and offer updated, engaging, and relevant visitor information.
Continue implementation of the National Scenic and Historic Trails (NSHT) Inventory, Assessment, and Monitoring (IAM) methodology and field guide, including data management plan actions.
Provide visitor services and protection, including but not limited to interpretive services and facilitated programs, interpretive media such as brochures and wayside exhibits, educational programs, volunteer services, recreational opportunities, visitor facilities, and management of and coordination with commercial services and concessions to enhance the visitor experience.
Supply visitors with up-to-date interpretive, logistical, and safety information.
Respond to GAO findings regarding the need for improvements to customer service, which will include exploring potential improvements to survey methods to better understand visitor expectations and experiences.
Program Performance Overview: The Office of Self-Governance (OSG) under the Office of the Assistant Secretary – Indian Affairs is responsible for the implementation of the Tribal Self Governance Act of 1994, including the development and implementation of regulations, policies, and guidance in support of self-governance initiatives.
The staff negotiates annual funding agreements with eligible tribes and consortia, coordinates the collection of budget and performance data from self-governance tribes, and resolves issues identified in financial and program audits of self-governance operations.
The national goals for support of self-determination and self-governance exceeded the percent of single audit act reports submitted by the Assistant Secretary – Indian Affairs.
The OSG issued two findings and determination memorandums in the 4th quarter of 2019.
One tribe had one audit finding related to Indian Affairs programs; the other had two Indian Affairs program audits findings that were resolved by OSG.
The Division of Internal Evaluation and Assessment (DIEA) received fifty single audit reports from OSG Compact Tribes in the 4th quarter.
However, there were no findings identified nor did DIEA detect any other issues that would impact the accountability of Indian Affairs program funds.
The Office of Self-Determination Services within the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), the Office of Indian Services (OIS), serves as the primary contact on policy affecting the unique contractual relationship between the Secretary of the Interior and Indian tribes or tribal entities.
The NPS manages public land with a wide range of traditional associations and cares for collections containing human remains, funerary objects, sacred objects, and objects of cultural patrimony.
The NPS supports the goals of the Indian Self-Determination Education and Assistance Act through annual funding agreements with tribes for whom parks hold cultural, historical, or geographical significance.
Under these agreements, tribes carry out a variety of programs, functions, and activities within NPS units including facilities, trail and road maintenance, natural and cultural resources inventories, and cultural heritage interpretation.
More generally, NPS field and program managers interact with American Indian tribes and Alaska Natives on a government-togovernment basis to reconcile NPS programs, policies, and regulations with traditional uses and to achieve common natural resource and cultural heritage preservation goals.
The NPS also supports the responsibility of the Secretary of the Interior for the national administration and implementation of the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA).
This includes planning for the discovery of sensitive items; appropriately returning certain items to lineal descendants, tribes, and Native Hawaiian Organizations; and making grants to fund museum and tribal projects for consultation and identification in support of NAGPRA notices and repatriation.
The NPS also provides grants to support Tribal Historic Preservation Offices in meeting legislatively-required preservation responsibilities based on their understanding of local needs and priorities.
Public Benefit: Self-governance and self-determination strengthen the government-to-government relationship between the Federal Government and tribal nations.
Together, these programs support and strengthen tribal self-governance, sovereignty, selfdetermination, and self-reliance, applying local expertise and knowledge to managing tribal functions and services.
The Division of Self Determination will continue to provide technical assistance and support to the Division of Internal Evaluation and Assessment and report to the Regional Senior Awarding Officials.
Program Performance Overview: The Department’s performance in fulfilling fiduciary trust responsibilities to American Indians and Alaska Native continues to perform within ranges from 90 to 100 percent as the Department reviews, processes, and carries out trust responsibilities in a timely and accurate manner.
Public Benefit: By fulfilling fiduciary trust responsibilities, the Department provides timely reposting of Indian trust ownership information to beneficiaries and ensures adherence to Indian law and litigation settlements.
Responsibility for fiduciary trust oversight of tribal lands and assets rests with several Departmental offices and programs.
Probate Services: The Probate Services program compiles inventories of Indian trust assets and family information and coordinates the timely distribution of trust assets with the Office of Hearings and Appeals, Land Titles and Records Office, and the Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians.
Land Buy-Back Program: The Land Buy-Program for Tribal Nations was established to implement the land consolidation aspects of the Cobell Settlement Agreement.
Human Services: The Human Services activity promotes the safety, financial security, and social health of Indian communities, by providing some direct funding and overseeing operations related to social services to include welfare assistance and Indian child welfare.
The objective is to improve the quality of life for individuals that are part of the tribe as well as to protect the children, elderly and disabled from abuse and neglect.
Division of Land Titles and Records (DLTR): The 18 Land Titles and Records Offices under DLTR is the official Federal offices-of-record for all documents affecting title to Indian lands, and for the determination, maintenance, and certified reporting of land title ownership and encumbrance on Indian trust and restricted lands.
All title documents affecting Indian land are to be recorded in the Indian Land Record of Title.
Real Estate Services: The Real Estate Services program conducts activities and processes transactions to protect, manage, develop, and utilize trust and restricted Federal Indian-owned lands.
Fee-To-Trust: The Fee-to-Trust program ensures that the acquisition of land-in-trust is an essential element of tribal selfdetermination.
Tribes are sovereign governments, and trust lands are a primary locus of tribal authority.
Many federal programs and services are available only on reservations or trust lands.
The current federal policy of tribal self-determination is built upon the principles that Congress outlined in the Indian Reorganization Act and reaffirmed in the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act.
Workforce Development: The Division of Workforce Development, under the Bureau of Indian Affairs, is the lead agency for implementing the Demonstration Project created by Public Law 102-477, the Indian Employment, Training, and Related Services Act, 25 U.S.C. section 3401 et seq.
Under this public law, tribes have the authority to integrate Federal employment, training, and related services that they provide to their members.
Federal-wide workforce development programs are integrated into Department of the Interior, Department of Health and Human Services, Department of Labor, Department of Education, Department of Justice, Department of Agriculture, Department of Commerce, Department of Energy, Department of Homeland Security, Department of Housing and Urban, Development, Department of Transportation and Department of Veteran Affairs.
Prioritize the management, reporting, and disbursement of tribal and individual Indian financial trust asset funds ($4.1B in approximately 3,500 tribal trust fund accounts and about $8.7M in 404,000 open Individual Indian Money accounts).
Continue to process trust account transactions accurately and timely.
Record at least 99% of Oil and Gas royalty revenues from the Office of Natural Resources Receipts in beneficiary accounts within 24 hours of receipt.
Implement a streamlined process that facilitates tribal purchases of fractional interests.
The process leverages the technology proven successful by the Land Buy-Back Program, which automates the steps required to generate purchase offers and for those offers accepted, the steps to approve, record, and certify each land acquisition.
Employ standard operating procedures that support the streamlined acquisition process.
Continue implementation of the Land Buy-Back Program, consolidating fractional interests and restoring them to tribal trust.
Will continue to partner with the regions and agencies to provide on-going training on the Native American Children’s Safety Act Guidance.
Continue its partnership with the U.S. Department of Justice to address the requirements of the Native American Children’s Safety Act, and expand the usage of the Tribal Access Program (TAP) Kiosks at BIA Direct Social Services Agencies and the tribes served by the BIA Agency, provides access to critical criminal justice information used in the placement of Indian children in and out-of-home care to reduce risk when installation occurs and ensure the safety and well-being of the children and families.
Improve the percentage of Bureau of Affairs’ regions and agencies, and tribes that receive updates to new policy guidance.
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security will continue its work under the Financial Assistance and Social Services - Case Management System Modernization Initiative and the Center for Excellence with a focus on training on the Child and Family Services portion of the system.
During FY 2019, the system was enhanced to electronically integrate the Bureau of Indian’s Indian Child Welfare Act Designated Agents list with the Tribal Leader's Directory Map that is published on the Bureau of Indian’s website and updated regularly and compare to that of Federally recognized tribes.
The Federal Register publication is frequently out-of-date and becomes inaccurate the moment it published due to the frequent changes in staff at tribal locations.
The enhanced system will improve accountability for the Indian Child Welfare Act and give states, counties, and private organizations with the most current information.
Continue working to build partnerships with universities and other organizations to recruit and increase the number of master level social workers to fill Child Welfare and IIM Specialist positions across the nation.
Provide policy oversight, technical assistance, and procedural training to the Bureau of Indian Affairs’ region and Agency staff on managing and monitoring supervised Individual Indian Monies accounts.
Develop an Individual Indian Monies core competency training for online usage to accessibility to Tribal and caseworkers across the nation.
Develop electronically based methods to monitor and support the Bureau of Indian Affairs’ Regional Human Services Offices to ensure the annual review of supervised IIM accounts conducted within the required yearly timeframe.
To continue to improve and monitor the timeliness of processing leases utilizing the realty tracking system that identifies locations with untimely processing.
Develop automated solutions to transfer the reality tracking system to the Trust Asset and Accounting Management System for increased efficiency and data integrity by one record system.
Update the Leasing Handbook to assist, standardize, and streamline leasing processes and approvals.
To create and implement systemized training on a national, regional, and agency level.
Continue designing and enhancing the automated solutions in the processing of Fee-To-Trust applications in the Trust Asset and Accounting Management System.
Implement guidance for the new policy regarding Fee-To-Trust off-reservation cases.
Work to improve program efficiencies at the tribal level in service delivery and case management.
Ensure that all targets are identified and negotiated and provide technical assistance at the regional and agency levels.
Continue to develop standardized business processes across LTRO's.
Update DLTRO Handbook to reflect the standardized business processes across LTRO's.
Update LTRO 51 IAM chapters 2, 3 & 4, reflecting the Bureau of Indian Affairs’ new automated processes.
Continue to improve and monitor the timeliness and accuracy of processing recorded documents.
Work with LTROs to continue to address legal land description discrepancies for mapping in the Trust Asset and Accounting Management System.
Report all deaths into the system of records to ensure that a probate case is created to begin the probate process.
Conduct research of family data to validate the decedent's trust assets to ensure the OHA-7 is accurate before submission to the Office of Hearing and Appeal for proper adjudication.
Verify that Probate staff is reviewing the OHA-7 for accuracy to avoid the probate case being dismissed/remanded back to Probate, causing delays.
Probate staff will continue to review the Decision Order to ensure the accuracy of the distribution of trust assets.
If corrections are needed, then Probate staff will request a rehearing during the appeal period to ensure the accurate distribution of trust assets.
Probate staff is facilitating the probate case through the closing process by forwarding the probate case to Land Title and Records Office for title update and then on to the Office of Special Trustee for IIM Account distribution.
Program Performance Overview: The Bureau of Indian Education (BIE) provides funding to 183 elementary and secondary schools and dormitories serving approximately 46,000 students, across 23 states, with over two-thirds of the schools operated by tribes and the remainder operated directly by BIE.
Additionally, BIE funds 33 tribal colleges, universities, tribal technical colleges, and post secondary schools.
In 2019, the program continued to track the high school graduation rate and attendance data.
While both measures did not meet the national goal, BIE increased resources to improve data collection and reporting.
Public Benefit: Providing quality education opportunities starting in early childhood by tribally identified strategies and needs.
Tribal communities need an educated citizenry to lead their governments, develop reservation economies, contribute to the social well-being of the community, and sustain Indian cultures.
Program Performance Overview: Performance metris for this strategy focus on health issues directly impacting insular area residents.
Community Water System (CWS) Improvement: Availability of clean water serves as a key indicator of the quality of life, and, for this goal, performance is indicated by CWS violation notices from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Continued economic challenges and aging infrastructure impact the insular area residents’ ability to maintain water system conditions and ensure that more than 90 percent of the 131 water systems in the insular areas are free of health-based violation notices each year.
Tuberculosis Eradication: The Office of Insular Affairs (OIA) will work to promote health and quality of life by preventing, controlling, and eventually eliminating tuberculosis (TB), a chronic problem, from the islands.
To do this, OIA collaborates with the Territories, Freely Associated States (FAS) and Federal partners, to identify new cases, transmission, and treatment completion of the communities.
Having one of the worst rates of TB in the Pacific, the Republic of the Marshall Islands has been working in close collaboration with the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to eradicate the disease with OIA compact health sector grant support.
In FY 2018, OIA spent $1.1 million was used to conduct mass TB screening with an 85 percent screening completion rate, finding, 307 active TB cases, 4,897 latent TB cases, and 54 new cases of leprosy.
To date, nearly 100 percent of patients with latent TB cases and 30 percent of those with active TB cases have completed treatment.
In FY 2019, another $1.1million was used to complete the treatment for those screened and remove TB as a public health concern in the RMI.
Challenges remain, however, in treating latent and active TB cases, especially in the state of Chuuk in the Federated States of Micronesia, where known TB cases stood at 77 in 2018.
OIA provided $1.6 million in 2019 to focus on early detection and treatment with the goal of a tuberculosis-free and leprosy-free Chuuk.
Infant Mortality: Infant mortality is considered a primary measure of public health for countries around the world.
Over the past decade, the overall infant mortality rate in the United States has improved, declining 15 percent from 6.9 infant deaths per 1,000 live births in 2005—a recent high—to 5.8 infant deaths per 1,000 live births in 2014.
The infant mortality rate in the insular areas is more than double that of the entire United States.
Infant mortality continues to be an extremely complex health issue with many medical, social, and economic factors, including race/ethnicity, maternal age, education, smoking, and health status.
Health Infrastructure: In 2019, OIA investeed in assessment of aging hospital facilities in American Samoa and Guam, using results to make determinations on improving or replacing facilities.
OIA is also contracting an insular health facility maintenance initiative, which will begin in 2020.
A team of medical professionals will assess the facility maintenance status and requirements for insular hospitals in the U.S. Territories and Freely Associated States.
The team will conduct interviews and group meetings to determine the local capabilities, perceived shortfalls, and local recommendations for solutions.
The team will gather data on facility maintenance staffing (number and current qualifications), facility maintenance requirements, identify failed and failing building systems, identify unique challenges to performing routine maintenance, and maintenance budget and procurement issues.
This data will be used as a road map to embed someone at the facility to establish a locally sustainable plan for addressing the root cause(s) of issues and need to embedded facility maintenance staff.
Public Benefit: The Territories and the Freely Associated States experience significant healthcare challenges.
The Department of the Interior will work with insular area partners to improve the quality of healthcare across the insular areas.
The Department will make investments to implement corrective action plans to address chronic operational and facility shortcomings at hospitals that serve their U.S. citizens and residents and focus on those factors identified by OIA-funded assessments, the Department of Health and Human Services/U.S. Centers for Medicare/Medicaid Services and local elected officials.
Additional investments will be made to combat noncommunicable and communicable diseases impacting the Pacific and Caribbean such as obesity, diabetes, and tuberculosis.
Continue water infrastructure projects that support clean water objectives.
Enhance water system monitoring in partnership with the U.S. Environment Protection Agency.
Invest in healthcare infrastructure and operations.
Program Performance Overview: Performance metrics for this strategy focus on economic issues directly impacting insular area residents.
The economic prosperity of the insular areas is essential to the United States for national security, diplomatic, and humanitarian purposes.
Average per capita Gross Domestic Product (GDP): In the four U.S. territories (American Samoa, the Commonweath of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI), Guam, and the U.S. Virgin Islands, American Samoa, and Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI)), GDP per capita is 44% of the GDP per capita for the U.S.
The Office of Insular Affairs (OIA) provides technical assistance to the insular areas to assist with economic development planning and execution and supports local planning and education activities related to tourism, agriculture, and aquaculture.
Also, OIA funds infrastructure projects related to economic development, such as fiber optic connectivity, port improvements, and renovations to tourist districts.
Cost of electricity: Without indigenous fossil fuels, insular areas face significant challenges in achieving reliable, affordable, and secure energy.
The resulting increased costs can have severe economic effects on the island communities, which depend almost entirely on imported petroleum products for energy.
The residential cost per kilowatt-hour for power in the territories directly impacts the quality of life in the insular areas and remains approximately two times higher than the national average.
To try to address electricity costs, OIA provides technical assistance in reviewing and implementing energy projects which would lower the cost of electricity.
The OIA, through its Energizing Insular Communities grant program, continues to provide funding for the highest priority projects identified in the energy plans, including more efficient traditional generation and transmission, photovoltaic, wind, and geothermal development projects.
Public Benefit: Strong local economies provide employment and a viable tax base for citizens in the insular areas.
The Department will assist the insular areas to strengthen their economies through strategic investments in infrastructure, public services, and technical assistance, which will attract and retain private sector investment.
The Department will promote policies and improve federal coordination on issues to enhance insular economies.
Support energy planning committees in the insular areas and implement action items/projects contained in local energy plans.
Fund public infrastructure projects that attract investment and provide technical assistance for economic development activities.
Supply professional training and consultation services to insular governments to help improve financial reporting.
Equip insular area leadership with the statistical tools necessary for informed decision-making.
Supply professional training and consultation services to insular governments to help improve financial reporting.
Program Performance Overview: Performance metrics for this strategy focus on the economic benefits of Compacts of Free Association annual financial assistance on freely associated states (FAS) residents.
Financial assistance is provided through the Office of Insular Affairs (OIA).
Improving Expenditure of FSM Infrastructure Funding: Utilizing OIA Compact funding, the FSM government-contracted technical assistance from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) to establish and fully staff three out of five program management offices at the FSM national government level, Pohnpei, and Yap States.
USACE continues to provide technical assistance laying the foundation for the professional management of public infrastructure funding.
Their support has also provided independent technical review of projects resulting in better designs, reduced cost overruns, and fewer disputes.
Palau Infrastructure: In 2019, the U.S. Government and Palau mutually agreed to projects utilizing $20 million of infrastructure funding provided under the 2010 Compact Review Agreement.
Road, port, and financial management system improvements will be implemented beginning in 2020.
Marshall Islands Healthcare: Utilizing OIA Compact funding, the RMI is planning the construction to professional standards of a 100-bed hospital facility in Majuro, RMI, and ensuring the maintenance and upkeep of the Ebeye Hospital within the Kwajalein Atoll.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) will provide oversight of design and construction management services to ensure the delivery of sound and safe infrastructure that is built to international standards.
The health sector of the Marshall Islands has acute problems in ensuring that professional medical staff positions are filled at both Majuro and Ebeye Hospitals.
Compact funding will be used for training purposes and staff development to lessen the reliance upon the expatriate professional medical staff.
Public Benefit: In coordination with the State Department, the Department will implement Compact obligations with three U.S.- affiliated freely associated states: The Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI) and the Republic of Palau (Palau).
The Department will make direct grants to assist FSM and RMI under their amended Compacts providing assistance to six sectors: education, healthcare, infrastructure, public sector capacity building, private sector development, and environment.
The Department is implementing the 2010 Palau Compact Review Agreement with appropriations provided in 2018.
Execute financial assistance agreements with the Freely Associated States in line with Compacts of Free Association.
Implement the 2010 Palau Compact Review Agreement.
Increase the expenditure rate of infrastructure sector grant funding in the Federated States of Micronesia.
Program Performance Overview: On November 26, 2019, President Donald J. Trump issued an Executive Order establishing the Task Force on Missing and Murdered American Indians and Alaska Natives (Task Force), which will be co-chaired by U.S. Secretary of the Interior David Bernhardt and Attorney General William P. Barr.
The E.O. gives a direction and reaffirms the Administration's priority of addressing the concerns of tribal governments and American Indian and Alaska Native communities.
The Task Force, in coordination and consultation with American Indians and Alaska Natives, will develop protocols for new and unsolved cases, establish multi-jurisdictional cold cases teams, and establish greater clarity of roles and responsibilities.
The Task Force will facilitate better coordination and collaboration with tribal communities, resulting in long term strategies to address complex issues.
It will take continued efforts and cooperation among all stakeholders to improve response and investigative challenges and collect and manage data across jurisdictions.
Greater clarity on the roles, authorities, and jurisdiction will be helpful for all of those involved with the goal of formal agreements and greater communication between agencies, with communities, and to the public.
To elevate this effort during the next two years, the Department has selected Indian Affairs for an Agency Priority Goal (APG), “By September 30, 2021, Indian Affairs, through the BIA Office of Justice Services, will meet and exceed the goals established by Executive Order 13898, emphasizing the coordination of data sharing with federal partners and ensure that 100 percent of BIA active missing and murdered cases are entered into the National Missing and Unidentified Persons System (NamUs).”
The Department’s Office of Law Enforcement and Security (OLES) continues work with all DOI bureaus to update current law enforcement staffing plans.
Although only 57 percent of the bureaus had a current law enforcement staffing plan in 2019, OLES plans to have 85 percent of the bureaus with a current law enforcement staffing plan by the end of 2020.
The BIA Office of Justice Services (OJS) program continues to focus on efficient use of resources to maintain the quality of law enforcement services provided to tribes.
To reduce costs, the program maximized the use of technology such as conference calls and web-hosted meetings to maintain the existing level of technical assistance to tribal programs.
Cost and level-of-effort tracking and reporting mechanisms are being utilized by the program to ensure mission objectives can be achieved within the resource levels provided.
Among these objectives is improved consistency and effectiveness of program reviews conducted, which in turn is expected to result in higher nation-wide offense clearance rates each year.
Since OJS is facing nationwide staffing issues, reviews may be impacted when scheduled.
Public Benefit: Inherent in our management of public lands is the obligation to protect DOI employees and visitors to those public lands.
Ensuring employee and public safety is complex and requires the resources of multiple bureaus and offices.
The Department’s Law Enforcement Program has the third largest contingent of federal law enforcement officers in the Executive Branch.
Depending on the season, approximately 3,500-4,000 law enforcement officers, rangers, and other employees patrol vast acres of public lands, national parks, wildlife refuges, and Indian communities and protect natural, cultural, and heritage resources from illegal activities.
Stand up a holistic effort to address missing and murdered Indigenous people, violence against women, human trafficking, and other violent crime occurring in Indian Country by bringing together multiple-agency stakeholders.
Develop and implement new investigative teams to focus specifically on cold cases, missing persons, violence against women, domestic violence and violent crime occurring in Indian Country.
Complete 50 annual law enforcement program reviews through appropriate planning and coordination with our tribal programs, which reflects BIA’s commitment to ensuring effective utilization of public safety resources in our service to tribal communities.
Program Performance Overview: The Office of Emergency Management (OEM) promotes all-hazard preparedness and response, ensures continuity of the Department to perform essential functions during catastrophic events, assists communities during imminent threats, and plays a vital role in supporting the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its disaster response mission.
To assess its readiness to perform its mission, the OEM has established a readiness index measure that assesses each bureau across four components and then averages the result for the Department.
Since 2015, the readiness index has remained constant at a high level.
The Department’s All-Hazards Baseline Operational Plan provides the baseline guidance for how the Department prepares for and responds to emergencies, regardless of type or cause.
The NPS is required to enforce all pertinent federal laws and regulations within all park units.
In addition to regular law enforcement, the NPS provides emergency management, search and rescue, and medical services; enhanced physical security at national icon parks; monitoring and protection of over 44 million acres of designated wilderness; efforts to curtail illegal trade and poaching operations; investigation of archeological and paleontological crimes; and specialized law enforcement and physical security at parks located on the international borders.
Proactive law enforcement and protection strategies include counter-drug operations and community outreach programs; applying science and technology to target crime; and participation in interagency task forces.
All of these activities enhance visitor and employee safety, natural and cultural resource protection, and homeland security.
Public Benefit: The OEM leads the efforts for preparedness and response, and leads coordination and information sharing among the emergency management, communications, public health, environmental health, wildlife health, integrated pest management, invasive species, and occupational safety and health mission areas across the Department’s bureaus and offices.
Support the five National Planning Frameworks (Protection, Prevention, Mitigation, Response, and Recovery) and their related five Federal Interagency Operational Plans, the National Incident Management System, and the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan while continuing the Department’s mission to protect natural and cultural resources.
Program Performance Overview: The Department supports the Administration’s plan to secure our borders and protect our citizens and resources along the border.
The Department continues collaboration efforts by searching for opportunities to share resources and balance efforts.
This is accomplished by routine interagency coordination, participating in local Border Management Task Force (BMTF) meetings, interagency training, and law enforcement specific operations.
The U.S. Border Patrol (USBP) is the primary partner agency responsible for patrolling Department lands adjacent to the U.S./Mexico Border.
With the border wall construction and talk of U.S. immigration reform, the USBP was inundated with individuals seeking asylum along the southwest border during FY 2019.
The Department implemented Operation Border Surge which increased the number of apprehensions and illegal drug seizures made by DOI law enforcement officers.
Over 70,000 of those apprehensions occurred at Chamizal National Memorial in El Paso, Texas.
This Park is located adjacent to the Border and runs parallel to a major port of entry known for illegal cross border activity.
Significant border wall construction across DOI managed lands making it difficult for individuals to enter the U.S.
DOI bureaus (FWS, NPS, BLM) implement a long-term law enforcement staffing plan on DOI property along the border.
On DOI lands where the border wall cannot be constructed, the use of emerging technologies to alert law enforcement of illegal cross border entries must be utilized.
Public Benefit: The Department manages lands adjacent to 41 percent of the southwest border of the continental US, 14 percent of its northern border, and 31 percent of the southeast border, totaling 1,900 miles along the three borders.
With an estimated 500 million visitors a year and over 480 million acres to manage, the Department’s managers in the field are faced with tough decisions on how to best utilize their law enforcement assets.
One strategy is adopting a whole government approach.
Through partnering, Federal, State, tribal, and local law enforcement agencies working in proximity to each other have been able to address critical issues like illegal immigration, and the natural resource impacts often associated with it.
Continue interagency coordination by participating in local Border Management Task Force (BMTF) meetings, interagency training, and law enforcement specific operations.
Program Performance Overview: On December 21, 2018, President Donald J. Trump issued Executive Order 13855, titled "Promoting Active Management of America's Forests, Rangelands, and Other Federal Land to Improve Conditions and Reduce Wildfire Risk," declaring it to be the "policy of the United States to protect people, communities, and watersheds, and to promote healthy and resilient forests, rangelands, and other Federal lands by actively managing them through partnerships with States, tribes, communities, non-profit organizations, and the private sector."
The Department is critical to promoting the policy goals within this E.O. and has established Secretarial Order 3372 to enhance the Department’s management of Federal lands.
During the past three years, wildfires have covered an average of 3.49 million acres of Department-managed land per year.
The serious health risks, safety concerns, tragic loss of life, and economic losses resulting from catastrophic wildfire demonstrate the need for increased attention to active forestland, rangeland, watershed, and wildfire management policies and techniques that reduce irreparable harm to landscapes and the citizens who live and work in neighboring communities.
The Department’s Office of Wildland Fire (OWF) strives to achieve a risk-based, cost-effective, technically efficient, and scientifically grounded wildland fire management program that safely meets fire and resource management goals.
OWF aligns programs, budgets, and performance to implement the intergovernmental National Cohesive Wildland Fire Management Strategy, a science-based and innovative, collaborative approach to mitigating wildfire risk.
The Department sustained its performance at existing levels over the past five years with only minor year-to-year variance for acres in desired condition and initial response strategy success.
The measure for treatments has been more variable due to changes in available funding and the set of projects undertaken in a given year.
The Department achieved its targets on all the wildland fire measures in FY 2019 and continues to develop new wildland fire management performance measures to better evaluate program efficacy in achieving resource conditions that reduce the intensity, severity, or negative effects of wildfire.
The work entails the application of wildfire risk mitigation concepts and principles, such as the strategic placement of fuels treatments based on risk assessment factors and mitigation plans.
To elevate this effort during the next two years, the Department has selected the OWF for an Agency Priority Goal (APG), “By September 30, 2021, the Department of the Interior will undertake at least 85% of all fuels management projects utilizing collaborative risk assessments that identify wildfire likelihood.”
Public Benefit: Preparedness activities provide the foundation for a safe and effective strategic response to unplanned ignitions and enable land managers to develop collaborative efforts to achieve fire-adapted communities and landscapes that are resilient to the effect of wildfire.
Fuel treatments improve the integrity of the forests and rangelands while reducing the risks of high severity wildfires and the impacts of such fires on people, communities, and natural and cultural resources located near or adjacent to federal or tribal lands.
Rehabilitation of the most severely damaged lands from high impact wildfires minimizes future threats to life, property, and natural and cultural resources by stabilizing and preventing unacceptable degradation of these key values.
The Department works collaboratively with other federal, tribal, state, and local governments to help protect life and property, limit damages to natural and cultural resources during wildfire response and reduce program and management duplication.
Foster a cohesive program that integrates wildland fire management principles and practices in resource management programs throughout the Department.
Advance the guiding principles of the National Cohesive Wildland Fire Management Strategy and other federal policy to restore and maintain resilient landscapes, create fire-adapted communities, and ensure safe and effective wildfire response.
Work collaboratively with Federal, Tribal, state, and local entities to ensure a coordinated approach to wildland fire management that work across boundaries to manage wildfire risk at a landscape scale and improve ecosystem and community resilience.
Facilitate shared stewardship of lands by coordinating protection responsibilities and resources in order to improve firefighter and public safety, gain economic efficiency, reduce duplication, and meet resource management objectives.
Rehabilitate and restore lands degraded and damaged by wildfire.
Strengthen accountability and oversight of the wildland fire management program through improved performance and the use of risk management principles to guide decision-making.
Manage an interagency Information Technology enterprise portfolio of fire applications and systems to improve wildland fire planning, preparedness, and response.
Implement the Administration’s priorities, including Executive Order 13855 and Secretarial Order 3372, to: improve collaboration with Federal, Tribal, state, and local partners; incorporate active fuels management into resource management planning; reduce wildfire risk; and promote sustainable recovery of damaged lands.
Conduct targeted fuels management efforts along the Southern border that support national security objectives while concurrently addressing the threat of wildfire.
Promote the use of technological advancements and innovation in wildland fire management activities, including unmanned aircraft systems, thermal imaging, remote resource tracking systems, and mobile technology applications.
Conduct active forest management work, including fuels reduction, fire effects monitoring, educational outreach, pre-fire preparation of burn units, projects to create defensible space around NPS infrastructure, and participation in prescribed fires in the Western and Southern United States.
Program Performance Overview: Overall, program performance remained relatively flat from 2017 to 2019, with three of five strategic plan performance measures improving performance and two decreasing performance.
The actual number of landslide hazard and risk assessments the Landslide Hazards Program (LHP) delivers in a given year is largely a function of the number of wildfires that occur each year in areas prone to debris flows and the number of requests for hazard assessments the program receives.
The 2017 and 2018 fire seasons were both very active in areas prone to debris flows which resulted in increased efforts in landslide assessments, but there were fewer major wildfires in 2019.
The percent completion of coastal and marine hazards and subsidence research increased from the target largely due to more observations being conducted because of data collection improvements in remote sensing applications.
This level of performance indicates that critical natural hazard knowledge and tools continue to be developed and provided to land managers, policy makers, and the public to inform decision-making.
Public Benefit: The USGS provides scientific information to emergency responders, policy makers, and the public to reduce the risk of life and property losses from a wide range of natural hazards, including earthquakes, floods, hurricanes, landslides, magnetic storms, tsunamis, volcanic eruptions, and wildfires.
Monitor and report on the nation's earthquakes via the Advanced National Seismic System (ANSS) and through support to several regional seismic networks operated by State and university partners, provide 24x7 reporting on domestic and global earthquakes, and deliver rapid earthquake impact and situational awareness products to support emergency response.
Deliver real-time earthquake data to NOAA, supporting tsunami alerting in the Pacific Rim and tsunami warning in Alaska, Hawaii, Washington, California, and U.S. Territories in the Western Pacific and Caribbean.
Continue to improve the USGS National Seismic Hazard Model, which describes the likelihood and potential impacts of earthquakes nationwide and serves as the basis of seismic provisions in building codes.
Convert 30 analog seismometers and analog telemetry nodes at Alaska monitoring stations to digital seismometers with digita data telemetry to make progress on compliance of monitoring networks with the National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) restrictions on radio frequency utilization.
Deliver proactive monitoring of the nation’s active volcanoes at levels matching the threats posed, including effective communication and outreach to land managers, emergency responders and the public about hazardous volcanic activity and effective community preparedness.
Partner with 3-DEP initiative and other Federal and State agencies to leverage resources towards acquiring high-resolution light distance and ranging (LiDAR) data over Very-High-Threat and High-Threat volcanoes.
Conduct field, laboratory, and modeling studies of landslide initiation and mobility processes in cooperation with federal, state, academic, and private sector partners to develop, test, and advance tools and methods for landslide monitoring, hazard assessment, and forecasting.
Provide post-wildfire debris-flow hazard assessments for major wildfires to Burned Area Emergency Response (BAER) Teams, State Geological Surveys, federal, state, and local emergency management and the public.
Collect observations, conduct studies, and test methods and models to expand the NOAA-USGS partnership for post-wildfire debris-flow early warning beyond the prototype area in southern California to other parts of the western United States.
In support of Executive Order 13744, Coordinating Efforts to Prepare the Nation for Space Weather Events and the National Space Weather Strategy and Action Plan (NSWSAP), the Geomagnetism Program will focus on operating magnetic observatories and providing real-time geomagnetic data needed for issuing warnings and forecasts of geomagnetic storms.
In support of the NSWSAP and to mitigate hazards for the electric-power grid, the Geomagnetism Program will develop geoelectric hazard maps, existing data sets needed to estimate Earth surface impedance, and computer-based tools need for real-time mapping of geomagnetic and geoelectric field variation.
Collect and use magnetotelluric measurements of the earth’s crust to improve assessments of geoelectric hazards for the contiguous United States, in response to the priorities of the National Space Weather Strategy and Action Plan.
Conduct field and laboratory studies with other federal and academic partners to characterize marine methane systems and associated sea-bed processes to enhance understanding of their substantial energy resource potential, the risk they represent to offshore operations, and their role in the global carbon system and marine ecological productivity.
Contribute analyses and expertise to delineate the U.S. Extended Continental Shelf consistent with international law and apply expertise to understanding the occurrence and potential of deep-sea mineral resources.
Collect, manage, and disseminate high quality and reliable integrated hydrologic information in real time and over the long term for flood and drought planning, warnings, and forecasting; designing water infrastructure; operating waterways for power production and navigation; managing water rights issues; and assessing safety conditions for water recreational activities.
Create a unified National Streamflow Network of more than 8,400 real-time streamgages operated year-round, including 3,470 Federal Priority Streamgages that support strategic Federal responsibilities.
Complete the full implementation of the Next-Generation Water Observing System (NGWOS) in the Delaware River Basin, continued implementation of NGWOS in the headwaters of the Colorado and Gunnison River Basin, and initial planning for NGWOS in a third basin, likely in the Central U.S.
Modernize the National Water Information System (NWIS) data storage and delivery system with efforts focused on moving off aging legacy systems.
Develop, refine, and apply hazard information to minimize loss of life and property, such as Rapid Deployment Gages (RDG’s), Storm Tide Sensors, and Wave Height Sensors.
Program Performance Overview: The Department established 12 new unified regions for many of its bureaus (except BIA and BIE) in 2018 and further implemented this approach in 2019.
The goal is to improve overall operations, internal communications, customer service, and stakeholder engagement.
Aligning geographic areas across the DOI will enhance coordination of resource decisions and policies and will simplify how citizens engage with the DOI.
A common geographic frame of reference means regional executives can be focused on the same resources, constituents, and possibilities.
Aligning bureaus with common geographies will allow for more integrated and better coordinated decision making across bureaus.
Unified regions will help streamline operations and in doing so, provide better service to the American people.
Bureaus within a region will focus on common issues, taking a comprehensive approach versus a bureau-centric approach.
This culture shift will help us work better together to accomplish one vision.
In 2018, regional facilitators were selected to lead the reorganization from the field and are building teams of subject matter experts in the primary Mission Areas (Recreation, Collaborative Conservation, and Permitting) and Support Areas (Human Resources Management, Information Technology, and Procurement of goods and services).
The unified region teams were comprised of experts from all the participating bureaus present in the region.
The unified regions were established in August 2018 and efforts to make the 12 unified regions fully operational were continued through 2019.
Public Benefit: The Department is improving its organizational model to determine how to best achieve its mission of serving the American public, honoring our tribal and fiduciary trust responsibilities, and managing and protecting our land, water and natural resources for the next 100 years.
Relocate staff from major urban areas to the region or field.
Improve Interior stakeholder engagement through shifting resources (Human Capital) from major urban areas to the region and field locations.
Implement efficiencies to improve mission delivery and achieve strategic goals.
Program Performance Overview: To facilitate strategic human capital planning, the Department will continue to leverage automation to improve employee performance and training opportunities and examine additional data to determine if operational efficiencies can be gained while minimizing redundancies under the current organizational design.
During Fiscal Year 2019, the Department completed a Human Resources (HR) Assessment on Human Resources Service Delivery.
As a result of the HR Assessment, the Department established HR Governance through a newly established HR Policy Review Board.
The Department also commenced three initiatives: transitioning to a single Talent Management system; establishing Interior Bureau Expert Teams’ (IBET) Executive Resources and Classification models; and, partnering with the Office of Law Enforcement to improve Personnel Security.
Public Benefit: The Department is committed to managing America’s vast natural and cultural resources with a 70,000-strong and 350 occupation-plus workforce that exemplifies high performance, customer service and accountability.
Leverage technology to improve HR operations to recruit and hire employees.
Leverage Centers of Excellence models to establish Interior Bureau Expert Teams.
Provide hiring managers and supervisors tools needed to hire quality candidates.
Leverage technology to provide opportunities to the workforce for career development.
Streamline the accountability and evaluation review process.
Leverage the Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey data to improve employee engagement, workplace culture and Best Places to Work in Federal Government ranking.
Program Performance Overview: On February 24, 2017, President Trump signed Executive Order (EO) 13777, entitled “Enforcing the Regulatory Reform Agenda,” to alleviate unnecessary regulatory burdens placed on the American people.
The Executive Order provides direction to identify regulations for repeal, replacement, or modification that eliminate jobs, inhibit job creation, are outdated, unnecessary, ineffective, impose costs that exceed benefits, or rely on data or methods that are not publicly available or insufficiently transparent to meet the standard for reproducibility.
In accordance with Executive Order 13771 entitled, “Reducing Regulation and Controlling Regulatory Costs,” the costs of the regulatory and deregulatory actions are measured as the opportunity costs or cost savings to society, as defined in OMB Circular A-4.
The Department’s Regulatory Reform Task Force is guiding implementation of regulatory reform to alleviate unnecessary burdens placed on the American people.
Periodically, the Department will review the written input to the Federal Rulemaking Portal (www.regulations.gov) to determine whether additional regulations should be targeted for review and considered for suspension, revision, or rescission.
The DOI achieved cumulative savings of $5.84B (net present value) from its deregulatory actions for the period FY 2017-FY 2019.
Public Benefit: The Department strives to be prudent and financially responsible in the expenditure of funds.
In addition to the management of the direct expenditure of taxpayer dollars through the budgeting process, it is essential to manage the costs associated with the governmental imposition of private sector costs required to comply with Federal regulations.
The Administration’s policy is that for every new regulation issued, at least two prior regulations be identified for elimination, and that the cost of planned regulations be prudently managed and controlled through a budgeting process.
Program Performance Overview: Compliance with permitting requirements is often unnecessarily prolonged and expensive.
As outlined in the President’s Executive Order “Establishing Discipline and Accountability in the Environmental Review and Permitting Process for Infrastructure,” and the corresponding Secretarial Order 3355, a significant opportunity exists to decrease the time required to complete environmental review and authorization for infrastructure projects.
The Department believes this can best be achieved through streamlined processing and unified regional boundaries that facilitate resolution of intersecting bureau issues within the same geography.
Secretarial Order 3355 implementation guidance issued in April 2018 identified the Department’s plans to streamline and collaborate on National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) compliance efforts.
In addition to reducing the time and page limits for environmenta review documents, the guidance is expected to significantly improve the overall timeliness of major right-of-way applications for water and energy infrastructure projects.
Public Benefit: America needs increased infrastructure investment to strengthen our economy, enhance our competitiveness in world trade, create jobs and increase wages for our workers, and reduce the costs of goods and services for our families.
The poor condition of America's infrastructure has been estimated to cost typical American household thousands of dollars each year.
Inefficiencies in current infrastructure project decisions, including management of unnecessarily expensive and prolonged environmental reviews and permit decisions or authorizations, have delayed infrastructure investments, increased project costs, and blocked the American people from enjoying improved infrastructure that would benefit our economy, society, and environment.
More efficient and effective federal infrastructure decisions can transform our economy, so the Federal Government must change the way it processes environmental reviews and authorization decisions.
Program Performance Overview: The Department of the Interior has highlighted this objective as a focus area for improvement.
Real property assets are integral to the success of the Department’s mission.
The Department’s real property inventory includes approximately 43,000 buildings and 80,000 structures with a replacement value of approximately $300 billion, across six bureaus.
Management of deferred maintenance is a Departmental priority to ensure completion of needed repairs and prevent further deterioration and unsafe conditions.
The Administration’s Public Lands Infrastructure Fund legislation will go a long way toward addressing the deferred maintenance of our National Parks, National Wildlife Refuges, BLM facilities, and Indian schools.
The Department will address deferred maintenance/repair needs with priority given to those that support critical mission activities and manage risk to improve the condition of assets.
Across the Department, there are currently 51,000 buildings and structures considered highest priority.
The Facility Condition Index (FCI) and Asset Priority Index (API) performance measures are key indicators for managing the portfolio in support of the Department’s diverse missions.
A significant factor impacting a sustainable portfolio of constructed assets is the aging infrastructure.
Many assets already exceed original design life, and this trend continues to increase maintenance demands.
Furthermore, the Department’s mission is to maintain heritage assets in perpetuity for the benefit of future generations.
The Department must continue to maintain and repair these aging assets and cannot simply divest these assets as is typically done in private industry.
These examples illustrate why the backlog of deferred maintenance continues to increase, now estimated at more than $16 billion.
The Department conserves the Nation’s cultural and heritage sites that reflect a rich and diverse history.
The Department safeguards our heritage for the generations that follow, to better understand our country’s present and learn from our past.
Many challenges exist in protecting and maintaining historic and archeological sites, especially with the impacts of weather on fragile sites and structures.
Sites are exposed to changing weather conditions that cause damage and deterioration of the structures and sites, and some locations are vandalized or accidentally damaged by visitors to federal lands.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) employs a Service Level Index to determine the conditions of the roads and bridges in tribal communities.
The overarching goal is to maximize the efficient use of real property and to optimize expenditures on the real property portfolio.
The BIA Road Construction Program maintains and operates the 30,000 miles of BIA-owned roads and bridges.
These roads and bridges serve as the primary access points to tribal communities, without which critical resources and services would not reach tribal members.
The Department will continue to improve and provide safe, functional, energy efficient, and universally accessible BIA facilities.
The Department is also working to improve its Bureau of Indian Education (BIE) funded schools and improve the learning environment of BIE students.
Public Benefit: The Department manages the full life‐cycle requirements of nearly every type of constructed asset, including visitor centers, dams, schools, health clinics, power generating facilities, housing, hotels, fire stations, campgrounds, roads, water and wastewater treatment plants, offices, and more.
Many of these assets have historic or cultural significance that not only support the Department’s mission, but also are important to our Nation’s heritage.
Improving our infrastructure means we can better accomplish our mission for the American people.
Complete compliance audits and inspections on dams, bridges, and facilities with seismic risk as required by law.
Any deficiencies uncovered are identified for maintenance, deferred maintenance, or line-item construction.
Provide safe and accessible facilities for visitors to view/photograph/learn about archaeological sites, historic structures, and historical collections.
Invest in the Service’s aviation program to maintain the DOI fleet and improve pilot safety.
Work on a multi-phased approach to shift from a paper-based permitting system to implementing a modern, web-based permitting system.
Retain maintenance capacity for the National Conservation Training Center to preserve the campus as the leading facility to engage, educate, and employ conservation professionals.
Prioritize maintenance on the highest-priority assets in accordance with the NPS Capital Investment Strategy.
Remove, rehabilitate, and/or replace obsolete employee housing units that are in poor condition.
Maintain efforts to preserve and protect cultural resources, including but not limited to stabilization and preservation of historic and prehistoric structures, protection of archaeological sites, and preservation of museum objects and archival collections.
Ensure that BLM’s management approach fully incorporates the Cultural Resource Program.
The program is responsible for the diverse, culturally significant, and scientifically important aggregation of archaeological sites, historic structures, and paleontological resources on public lands.
Prioritize Deferred Maintenance and Capital Improvement projects, emphasizing projects that create jobs in local communities, those that improve recreation access, and those that enhance visitor safety.
Work closely with the Federal Highway Administration on Federal Lands Transportation Program, Federal Lands Access Programs, and Emergency Relief for Federally Owned Roads to complete high-priority projects to increase public access to BLM lands.
Protect life, critical infrastructure, and natural and cultural resources through the BLM’s Fire and Aviation Program.
Utilize mitigation, education, and community assistance programs to partner with local entities, homeowners, and business owners on projects to protect homes and the public.
Assess accountability and control issues related to museum property collections.
This includes collections of museum properties, natural history, and art that are catalogued, preserved, and inventoried in accordance with Federal statutes and Departmental directives.
Develop and establish a mitigation strategy for factors that may have negative impacts on the collection’s condition.
Engage law enforcement and install surveillance protections on a continuous basis to prevent theft, destruction, and vandalism of artwork collections and archaeological and cultural resources, especially in facilities not managed by Reclamation.
Continue to assure compliance with applicable cultural resources statutes such as the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA), Archaeological Protection Act (ARPA), and the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA).
Work with repositories to designate and train staff to be responsible for and improve the day-to-day management of museum collections, to ensure the preservation of the collections in perpetuity.
Continue to catalog, accession, and assess museum objects in all repositories.
Perform mandatory annual inventories to assess the condition of collections and provide accountability.
DFMC will increase its capacity to directly manage more construction projects, by managing construction projects in excess of $1M and all new construction regardless of program.
The first step in this process is to hire contracted employees as we proceed to advertise for FTEs.
DFMC will also be creating additional IDIQs and BPAs to support improved A-E planning and design development work and construction site supervision.
DFMC is also in the preliminary stages of executing their Site Assessment and Capital Improvement Program that seeks to coordinate School Replacement, Facility Replacement, and Education FI&R funds to ensure that the most critical school sites are evaluated first with supporting plans of action developed.
Continue to develop guidance to be provided to BIA regions and tribal contractors that perform level of service road maintenance assessments for deferred maintenance reporting to implement a uniform assessment schedule in the field.
Program Performance Overview: Information Management Technology (IMT) supports every facet of the Department’s diverse mission.
Employees, volunteers, and the public require modern, reliable, secure, and agile IMT services delivered in a cost-effective and transparent manner.
The increasing sophistication of cyber-attacks demand increased situational awareness, risk-based implementation of technology, demonstrated resilience in critical technologies, and a dynamically trained cybersecurity workforce.
The Department implements many of the capabilities through the Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) program which provides the capabilities and tools that identify, prioritize, and mitigate cybersecurity threats and risks in near real-time.
The Department must also implement a multitude of security and privacy controls to protect its mission-critical High Value Assets (HVAs) information systems.
Key priorities for the Department will be to strengthen the cybersecurity resiliency of these assets by eliminating vulnerabilities and isolating HVA assets from the rest of the network, modernizing older, legacy information technology (IT) systems, and ensuring proper oversight of privacy compliance activities and risks.
The Department’s employees and customers desire a computing experience that allows DOI employees to access, integrate, analyze, and capture data from any location and computing device.
Employing common processes and standards across the Department will enable seamless access to computer resources and information from any DOI facility.
To promote mobile, Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) solutions, the Department is expanding the number of mobile platforms and devices supported while protecting and securing the data.
The Department also seeks to provide services at a lower cost by consolidating and standardizing IMT services and systems.
The OMB's Data Center Optimization Initiative (DCOI) aims to reduce annual costs associated with federal data centers, resulting in significant cost savings and avoidance.
Some of these savings will be used to optimize the IMT services provided by the remaining data centers, enabling more cloud computing services and improving public access to information.
A primary focus for consolidation is the Department's hosting strategy.
The goal is to build a ubiquitous computing environment where IMT and Cloud services are provided seamlessly and on-demand to the customer.
The Department will continue to take advantage of federal-wide contracts for optimizing telecommunications and network services.
The Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA) was enacted to clarify executive responsibilities and establish accountability for the acquisition and management of resources.
Successful implementation of FITARA will lead to more effective management of IMT assets and, in turn, improve the government's ability to serve the public.
It will also increase the number of successful federal technology programs and accountability of trust in using public funds.
In 2019, the Department realized a higher than predicted percentage of appropriately authorized and managed unclassified network hardware and software assets by leveraging alternate solutions from what was previously planned.
Process changes and tool upgrades resulted in improvements to the OCIO's asset inventory, configuration security management, and asset reporting capability.
The result of these changes and upgrades is a more complete picture of the hardware and software assets deployed across the DOI.
Public Benefit: Implementing the CDM program, ensuring the protection of the Department’s high value assets, and improving privacy controls will greatly enhance the ability to protect any Personally Identifiable Information (PII) that is collected and stored as well as increase the resilience and dependability of the information technology that provides essential services to the public.
Allowing seamless access to information and resources and expanding the use of mobile devices will allow our employees to more easily obtain the tools and data they need to efficiently and effectively perform their mission to serve the public.
By consolidating data centers, modernizing computer networks, and standardizing common IT services the Department will achieve significant cost savings or avoidance for tax payers and improve delivery of IT services to the public.
Implement Department of Homeland Security Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation capabilities resulting in automated network monitoring, real-time analysis of critical security-related information, and enhanced risk-based decision-making.
Protect high value information assets by isolating these assets from the shared computing environment.
Improve connectivity, with an emphasis on broadband in remote areas and standardized and streamlined WiFi capabilities.
Optimize Data Centers by reducing the total number of data centers, using Trusted Internet Connections, and promoting standard services.
Establish accountability, compliance and risk management functions for improving management of IMT resources.
Enable DOI employees to easily connect to DOI’s network, bureau resources, and local printers at any DOI location, while keeping internal networks secure from non-DOI-managed devices.
Establish and standardize Department-wide enterprise IT Service Management and Service Desk ticketing system.
Simplify and streamline ordering processes for all DOI employees and will allow Headquarters and Regional offices to obtain IT components quickly and efficiently.
The following table provides APP&R page references, corresponding action offices, and performance measures that correspond with topics in the DOI Office of Inspector General’s (OIG) Report on Major Management Challenges (also referenced in the DOI Agency Financial Report).
Program evaluations are an important tool in analyzing the effectiveness and efficiency of the Department’s programs, and in evaluating whether the programs are meeting their intended objectives.
The Department’s programs are evaluated through a variety of means, including performance audits, financial audits, management control reviews, and external reviews from Congress, OMB, GAO, OIG, and other organizations, such as the National Academy of Public Administration and the National Academy of Sciences.
The Department uses self-assessments to verify that performance information and measurement systems are accurate and support the Department’s strategic direction and goals.
Data collection and reporting processes are further reviewed and improved using customer and internal surveys.
1. What has been the Bureau of Reclamation’s planned and actual investment in water reuse, reclamation, and recycling projects under the Title XVI and WaterSMART programs?
2. How has the Bureau of Reclamation selected and prioritized water reuse, reclamation, and recycling projects?
3. What are the current and anticipated benefits of these projects?
Findings / Actions Taken/Planned in Response to Evaluation: No findings or recommendations in final report (GAO-1-105 & GAO-19- 110).
Recommendation: No findings or recommendations in final report (GAO-19- 110).
Action taken: No findings or recommendations in final report (GAO-19- 110).
5. Appeal options, if any, available to tribes.
Findings/Actions Taken/Planned in Response to Evaluation: GAO identified key factors that tribes and agencies believe hinder effective consultation on infrastructure projects.
3. Agencies not respecting tribal sovereignty or the government-to-government relationship between federally recognized tribes and the federal government.
3. Difficulties coordinating with other federal agencies when there are multiple agencies involved in particular infrastructure projects.
Recommendation: GAO Recommendation #9: The Commissioner of the Bureau of Reclamation should document in the agency’s tribal consultation policy how agency officials are to communicate with tribes about how tribal input from consultation was considered in agency decisions on infrastructure projects (GAO-19-22).
Action taken: Reclamation’s Native American and International Affairs Office will review and modify as appropriate, Reclamation’s “Protocol Guidelines: Consulting with Indian Tribal Governments” about how Reclamation officials are to communicate with tribes about how tribal input from consultation was considered in agency decisions on infrastructure projects.
Strategic Plan Mission Area: Modernizing Our Organization and Infrastructure for the Next 100 Years.
1. Perform the annual independent Federal Information Systems Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA) audit of DOI’s information security programs and practices related to the financial and non-financial information systems in accordance with the FISMA, Public Law 113-283, 44 USC.
2. Assess the implementation of the security control catalog contained in the NIST SP 800-53 Rev 4.
1. Documented, approved, or tested system changes prior to deploying into production environment at BLM, BOR, and OST.
2. Reviewed third-party contractual agreements to ensure system changes were documented at BOR.
3. Implemented high and moderate-risk security patches within the prescribed timelines in accordance with DOI policy at BOR and USGS.
4. Disabled inactive user accounts after 45 days of inactivity at BOR.
5. Documented and implemented procedures to facilitate the implementation of system and communication protection controls at BIA, BOR, BSEE, FWS, NPS, OSMRE, and OST, which would protect data at rest.
6. Ensured personnel with incident response responsibilities complete training at BLM and BOR.
1. BOR update its contractual agreement with its vendor to enforce the documentation of change testing for all changes that the vendor develops for the system.
The updated contractual agreement should adhere to the bureau's change.
2. BOR review and update incident response procedures to require incident response training be completed annually for all personnel with incident response responsibilities.
Additionally, it would be beneficial for BOR to integrate this requirement with the DOI learning management system to ensure that completion is being tracked and completion.
3. BOR document and implement procedures to facilitate the implementation of the SC-28 security control.
The procedures should include roles and responsibilities, technical requirements, and exceptions to procedures when appropriate.
4. Implement a process to periodically and update position risk designations at least every three years.
1. BOR will Update contract verbiage to reflect vendors will not make changes to the system.
2. Review and update the incident response procedures to require personnel with Incident Response (IR) responsibilities to take annual IR training.
3. Follow guidance for protection of information at rest from OCIO when it is provided.
Draft OCIO Directive 2018-(PENDING) Encryption Requirement for Moderate and High Systems is under review at DOI.
Action taken: Reclamation created Plan of Action and Milestone (POA&M) 37393 and updated the Bureau of Reclamation Cybersecurity Incident Response Procedures for Fiscal Year 2019 to include training requirements.
The draft procedures were disseminated to the Regional Information System Security Managers (RISSMs) for comment, and the comments were incorporated into the procedures.
The BOR Cybersecurity Incident Response Procedures document was finalized on April 15, 2019 and contains IR training requirements in section seven.
Draft Corrective Action Plan is in process and being reviewed by HR.
IRO Senior management spoke to HR senior management on 5/23/19.
Meeting was held in July covering the Position Designation Reviews by July 2020.
Received OCIO Directive 2019-001 regarding Encryption Requirement for Moderate and High Systems.
Title of Program Evaluated: The Sacramento County Sheriff's Department Claimed Higher Labor Rates Than Allowed on Contract No.
R17PC00051 and Ignored Training Requirements for Contract No.
1. Determine the interim costs of $1,266,887 claimed by the SCSD under Contract No.
R17PC00051 between July 1, 2017, and September 30, 2017, were allowable and allocable under applicable Federal regulations, BOR policies and procedures, and contract terms and conditions.
2. Incorrectly charged indirect labor hours to the contract, resulting in questioned costs of $214,296 on Contract No.
3. Charged hourly rates different from those that were ratified, resulting in questioned costs of $100,269 on Contract No.
4. Did not correctly account for labor hours worked on the billed invoices for 5 of the50 timesheets reviewed for Contract No.
5. Did not conduct the required annual IT training for Contract No.
6. Did not conduct the required ethics training for Contract No.
7. Did not maintain internal controls for ethics procedures for Contract No.
Recommendation: OIG recommends BOR is to improve compliance with applicable Federal regulations, including BOR policies and procedures, and contract terms and conditions.
Action Planned: BOR will review federal regulations, contracts, invoices, policies and procedures for compliance with federal regulations and contract terms.
Action taken: The review of the invoices from July 2017 to November 2017 have been completed, representing 41% completion (5 months / 12 total months = 41%).
A final determination on the questioned costs will be completed once all invoices are reviewed.
A contract modification has been submitted to remove paragraph (f) of the security clause (WBR 1452.237-80), covering t the IT security training requirement.
The Division Manager and Branch Chiefs have begun discussions towards the development of an ethics training template to roll out to staff.
The ethics training clause was not applicable to the 2012, 2017.
Developing internal controls over ethics procedures is implemented by clause 52.203-13 section c.
Section c of the clause does not apply to contracts valued less than $5.5 million or commercial items.
R12PC20015 was commercial and the initial award for R17PC00051 was less than $5.5 million so it was not applicable.
The current contract is commercial, so Section c does not apply.
The Government will review the applicability in future contracts and enforce when applicable.
The Division Manager and Branch Chiefs have begun discussions towards the development of a training template to roll out to employees.
Title of Program Evaluated: GAO would like to discuss emergency alerting issues, however, USGS will not be the focus of this review.
Purpose of Program Evaluation: GAO is beginning this work in response to a request made by several congressional committees.
GAO would like to discuss emergency alerting issues but USGS will not be the focus of this review.
Findings / Actions Taken/Planned in Response to Evaluation: GAO’s notice to DOI/OFM of the review of emergency alerting is dated April 1, 2019.
Entrance interviews have been conducted and the review is ongoing, and findings have not yet been released.
Recommendation 1.
Purpose of Program Evaluation: GAO has been mandated to review NEHRP and assess the risks earthquakes pose to the United States.
Findings / Actions Taken/Planned in Response to Evaluation: GAO’s notice to DOI/OFM of the review of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program is dated July 31, 2019.
Entrance interviews have been conducted and the review is ongoing, and findings have not yet been released.
Recommendation 1.
The procedures should include roles and responsibilities, technical requirements, and exceptions to procedures when appropriate.
This is still in progress with a target date for completion of 3/31/2020.
The Description of Weakness and Circumstances Unique to the System in Block 5a of the Weakness Completion Verification Form (WCVF) (Attachment 1) reads, "ECOS migrated all production data to IRTM hosted Nimble storage and the ECOS System and Communications Protection Policy and published outlining implementation statements for all SC family controls including SC-28. All volumes are now encrypted."
Additionally, FWS will include a statement on the FWS’ website to inform the public about posting of public comments and identity information in Regs.gov.
Target Date 6/30/2020.
FWS considers this recommendation implemented.
FWS considers this recommendation implemented.
Scott Aikin, U.S.Fish & Wildlife Service, National Native American Programs Coord.