This document explains how the Department of Labor (DOL) improves the lives of America’s workers through the management of its agencies and programs.
As required by the Government Performance and Results Modernization Act of 2010 (GPRMA), it provides information on planned and actual performance and progress in achieving the four strategic goals, one management goal, ten strategic objectives, and twenty performance goals identified in the DOL FY 2022-2026 Strategic Plan and presented in the table below.
Vision: Empowering all workers morning, noon and night.
Mission: To foster, promote, and develop the welfare of the wage earners, job seekers, and retirees of the United States; improve working conditions; advance opportunities for profitable employment; and assure work-related benefits and rights.
Outlined below is the basic structure of this document, which provides an overview of each Strategic Goal and Objective,1 a Strategic Review Summary of Progress at the objective level, and an overview of each partner agency’s performance goal.
DOL agencies with performance goals contributing to the objective are listed; a brief introduction follows.
This section includes highlights of progress or obstacles for each strategic objective.
Each DOL partner agency section includes a brief introduction of their mission and programs.
The narrative in this section presents performance information supported by a table with applicable measures, targets, results, and status (whether or not results reached or exceed the target, indicated by Y or N).
Where “baseline” appears in the target cell for new indicators, no data were available for establishing a numerical target.
If results improved over the prior year but did not reach the target, “I” appears in the status cell.
Agency Priority Goals (APGs) identify near-term improvements in outcomes, customer service, or efficiencies that advance progress toward longer-term strategic goals and objectives.
They are two year goals that reflect the top implementation-focused, performance improvement priorities of agency leadership and the Administration, and therefore do not reflect the full scope of the agency mission.
Implementation and management of APGs require decisions about agency priorities, trade-offs, measurement, evidence, strategies, timing, and leadership that are reviewed at least quarterly to see that sufficient time, resources, and attention are allotted to addressing specific problems or opportunities related to the goal.
By September 30, 2023, DOL programs will prioritize the advancement of diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility, to better support underserved communities through a series of measures and milestones across agencies that demonstrate concrete and sustained progress.
2) reduce the estimated improper payment rate of unemployment benefits.
The Department will also plan and offer new, innovative technical assistance and grants to strengthen UI service delivery, fraud prevention, and equitable access.
More information about each goal is available on Performance.gov.
Advance training, employment, and return-to-work opportunities that connect workers to higher-wage jobs, especially in ways that address systemic inequities.
The American economy must work for all workers.
ETA, VETS, WB, and ODEP oversee programs and develop policy as part of the nation’s public workforce system, providing support to workers and employers.
In the coming years, these agencies will strengthen their efforts to expand opportunities to advance equity, inclusion, and job quality.
These agencies invest in workforce development and modernized employment practices; they also build upon established collaborations with other DOL agencies, as well as federal, state, community-based, non-profit, and other organizations to influence evidence-based policy changes, conduct important research, and strengthen employer engagement.
Collectively, these agencies’ performance goals contribute to helping workers access quality jobs today and tomorrow, and to improving DOL’s agility to evolve in an ever-changing environment.
Additionally, DOL’s Civil Rights Center investigates and adjudicates alleged discrimination and other violations of equal opportunity requirements, and provides technical assistance (TA), to ensure that the workforce system is operating in compliance with the law.
Findings for this objective were grouped into three themes: Promote Inclusion and Advance Equity; Advance Employment Entry, Retention, and Advancement; and Hiring and Diversity.
Findings demonstrating progress included use of evidence in strategies for administration of grant programs.
Challenges were identified in data needed to promote equity goals.
In early Fiscal Year (FY) 2021, ETA established a new Division of Data Analytics and Strategic Planning to develop evidence-based insights into pressing or emerging policy questions.
ETA analyzed the completeness of programs’ demographic data to determine the extent that the data could be leveraged to develop valid and reliable equity metrics.
ETA is conducting comparative outcomes analysis and has funded a TA contract for FY 2022 to improve the completeness of Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) demographic data.
ETA’s Office of Apprenticeship (OA) and Office of Unemployment Insurance (OUI) are also undertaking efforts to improve demographic data collection and reporting.
ETA worked with the DOL Chief Evaluation Office (CEO) to complete three studies of American Job Centers (AJCs).
The institutional analysis study yielded four study briefs covering: Key Institutional Features of AJCs, AJC One-Stop Operators, System Resource Sharing Practices Among AJCs, and AJCs Service Delivery in Rural Areas.
Accessibility was rated across three domains: physical accessibility, communications accessibility, and programmatic accessibility.
92 percent of AJCs were fully accessible in the physical domain, 70 percent in the communications domain, and 44 percent in the programmatic domain.
This implies that across many of the AJCs, at least some people with disabilities could not meaningfully participate in, and benefit from, services to the same extent as those without disabilities in each domain of accessibility.
VETS continued to prioritize embedding equity and inclusion into all VETS programs to reach underserved communities; and provide veterans, transitioning service members, and their families with targeted training and resources through programs that leverage partnerships to improve employment outcomes to build meaningful careers in ways that address systemic inequities.
Jobs for Veterans State Grants (JVSG): VETS will work with partners to improve the integrity of data received from grantees and analyze historical data to identify inequities among marginalized communities.
Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program (HVRP): VETS will revise the FY 2023 Funding Opportunity Announcement to identify areas with the highest rates of veteran homelessness, including communities most affected by poverty.
National Veterans’ Training Institute (NVTI): Through NVTI, VETS will deliver a training course that focuses on employment and training strategies to improve outcomes for underserved communities.
Transitioning Assistance Program (TAP): Through the Off Base Transition Training Pilot, TAP will provide veterans and military spouses the opportunity to participate in DOL-sponsored courses typically only available for transitioning service members on military bases.
VETS will select pilot sites that improve the employment situation of veterans experiencing poverty.
Uniformed Services Employment Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA): To ensure program equity, VETS will request a change to the USERRA VETS-1010 form to include additional equity demographic data that will allow VETS the ability to ensure equitable treatment during the conduct of investigations and identify any trends involving claimants who are part of a protected class in addition to military status.
WB contributes and provides thought leadership to advance equity principles and practices in a variety of intra- and inter-agency councils and working groups, including the Gender Policy Council.
WB shepherded DOL’s input toward the U.S.’s first-ever National Strategy on Gender Equity and Equality and collected input from DOL sub-agencies on their gender equity goals and baseline capacity to deliver programming and budgeting with a gender lens.
In FY 2022, ODEP met its target in issuing 112 implementation tools.
Implementation tools are formally developed tools that provide educational or explanatory information to support adoption and implementation of ODEP-developed/recommended practices and policies.
This included developing the National Plan to increase Competitive Integrated Employment (CIE), which was released in January 2022.
Expanding Registered Apprenticeship in the United States, the first implementation study of the American Apprenticeship Initiative (AAI), showed positive progress in expanding apprenticeships to new occupations and populations underrepresented in apprenticeships.
Overall, apprenticeship programs in 63 percent of occupations supported by the grantees are newly registered, rather than expansions of pre-existing registered or unregistered programs (37 percent).
Grantees report that they target underrepresented populations, including women, veterans, and racial and ethnic minorities; as of December 31, 2019, 69 percent of AAI apprentices are from these populations.
Through DOL’s TAP, VETS offers employment-related workshops at military installations worldwide and virtual training platforms to support the nation’s veterans, transitioning service members, and military spouses by preparing them with the tools necessary for a successful transition from military to civilian employment.
In FY 2021 and FY 2022, the TAP post-course survey results indicated a 96 percent facilitator satisfaction rating.
VETS has shifted to focus primarily on the wages received by the participants served (JVSG and HVRP) compared to appropriate state level wage data.
VETS’ goal is to place participants into employment that exceeds the living wage in each state, which aligns with the Department’s “Good Jobs” initiative.
The HVRP Median Earning (2nd quarter after exit) increased from $4,373 in PY 2018 to $8,216 in PY 2021.
VETS has seen an increase in the percent of closed USERRA cases that meet the quality standard, rising from 83 percent in FY 2013 to 96.5 percent in FY 2022.
VETS is continuously assessing case quality to ensure the highest level of claimant satisfaction.
Since WANTO’s inception in 1992, the Department of Labor has awarded 132 grants totaling nearly $33 million to community-based organizations in nearly two-thirds of all states (32 states total) in order to help women pursue apprenticeships and provide TA to employers and labor unions to support women in apprenticeships and nontraditional occupations (where women comprise less than 25 percent of the workforce).
In the last 5 years alone, WB has helped nearly 9,000 women train for and succeed in apprenticeship and other nontraditional fields.
In the FY 2021, WANTO Funding Opportunity Announcement, priority was given to organizations that have served as an equity intermediary in the past and those who proposed to focus on expanding outreach/recruitment to historically underrepresented communities.
ODEP does not have adequate data from workers with disabilities and employers to understand the labor market conditions affecting persons with disabilities.
ODEP has limited ability to collect reliable data from employers regarding disability employment.
As a result, it is difficult to gauge the effectiveness of efforts to identify and remove barriers to employment for persons with disabilities, especially as the country emerges from the COVID-19 pandemic.
To address at least part of this challenge, ODEP is working with DOL’s Chief Evaluation Office, Bureau of Labor Statistics, and the Census Bureau to revise the 2024 disability supplement to the Current Population Survey to gather more timely information about labor market challenges experienced by people with disabilities.
Several risks in ETA’s Apprenticeship, Office of Foreign Labor Certification (OFLC) programs, and grant administration point directly to staffing limitations as threats to maintenance of performance standards and oversight responsibilities.
The OA portfolio has increased substantially in recent years.
On the near-term horizon are pending congressional action for the National Apprenticeship Act which could drive further increases.
OFLC is experiencing a dramatic rise in application volumes, with record application levels in most OFLC programs in FY 2022.
This rising employer demand for labor certifications and prevailing wage determinations has strained OFLC’s case-adjudication capacity and necessitated the diversion of staff reviewing Permanent Labor Certification (PERM) applications to meet statutory and regulatory deadlines in the temporary programs (H-2A, H-2B, and CW-1).
OFLC has successfully managed these rising workloads with employee cross-training, IT improvements, and innovations such as “Flex” adjudication teams that can shift between business lines in response to workload demands.
OFLC cannot, however, absorb the current rate of increased demand indefinitely while still achieving its statutory and regulatory adjudication time requirements.
On average, Federal Project Officers are currently managing over 25 grants.
This significant workload raises the risk of grantee non-compliance, such as misclassification of costs, lack of sufficient fiscal controls, expenditures on ineligible participants, lack of or insufficient documentation for costs, expenditures on unallowable activities, slow implementation of projects, and low performance outcomes.
VETS has used Office of Personnel Management’s (OPM) special hiring authorities to recruit personnel with affinity to VETS’ mission and improve the internal recruitment process to help managers fill vacant positions quickly.
VETS also shared vacancy announcements widely to obtain a broad and diverse pool of talented applicants.
Expenses related to ODEP hosting and operating the WRP website have continued to grow, while job placements from the program have remained relatively low (10-15 percent of students in the database).
WRP was specifically recognized as important to promoting DEIA in the Federal workforce in Executive Order 14035 issued June 25, 2021.
In adherence with this Executive Order, ODEP has developed a report.
This report is currently in clearance with the Department of Defense and will be submitted to APDP once clearance is finalized.
ETA Performance Goal 1.1 – Create customer-focused workforce solutions that serve all workers, including underserved communities.
ETA oversees the provision of training and employment assistance, labor market information, and education through programs authorized by the WIOA—for adults, dislocated workers, youth, Job Corps, employment services authorized by the Wagner-Peyser Act, amended by title III of WIOA, and National Programs; Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) authorized by the Trade Act of 1974, as amended; Foreign Labor Certification activities authorized by the Immigration and Nationality Act; the Senior Community Service Employment Program authorized by the Older Americans Act; and Apprenticeship programs authorized by the National Apprenticeship Act.
Additionally, ETA oversees the federal-state Unemployment Insurance (UI) program, authorized under the Federal Unemployment Tax Act and Title III of the Social Security Act (see ETA Performance Goal 3.1).
The public workforce system provides access to training, employment, and supportive services to a broad array of customers at all skill levels.
These services include career counseling, case management, assessments that identify transferable skills, and skill development.
ETA and the workforce system are committed to expanding access to Registered Apprenticeships; providing and improving strategies and tools that help connect employers and skilled workers and connect workers to quality jobs; and continuously improving the effectiveness, efficiency, and equity of workforce development programs by ensuring accountability and applying evidence of what works in these programs.
Since Program Year 2016,3 the WIOA core programs and ETA’s other WIOA-authorized and partner programs have been required to report on six WIOA primary indicators of performance: employment in the 2nd quarter after exit, employment in the 4th quarter after exit, median earnings in the 2nd quarter after exit, credential attainment, measurable skill gains, and effectiveness in serving employers.
ETA has established national targets for employment in the 2nd quarter after exit, median earnings in the 2nd quarter after exit, and measurable skill gains performance indicators for WIOA Adult, WIOA Dislocated Worker, WIOA Youth, and TAA, as well as establishing national targets for employment in the 2nd quarter after exit and median earnings in the 2nd quarter after exit for the Wagner-Peyser Act Employment Service.
In addition, ETA has aligned performance reporting definitions and calculations and implemented a streamlined performance reporting system for WIOA and other DOL partner programs.
Eighteen workforce grant programs use a common record layout (the Participant Individual Record Layout, or PIRL) to report program participant service and outcome information.
Using one system enhances data reliability and accuracy.
Throughout the period of measurement, which for measures like second quarter employment that used exiters from July 2020 to June 2021, programs across the workforce system had to adjust to account for the unprecedented operational and economic impacts of the pandemic.
Service models had to be adjusted to allow for virtual delivery and, in some cases, programs and services faced temporary suspension of operations.
The pandemic directly impacted the provision of work-based learning and the ability of participants to complete their credentials due to suspension of operations in some cases.
Additionally, the pandemic resulted in historic levels of unemployment throughout the period of measurement, which impacted the employment rate measures across all programs.
ETA provided TA and guidance to assist grantees in adjusting their program delivery models to virtual services, and where available, to virtual work experiences.
ETA continues to provide TA to grantees to assist and support programs’ ability to identify, provide, and report on quality credentials.
Throughout the adjustment to virtual service delivery and services, ETA also provided guidance and TA on best practices for remote delivery.
ETA anticipates that the work-based learning, credential attainment, and employment rate measures will continue to improve as grantees continue to adapt services to the changing economy.
For participants engaged in work-based learning, ETA has provided extensive TA to workforce practitioners, including apprenticeship and business outreach staff.
Apprenticeship Directors also share information on how resources like WIOA formula grants and TAA funds can be used to support work experience, pre-apprenticeship programs, on-the-job training, and supports for apprentices.
These efforts led to development of an apprenticeship toolkit for workforce practitioners, dissemination of a Fact Sheet explaining that the TAA program can serve as another funding vehicle to support Apprenticeship participation, and webinars to help states leverage apprenticeships in serving TAA recipients.
In FY 2022, ETA promoted work-based learning as an equitable economic recovery strategy and to ensure access to quality jobs.
Work-based learning includes Registered apprenticeships, pre-apprenticeship programs, work experience and internships, transitional jobs, On-the-Job Training (OJT), customized training, and Incumbent Worker Training.
In FY 2022, YouthBuild provided TA that focuses on work experience, particularly in construction, climate jobs, and other high-growth industries such as health care, manufacturing, and information technology.
During the pandemic, programs had to adjust worksites and offer work experiences both in-person and virtually.
ETA provided TA specifically on virtual and in-person work experience that gives consideration to communities and populations with limited access to virtual tools, including new grantee orientations, webinars, tip sheets, and peer sharing.
H-1B Skills Training Grants supported the development of new apprenticeship and other earn and learn programs and the scaling of existing programs, particularly into new industries and occupations (such as information technology, including cybersecurity).
More recent investments aim to increase both the number of apprenticeship positions and the ability of all Americans, including racial and ethnic minorities and those in communities most affected by poverty, to gain access to this proven pathway to quality, family-sustaining careers.
Along with an emphasis on apprenticeships, these grants encourage and incentivize the use of work-based learning strategies by allowing for employer reimbursement of a portion of the costs of training during OJT and apprenticeships.
The WIOA Youth formula-funded program continued focusing on work experience, which is prioritized under WIOA through a minimum 20 percent expenditure requirement.
During the pandemic, programs had to adjust work sites and offer work experiences both in person and virtually, and ETA intends to apply lessons learned from the pandemic, including continued use of virtual work experience, as part of the focus on work experience as a foundation for young adult employment success.
The Reentry Employment Opportunities (REO) grants prepares individuals who were involved with the justice system for employment that stabilizes their income and creates opportunities for career pathways.
The Pathway Home and Partners for Reentry Opportunities in Workforce Development grants built upon evidence from the Linking Employment Activities Pre-release grants and seek to determine if consistent services begun while in state prisons or local jails lead to better employment outcomes.
Meanwhile, the REO Growth Opportunities grants prepare justice-involved youth and young adults for the world of work through education and training, paid work experiences, mentorship, and leadership development.
With a focus on youth (15-18) and young adults (18-24) most impacted by community violence, particularly in areas of concentrated crime and poverty the grants partner with community violence interrupters.
The WIOA Adult program is integral to reaching adults most in need of assistance from the public workforce system in a rapidly evolving environment.
ETA has published guidance (Training and Employment Guidance Letter (TEGL) 7-20) that emphasizes prioritizing services to the workforce system’s most in need participants.
WIOA identifies three groups of individuals who must receive priority of service: individuals who are recipients of public assistance, low-income, or basic skills deficient (including English language learners).
ETA has exceeded the goal for the number of states in which at least 75 percent of the state’s WIOA Adult program participants are from at least one of the three aforementioned priority groups, and will continue to coordinate state efforts to achieve higher success.
In FY 2022, ETA’s nationwide Job Corps program successfully reopened all of its 121 Job Corps Centers, after navigating the enrollment, service, and job placement impacts from COVID’s crisis and recovery phases.
During and since COVID, Job Corps continued its efforts to improve the student experience by launching the Secretary’s vision of Job Corps 2.0 – a student-centered program design that focuses on innovation, modernization, automation, and strategic partnerships with national employers and organizations to accelerate program performance and improve student outcomes.
In FY22, Job Corps launched projects to modernize its web-based access to enrollment, direct service, supportive, and transitionbased resources.
Job Corps also integrated DEIA-conscious refinements into the program and its services and provided training and technical assistance to Job Corps stakeholders and direct service providers to improve program performance during the fiscal year.
Through Job Corps’ demonstration grants, Job Corps has established substantive relationships with Community Colleges across the nation, including Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), that Job Corps can build upon to expand career development resources for students.
All of these actions are intended to increase the awareness of Job Corps as the top choice for opportunity youth interested in furthering their employment and career goals.
Also, in FY 2022, ETA supported workforce system alignment through a Registered Apprenticeship (RA) Technical Assistance (TA) Center of Excellence focused on national strategic partnership and system alignment.
Through this four-year cooperative agreement, ETA supports efforts to establish, build, and sustain partnerships that support system alignment of the national workforce and education systems to accelerate Registered Apprenticeship Program (RAP) adoption and expansion.
This RA TA Center of Excellence provides technical assistance on a national scope to RAP sponsors implementing RAPs and also supports state and local workforce development boards, American Job Center programs and operators, governors, and other essential stakeholders that drive and inform economic and workforce development policies and programs.
In FY 2023, OA continues to work in close coordination with the RA TA Center to increase workforce system alignment.
ETA is committed to expanding the number of active Registered Apprenticeships to rebuild the middle class and connect a diverse workforce to family-supporting, quality jobs.
In FY 2022, OA implemented the Secretary’s Advisory Committee on Apprenticeship (ACA), strengthening education/workforce alignment, creating more youth and pre-apprenticeship programs, increasing enforcement activities to advance diversity, equity, and inclusion in apprenticeship, ensuring Registered Apprenticeship policy and program practices support good jobs and labor standards, and supporting the anticipated National Apprenticeship Act reauthorization and future federal investment contingent upon Congressional action.
In May 2022, the ACA issued an interim report including recommendations to the Secretary of Labor.
In FY 2023, the ACA will provide additional recommendations to the Secretary.
In addition, in FY 2022, OA expanded registered apprenticeship into high-demand, priority industries including clean energy, infrastructure, healthcare, agriculture, and early childhood education, and will continue these efforts in FY 2023.
In FY 2022, OA also executed a range of initiatives including efforts to increase access to underrepresented populations and ensure registered apprenticeship opportunities are available for all Americans, including awarding $171 million in Apprenticeship Building America grants to support building and modernizing state apprenticeship systems; expanding opportunities for youth in registered apprenticeship; expanding registered apprenticeship pathways in pre-apprenticeship; creating and expanding registered apprenticeship equity partnerships; and investing in registered apprenticeship hubs that facilitate the establishment, scaling, and expansion of RAPs in new and fast-growing industries and occupations.
In FY 2023, OA expects to continue to fund a range of initiatives that expanded registered apprenticeship into high-demand, priority industries and increase access to underrepresented populations and ensure registered apprenticeship opportunities are available for all Americans.
OFLC is experiencing a dramatic increase in application volumes, with record levels of applications received in the H-2A, H-2B, PERM, and Prevailing Wage Determination programs in FY 2022.
In the H-2A program, application levels have increased nearly four-fold in the last decade (5,475 applications in FY 2012; 19,038 in FY 2022) with more than four times the number of H-2A agricultural workers requested annually (90,362 workers in FY 2012; 379,646 in FY 2022).
Despite these surging application levels, OFLC met its target of 97 percent of complete H-2A applications being certified at least 30 days before the date of need.
OFLC utilized overtime, contract staffing, support from PERM and Flex Team adjudication staff, and the internal reassignment of H-2A Audit staff to meet its annual adjudication goals.
H-2B application levels also increased markedly in FY 2022, rising 45 percent from FY 2021 – the largest annual percentage increase in the program’s history.
In FY 2023, OFLC will continue to seek operational improvement and information technology enhancements to reduce barriers to timely processing and help manage its rapidly rising workloads.
OFLC will also continue its efforts to enhance State Workforce Agency (SWA) grants to improve program effectiveness, pursuing additional funding to help SWAs manage fast-rising state-level FLC workloads, conducting on-site grant monitoring reviews, providing TA to state staff, and focusing efforts on the states where H-2A and H-2B workload demands are greatest.
As a result of outreach to individual and organizational members of underserved communities, ETA took several steps in FY 2022 to increase access to ETA programs, services, and benefits, and to achieve equitable outcomes.
ETA made significant adjustments to virtually all of its competitive grant programs in FY 2022, such as requiring applicants to identify and address specific equity gaps in the Strengthening Community Colleges grant competition, scoring applications based in part on the degree to which applicants would increase services to underserved communities, and focusing on quality jobs as a strategy to achieve equitable outcomes.
ETA also took steps to expand access to grants and extended open periods for grant competitions to provide more time for smaller and community-based organizations to apply.
In addition to changes to its competitive programs, ETA dedicated resources to increasing equity and job quality in its WIOA formula programs as well, supporting Comprehensive and Accessible Reemployment Through Equitable Employment Recovery (CAREER) Dislocated Worker Grants (DWGs) in their period of performance, and awarding Quality Jobs, Equity, Strategy, and Training DWGs.
In FY 2023, ETA will provide TA to workforce system grantees on conducting outreach and recruitment to expand access to ETA-funded services, on high quality training strategies and the partnerships necessary for disadvantaged communities to benefit from such training, and on ensuring that the high-quality jobs produced by the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and the CHIPS and Science Act are available to underrepresented communities.
VETS oversees programs that assist veterans seeking employment and provides outreach to employers seeking skilled workers.
These efforts are focused on enabling all veterans to reach their full potential in the workplace.
VETS administers several programs to meet the employment and education needs of veterans, transitioning service members and spouses.
The Jobs for Veterans State Grants (JVSG) program provides funding to states for Disabled Veterans’ Outreach Program (DVOP) specialists and Local Veterans’ Employment Representative (LVER) staff.
The Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program (HVRP) addresses one of the most vulnerable populations by reintegrating homeless veterans into society and the workforce.
DOL’s Transition Assistance Program (TAP) provides workshops to support a successful transition from military to civilian employment.
Pursuant to the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA) and the Veterans’ Employment Opportunities Act of 1998, VETS investigates complaints received from individuals who believe their employment or reemployment rights under USERRA and federal employment preference rights under Veterans’ Preference were violated.
Also, VETS operates the Honoring Investments in Recruiting and Employing (HIRE) Veterans Medallion Program—the only federal-level veterans’ employment award that recognizes a company or organization’s commitment to recruiting, employing, and retaining veterans.
VETS provides veterans, transitioning service members, and their families with targeted training and resources through three programs that leverage partnerships to improve employment outcomes.
DOL TAP offers workshops to transitioning service members and their spouses through facilitators at military installations worldwide, as well as through instructor-led virtual training platforms.
The VETS TAP vendor hires experienced facilitators and trains them thoroughly on the DOL TAP curricula before they are allowed to conduct workshops.
The VETS TAP vendor conducts internal quality control of their facilitator staff to ensure they meet standards.
In addition, DOL VETS Federal Field Staff conduct regular TAP site assessment visits to observe the facilitators in the classroom.
VETS reviews results of the Transition Assistance Curriculum Participant Assessment (TACPA) received quarterly from Department of Defense and the TACPA written comments for use in improving facilitator performance and curricula content.
In FY 2021 and FY 2022, the postcourse survey result for facilitator satisfaction was 96 percent.
DVOP specialists provide individualized career services to veterans with significant barriers to employment, eligible transitioning service members, and wounded, ill, or injured service members and their caretakers.
The PY 2018 result for this measure was $6,420 and the PY 2021 result was $7,998.
VETS increased the national target for this measure and is committed to improving the tracking and reporting of participant wages in relation to state-level targets in the agency’s quarterly performance reports.
HVRP grantees provide a variety of services along with federal, state, and local partners to best serve the unique needs of veterans experiencing homelessness.
Median earnings in the second quarter after exit have continued to increase, the PY 2018 result was $4,374 and the PY 2021 resul was $8,216.
VETS is committed to ensuring participant wages align with the median earnings by occupation as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).
VETS manages its USERRA investigations to ensure each complaint is investigated appropriately in terms of quality and timely completion.
In FY 2022, the percent of USERRA investigations completed within 90 days was 79 percent.
Upon review of investigations, VETS determined that substantiated claims6 only make up 20.2 percent of cases closed within 90 days, while they make up 44.6 percent of cases closed beyond 90 days.
VETS also determined that in FY 2022, while the rate of cases closed within 90 days is 6.8 percent below the prior five-year average of 85.9 percent, the rate at which substantiated claims were resolved, at 89.3 percent, is 6.8 percent above its previous five-year average of 82.5 percent.
These data indicate that when VETS investigators spend more time on substantiated claims working toward resolution, often using methods and tools that require extensions beyond the initial 90-day investigative deadline, VETS resolves more of these claims.
Further, the requirement to complete investigations within 90-days was amended with passage of the Veterans’ Benefits Improvement Act (VBIA)6F7, which permitted investigations to continue beyond 90 days with an extension of time agreed to by the claimant.
Therefore, in FY 2023, VETS will continue to monitor and report on our current statutory requirement of the percentage of cases which were closed within 90 days or within an extension of time agreed to by the claimant, while removing the non-statutory reporting element of the percentage of cases which were closed within 90 days.
VETS will further improve our monitoring of the quality of cases by adding an additional measure of the percentage of cases that have substantiated claims which are resolved prior to closure.
WB conducts research to formulate practices and policies aimed at increasing economic and employment opportunities and advancement for the 75 million working women and their families in the U.S. WB identifies trends, data gaps, policy and programmatic needs, and strategic mechanisms to safeguard the interest of working women.
These efforts allow WB to inform and educate individuals and organizations at the local, state, and national levels about the issues facing women in the labor force.
For more than 100 years, WB has been committed to advocating for equality and economic security for working women and their families.
In FY 2022, WB focused its research, policy analysis, grant-making, and education and outreach on addressing equity in wages and working conditions; disrupting occupational segregation for working women; and increasing access to paid leave and affordable child care, giving particular attention to marginalized sub-groups of working women, including women of color, older women and other disadvantaged populations.
WB exceeded its target for the number of policy and research deliverables, producing a total of 45 issue briefs, reports, data analyses and visualizations, and other resources, detailing how women, especially women of color, older women workers, and parents, were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and economic crisis.
WB released two new data interactives on existing employment and earnings disparities for women that allow for additional disaggregation by sex and race, and that will be used by the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) during compliance audits.
WB also published the National Database of Childcare Prices (NDCP), the most comprehensive federal source of childcare prices at the county level, which will be used to evaluate how childcare prices are linked with gender and racial inequality in the labor force.
The Bureau also capitalized on historic infrastructure and related public investments to seed equity principles and practices in nascent funding streams and projects, providing financial support for a leading community based organization well versed in equity implementation in the construction industry to deliver technical assistance in 11 states.
Through a combination of grants, programming, stakeholder engagement activities, communications products, and sustained participation in a variety of intra- and inter-agency equity initiatives, WB provided leadership to bring greater gender and racial equity to the workforce and the skilled trades.
WB achieved this at a time where our country is making large investments in infrastructure, and recommended policy interventions that promote more equitable labor force participation for all women, while also addressing inequities exacerbated by occupational segregation and the lack of workplace and discrimination protections.
In FY 2023, WB is celebrating the 30th anniversary of the Women in Apprenticeship and Nontraditional Occupations (WANTO) Act, and has increased funding for the WANTO grant program, and added a new performance measure to track the percentage of women who achieve measurable skill gains by the end of the grant period of performance as a result of job skills training the grantee provides.
Fostering Access, Rights and Equity (FARE) grant program to help women workers who are paid low wages learn about and access their employment rights and benefits.
In partnership with DOL’s Chief Evaluation Office and OPM, WB will complete phase one of a multi-year paid leave research and evaluation portfolio to answer critical questions surrounding the implementation and effects of the Federal Employee Paid Leave Act (FEPLA).
In addition, WB is celebrating the 30th anniversary of the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) and will disseminate visualizations depicting various data elements from the 2017/2018 American Time Use Survey (ATUS) Leave and Job Flexibilities module, as well as prepare for the 2024 module, which it will sponsor in collaboration with BLS.
In FY 2023, WB’s research and education priorities will include releasing several products discussing the economic and workforce impact of occupational segregation; the effects of caregiving on women’s employment, earnings, savings, and retirement benefits; and women’s retirement income gap and other topics related to older women workers.
WB will continue actively contributing to and providing thought leadership to advance equity principles and practices over the course of agency involvement in a variety of intra- and inter-agency councils and working groups, including the Gender Policy Council, DOL equity working groups, Advisory Committee on Apprenticeship, and a number of others.
ODEP Performance Goal 1.1 – Develop evidence-based policies, practices, and tools to foster a more inclusive workforce to increase quality employment opportunities for individuals with disabilities.
ODEP promotes policies and practices, and coordinates to increase the number and quality of employment opportunities for individuals with disabilities.
ODEP employs strategies to help employers meet their business objectives by fully integrating the skills and talents of job seekers and employees with disabilities.
Additionally, ODEP uses data and evidence to promote the adoption and implementation of policy strategies and effective practices to increase the number and quality of job opportunities for people with disabilities.
Based on research and evaluation, ODEP develops or identifies effective policy and practices, conducts outreach to share this critical information, and provides technical assistance to all levels of government and employers to aid them in adoption and implementation.
ODEP will continue to fund the Retaining Employment and Talent After Injury/Illness Network (RETAIN) and the State Exchange on Employment and Disability (SEED) and initiatives supporting competitive integrated employment for people with disabilities including those with mental health conditions.
ODEP will also fund initiatives such as climate/clean energy apprenticeships made possible by the infrastructure bill that examine and promote inclusiveness and equity.
In addition, ODEP will fund a new initiative, the Equitable Transitions Models Demonstration, to develop scalable strategies to enable low-income youth and young adults with disabilities ages 16-24, including those experiencing homelessness, leaving foster care, or involved in the justice system, to successfully transition into the workforce.
Secure safe and healthful workplaces, particularly in high-risk industries.
All workers have a right to a safe and healthful work environment.
OSHA and MSHA recognize that some workers are more vulnerable than others and that some workplaces are more hazardous than others.
By strategically scheduling inspections and outreach in high-risk areas, in addition to completing mandated enforcement activity, DOL expects to have the greatest effect on overall compliance.
With more employers in compliance, workplace injuries, fatalities, and illnesses should decline – the ultimate outcome for workers.
The Secretary’s vision provides workers a voice in the workplace so that they may actively participate in the protection and promotion of their workplace rights without hindering their employment growth opportunities.
Workers are more likely to have a voice in the workplace if they are better informed of their employment rights and are better able to freely exercise those rights and overcome their fear of adverse consequences.
OSHA and MSHA provide a range of protections for workers who claim their rights are being violated.
Findings for this objective were grouped into three themes: Safe and Healthful Workplaces, Whistleblower and Miners’ Rights, and Enforcement Capacity.
Evidence of progress included protecting miners’ rights.
Challenges were identified in efforts to rebuild enforcement and compliance assistance protections that were heavily impacted by the pandemic, and in attracting, hiring, training, and retaining a diverse workforce.
We also noted in this area that DOL’s Office of the Solicitor (SOL) is key to the success of this objective.
SOL needs sufficient resources and capacity to provide advice and counsel to worker protection agencies in order to assist those agencies in unleashing their full power within lega boundaries.
OSHA faced challenges in enforcing workplace safety and health standards during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Further escalation of the pandemic may erode the agency’s ability to conduct effective enforcement.
OSHA’s limited resources were further constrained by the exigencies from COVID-19.
However, OSHA received slightly over $100 million in supplemental funding through the American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA).
Up through FY 2022, OSHA obligated $56.2 million of this supplemental funding on enforcement activities in FY 2022.
In February 2021, The DOL Office of Inspector General (OIG) reported that OSHA received 15 percent more complaints in 2020 but performed 50 percent fewer inspections compared to a similar period in 2019.
Therefore, risk has increased in that OSHA may not ensure the level of protection that workers need at various job sites.
In FY 2022, OSHA conducted 31,886 inspections of the 31,400 targeted.
In FY 2021, due to the slow pace of vaccinations and continued implementation of strict social distancing and state stay-at-home orders to address COVID-19 across multiple regions and jurisdictions, OSHA was unable to perform many of the required on-site evaluations for participation in VPP.
In FY 2022, new approvals increased by 36 percent from 14 in FY 2021 to 19 in FY 2022 and re-approvals by 175 percent from 96 in FY 2021 to 264 in FY 2022.
In FY 2022, the estimated mining industry five-year fatality rate per 200,000 hours worked was 0.0111, a four percent increase from FY 2021.
Although falling short of their aggressive targets, this was the second year, in the last five years, of the lowest rate of the estimated five-year rolling average rate of all injuries associated with powered haulage equipment.
MSHA also developed a mobile app that provides safety and health information directly to miners and mine operators.
The app is an additional tool to reach miners and operators quickly and help keep miners safe.
The OIG has identified Protecting the Safety and Health of Workers as a top management and performance challenge.
MSHA is challenged by a 25- year high in the number of black lung cases and needs to develop strategies for addressing this issue.
MSHA is also challenged to develop better protections for miners against airborne contaminants, such as respirable silica dust.
As a result, the agency is developing a proposed silica rule, which will provide improved health protections for all miners.
In FY 2022, MSHA initiated a plan to increase sampling and to improve enforcement and compliance assistance associated with respirable silica dust.
This initiative will continue into FY 2023 and beyond.
Also, MSHA initiated the Miner Health Matters campaign with a focus on enforcement and outreach efforts to ensure that miners working in potentially dangerous environments are aware of precautions to take to limit their exposures to silica and other dangerous toxins.
The OIG conducted a series of audits of OSHA’s Whistleblower Protection Program.
Two audits were completed in FY 2020: one on COVID-19 Impact and Response and one on OSHA Region IX’s whistleblower program.
Both audit results show continued need to improve the quality of investigations, complete the Whistleblower Investigations Manual (WIM), improve case management by developing a reasonable balance between timeliness and quality, monitor pilot programs for potential nationwide implementation, and upgrade the database system.
In FY 2022, MSHA completed 100 percent of investigations of miner requests for temporary reinstatements within 20 days of receipt and 90 percent of 105(c) investigations of miner discrimination complaints within 60 days of receipt.
As part of several new safety and health initiatives, MSHA continues to educate miners about their rights and the Mine Act’s protections against retaliation, discrimination, and interference.
OSHA was able to increase its staffing capacity in FY 2022 (from 1,859 to 2,044).
The agency hired 393 staff, including 227 compliance safety and health officers (CSHOs).
OSHA’s strong hiring efforts are continuing in FY 2023, and the agency is engaged in targeted recruitment at Historically Black Colleges and Universities, Hispanic-Serving Institutions, Asian American and Native American Pacific Islander Serving Institutions, and Tribal Colleges and Universities for hiring to attract a diverse pool of job candidates.
The agency also has Direct Hire Authority for CSHO positions, allowing OSHA to hire staff with safety and health experience quickly.
MSHA was able to increase its staffing capacity in FY 2022 (from 1,668 to 1,704).
In FY 2022, MSHA continued the hybrid occupational series (1801) to overcome hiring obstacles and to attract a more diverse and qualified workforce.
This new series provides greater flexibility in hiring, by recruiting and training recent graduates as entry level inspectors and then transitioning them to occupational series 1822 inspectors upon completion of the training program.
Additionally, MSHA’s registered Apprenticeship program provides experienced miners living or working in underserved and underrepresented communities the opportunity to obtain a career with the Mine Safety and Health Administration.
Apprentices will onboard at the GS-11 level.
The goal is for apprentices to receive the first three modules of entry level inspector training within six months of onboarding.
MSHA’s registered apprenticeship program was established through the Employment and Training Administration and targets underserved communities, specifically the Hispanic and Native American communities.
This program is designed to train miners with a minimum of five-years experience as MSHA Safety and Health inspectors.
Finally, MSHA is using the ARPA to fund 72 FTE, primarily for enforcement activities.
As of the end of FY 2022, MSHA has onboarded 46 people using the ARPA, 40 of which are enforcement onboards.
OSHA Performance Goal 2.1 – Secure safe and healthful working conditions for America’s workers.
OSHA was established by the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 with the mission to ensure employers provide America’s workers safe and healthful working conditions.
OSHA ensures the safety and health of America’s workers by setting and enforcing workplace safety and health standards; delivering effective enforcement; providing training, outreach, and education; and encouraging continual improvement in workplace safety and health.
Through these efforts, OSHA aims to reduce the number of worker illnesses, injuries, and fatalities and contribute to DOL’s broader goals.
OSHA’s regional and area offices strategically prioritize enforcement resources to target high hazard industries and irresponsible employers based on occupational illness and injury rates.
Corporate Wide Settlement Agreements and the Severe Violator Enforcement Program are additional tools OSHA uses to target employers that require improvement across a business enterprise.
Ensuring the health and safety of workers is a national priority and moral imperative.
Healthcare workers and other essential workers continued to put their lives at risk during the COVID-19 pandemic.
These workers not only care for those who are sick but also assure America’s supply chains remain resilient, diverse, and secure, ensuring our economic prosperity and national security.
Many of these workers are employed in industries and workplaces with the highest illness and injury rates.
Often the employees in these industries and at these workplaces are ethnic or racial minorities, non-English speakers, immigrants, the economically disadvantaged, or adults with diminished capacity.
Therefore, protecting essential workers who support America’s supply chains (warehousing and package/parcel services), healthcare, construction, manufacturing, and agriculture also advances racial equity and supports underserved communities.
OSHA targeted high hazard industries and workplaces by adding and/or refining its emphasis programs and initiatives to further the Department’s efforts to support supply chain industries and workplaces with vulnerable workers.
OSHA received $100.3 million in ARPA funds, which are available through September 30, 2023.
The law requires at least $5,000,000 be for enforcement activities related to COVID–19 at high risk workplaces including health care, meat, and poultry processing facilities; agricultural workplaces; and correctional facilities.
OSHA is using the funding to support Compliance Safety and Health Officers (CSHOs) and additional enforcement staff for COVID-19 enforcement activities.
OSHA hired numerous high-impact positions, including CSHOs, Whistleblower investigators and other staff to backfill behind senior OSHA staff, who are working on COVID-19 related matters (e.g., inspections).
Safety training is a critical piece of OSHA’s effort to prevent workplace fatalities, injuries, and illnesses.
OSHA conducts training programs at the OSHA Training Institute (OTI), administers the OTI Education Centers Program, and administers the Outreach Training Program.
Down to Prevent Falls in Construction, Heat Illness Prevention, and the Safe + Sound Campaign).
In FY 2022, OSHA provided training for 1,378,581 individuals.
OSHA continued to use a mix of traditional in-person training and virtual training.
In addition, it enabled events that were planned and implemented at an Area or Regional Office level to be accessible to a national audience.
The implementation of virtual training increased access to training for many workers and OSHA personnel.
OSHA also administers and enforces 25 whistleblower protection statutes that protect workers who experience retaliation for reporting violations of the law.
Principally, this includes Section 11(c) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, which prohibits employers from retaliating against employees who bring workplace safety and health hazards to the attention of the employer or the Agency.
The additional 24 whistleblower protection provisions protect workers in a variety of industries who speak out against unsafe and/or unlawful behavior, including violations of transportation, environmental protection, consumer protection, health insurance reform, or fraud and financial reform laws.
In FY 2022, OSHA focused on inspections conducted through emphasis programs.
Specifically, the Agency focused its emphasis on reducing or eliminating employee exposure to fall, struck-by, caught-in, and electrical hazards in all workplaces.
This is compared to prior years when the emphasis was solely on the total number of inspections for hazards that are among the leading causes of death in the workplace.
In FY 2022, OSHA nearly met its target for the average age of pending cases (332 days against a target of 330 days), which was an improvement over its FY 2021 results.
In addition, OSHA exceeded its target of 10 days, with a result of 5.4 days, for the average time to complete new complaint screening process.
Additionally, in FY 2022, OSHA lowered its inventory of pending investigations from 2,441 cases as of September 30, 2021 to 2,355 as of September 30, 2022.
In its Whistleblower Protection Program, OSHA overhauled the WIM to further streamline the investigative process without compromising case quality.
In addition, OSHA expanded its Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Program across all regions as a viable alternative to the traditional investigative/enforcement process.
These major initiatives will assist the Agency in tackling the still-large inventory of pending cases and backlog of over-aged cases while promoting greater customer service.
Furthermore, OSHA implemented its Whistleblower Outreach Plan for FY 2022 by concentrating its efforts on reaching migrant and other traditionally underserved workers, especially those who are not English speakers.
OSHA coordinated with worker advocacy groups to identify and meet the needs of these categories of vulnerable workers and developed a tracking mechanism to capture all compliance assistance activity regarding these vulnerable populations.
MSHA protects the safety and health of the nation’s miners through enforcement of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 (Mine Act), as amended by the Mine Improvement and New Emergency Response Act of 2006.
MSHA’s mission is to prevent death, disease, and injury from mining and to promote safe and healthful workplaces for the nation’s miners.
This mission is carried out through the promulgation and enforcement of mandatory safety and health standards; mandated inspections, which require four complete inspections annually at active underground mines and two complete inspections annually at active surface mines; miner training; and technical compliance assistance activities.
To prevent miner injuries, occupational illness, and fatalities, operators must have in place effective safety and health programs that are constantly evaluated to identify and eliminate mine hazards, and that provide training for all mining personnel.
MSHA has undertaken several measures to prevent mining deaths including: increased monitoring and strategic enforcement through targeted inspections at mines with identified problem areas; a Pattern of Violations program; special initiatives such as focusing on inexperienced miners and miners working alone; outreach efforts such as “Safety Pro in a Box,” which provides guidance to the metal/nonmetal mining industry on best practices and compliance responsibilities; outreach campaign on “Take Time Save Lives”; Enhanced Enforcement Program on contract/customer truck drivers and managers/supervisors performing mining tasks; and emphasis on fall protection to protect miners working from heights.
MSHA prioritizes efforts to reduce workplace hazards that represent a primary cause of occupational illnesses, fatalities, and injuries.
In FY 2022, accidents caused by powered haulage equipment, which is a category of moving machines used to transport miners or haul materials in mines, contributed to 28 percent of fatalities and 9 percent of total injuries.
MSHA continued to promote best practices to prevent injuries and fatalities associated with powered haulage accidents.
The Powered Haulage Initiative website includes pages highlighting large equipment blind spots, seat belt usage, and conveyor safety.
Inspectors at all field offices continued to focus on conveyor safety during mine visits, discussing best practices and distributing hardhat stickers and brochures.
MSHA focused on fatalities involving contractors and provided compliance assistance to address causes of these deaths.
MSHA continued to promote its outreach efforts through social media, the agency’s public website, msha.gov, and quarterly stakeholder calls.
In FY 2022, MSHA also awarded $1,000,000 in grant funding through its Brookwood-Sago grant program to support education and training opportunities for miners that focused on safety and health topics, including powered haulage safety.
MSHA is also working on a fina rule for a Safety Program for Surface Mobile Equipment which will reduce powered haulage accidents and injuries.
In FY 2022, the estimated mining industry five-year fatality rate per 200,000 hours worked was 0.0111, a four percent increase from FY 2021.
Although falling short of their aggressive targets, this was the second year, in the last five years, of the lowest rate of the estimated five-year rolling average rate of all injuries associated with powered haulage equipment.
MSHA will continue enforcement efforts and compliance assistance to reduce overexposures to silica dust in the mining industry.
As part of the Silica Enforcement Initiative, in FYs 2023 and 2024 MSHA will continue to increase inspections at mines with a history of repeated silica overexposure; increase sampling in targeted conditions; analyze sampling data; develop health alerts; provide guidance for training plans; and establish a team of experts to address critical health issues.
Where it is determined necessary for the protection of miners, spot inspections will be conducted, where citations are not totally abated within the set abatement timeframe additional action will be considered as appropriate, to ensure miners are being protected.
MSHA will also continue its Miners Health Matters campaign, with a focus on making sure that miners and operators are aware of the adverse health effects of silica and other contaminants and best practices for reducing miners’ exposure.
Additionally, MSHA will track and analyze the number of coal miners participating in the 30 CFR, Part 90 program, which was designed to protect miners with evidence of pneumoconiosis.
MSHA will provide guidance for training plans to focus on exposure risks and informing miners of their Part 90 rights that allow them to continue working in healthier parts of the mine.
MSHA’s work includes strong enforcement, active outreach, education and training, and technical support to the mining industry.
In FY 2022, utilizing approximately $2.3 million of the supplemental funds provided through the ARPA, MSHA provided expert advice and guidance in health hazard enforcement, supported enforcement and regulatory activities by performing health initiatives related to controlling the pandemic, continued to work on developing standards concerning miner exposure to respiratory health hazards; and supported internal needs to address any safety and health risks.
MSHA continued to advance the Administration’s and Secretary’s priorities by focusing on diversity, racial and gender equity, and bilingual needs in underserved communities to build a more modern, inclusive workforce.
All workers have the right to be paid properly and treated equitably.
WHD, OFCCP, and OLMS promote fair pay, worker rights, and equal opportunity, and serve as the voice of America’s workforce.
These agencies enforce laws and provide compliance assistance that address worker pay and leave, equal rights, and labor-management transparency.
Together, these agencies protect tens of millions of employees in millions of workplaces across the country.
Findings for this objective were grouped into three themes: Targeting Enforcement, Outreach to Vulnerable Workers, and Enforcement Capacity.
Evidence of progress included campaigns to improve partnerships with stakeholders with a focus on access and equity, as well as process improvements to achieve ambitious hiring goals.
Challenges were identified in resources and data needed to target enforcement and outreach efforts to underserved communities.
We also noted in this area that SOL is key to the success of this objective.
SOL needs sufficient resources and capacity to provide advice and counsel to worker protection agencies in order to assist those agencies in unleashing their full power within legal boundaries.
In FY 2019, WHD created a severity index and measure for Fair Labor Standards Act registered cases that captures key dimensions of high impact cases (egregiousness, culpability, and magnitude of violations).
WHD estimates this strategy of increasing the proportion of cases that are high impact can recover additional back wages for workers over time.
These higher impact cases also provide more opportunity to issue press releases, which research studies show has a deterrent effect on non-compliance.
WHD aims to increase the proportion of cases meeting that threshold, including cases involving liquidated damages, civil monetary penalties, and litigation.
In FY 2022, WHD established a new performance measure tracking the percent of compliance actions in industries with a high proportion of workers in underserved communities.
The low-wage industries and vulnerable workers that WHD has historically prioritized are consistent with the industries identified by an equity-focused analysis of federal statistical data.
Nonetheless, this equity measure will further focus discussions within WHD and with stakeholders on efforts to advance equity goals.
WHD has a range of activities underway to complement that focus.
All crossregional initiatives have factored equity into enforcement, outreach, and media strategies as WHD learns how to accelerate and optimize implementation of its equity-informed strategies.
OFCCP obtained $20.4 million in monetary settlements for affected class members in FY 2022 and $31.9 million in FY 2021.
In FY 2022, over a quarter of OFCCP’s settlements of discrimination cases resolved issues of pay discrimination, resulting in almost $6 million in remedies.
In FY 2022, OFCCP implemented an online verification process to ensure that 100 percent of federal contractors known to OFCCP develop and maintain Affirmative Action Programs (AAPs) to enable the agency to enforce the law efficiently and maximize the use of its resources by focusing on contractors at higher risk of noncompliance.
This process also led to the completion of the open Government Accountability Office (GAO) recommendation to develop a mechanism to monitor AAPs from covered supply and service federal contractors on a regular basis.
OLMS has instituted a risk-based audit targeting model to more effectively identify unions where criminal activity may be present, by identifying anomalies in union financial reports and using other targeting strategies.
OLMS uses this measure to strategically utilize its enforcement resources when there is strong suspicion of illegal activity in a particular union or local, thereby avoiding auditing the majority of unions that are in compliance with the law, and efficiently utilizing government resources.
In FY 2022, OLMS achieved 12.65 percent, below the targeted 17.00 percent, and the lowest since FY 2011 when the measure was implemented.
In FY 2022, WHD strengthened outreach efforts focused on essential workers and built strategic partnerships with various types of stakeholders.
WHD conducted over 4,000 outreach events and reached over 289,000 participants across community-based organizations, worker centers, unions, industry associations, consulates, faith-based organizations, and worker advocacy groups.
The goal is to build relationships with underserved communities and expand access to WHD resources and services.
WHD also continued its outreach efforts focused on essential workers through the EWEP campaign.
As part of this campaign, WHD held over 950 EWEP events, including 60 listening sessions to hear the concerns of vulnerable worker communities.
Starting in FY 2017, OFCCP implemented a digital engagement campaign to increase the number of listserv subscribers and their level of online engagement with OFCCP.
In FY 2022, OFCCP prioritized broader stakeholder engagement (including increased outreach to worker rights and advocacy organizations) to ensure that the agency provides information and compliance assistance to its stakeholders.
OFCCP conducted over 335 compliance assistance sessions and 420 outreach events, of which nearly half were focused on workers’ rights.
Additionally, between FY 2020 and FY 2021, the agency updated its technical assistance guides for supply and service, construction, and small federal contractors, and educational institutions.
OLMS’ mission supports strengthening unions.
Unions address inequality and help advance the economic aspirations of diverse communities.
The Department partnered with the Worker Empowerment Research Network (WERN) to better understand the state of worker organizing and collective bargaining.
The group published a report in June 2022, that determined that, despite a decrease in union participation, the level of worker support for unions was higher than in the past.
However, the study also concluded that workers may be deterred from unionizing by shortcomings in labor laws and employer responses to organizing.
A third finding was that, in lieu of forming unions, workers have discovered other means of selfadvocacy.
The executive summary of this report is included on the Department’s new on-line Worker Organizing Resource and Knowledge (WORK) Center on unions and the union advantage.
OLMS has been a major contributor to the WORK Center.
OLMS’ investments in expanding the number of forms available electronically, outreach to facilitate electronic filing of union financial reports, and a rule that required electronic filing of the Form LM-3 and LM-4 reports for fiscal years beginning on or after January 1, 2017, led to great progress in transparency.
OLMS made additional LM forms available for electronic filing over the course of FY 2020 (Forms LM-1, 10, 20, and 21), making electronic filing for those reports mandatory in FY 2021.
This is reflected in OLMS’ e-filing rate of 97.9 percent in FY 2022, up from 58 percent in FY 2017.
WHD hired 217 investigators and 47 technicians for a total of 264 new enforcement staff in FY 2022 and plans to hire another 148 staff in FY 2023.
WHD continued to strengthen and expand online platforms supporting the onboarding process and to deliver entirely remote training programs.
WHD leveraged the tools and techniques developed during the pandemic, combined with emerging approaches for effective training, to establish a hybrid training program that uses a combination of in-person and online training.
Additionally, WHD has undertaken a range of outreach activities and conducted analysis to determine the language and cultural competencies necessary to better serve geographic locations with high populations of persons of color and underserved communities.
WHD also carried out a multi-pronged approach aimed at broadening an already diverse workforce This approach included recruiting entry-level talent from minority-serving institutions, posting positions with a second language requirement, and making use of direct hiring authorities such as Schedule A, which prioritizes hiring workers with disabilities.
OFCCP’s compliance officer levels are down more than 50 percent from a decade ago, significantly limiting the agency’s ability to evaluate contractor compliance.
The number of compliance officers has significantly decreased due to attrition over the past three years, from 313 in FY 2019 to 222 at the end of FY 2021.
In FY 2022, OFCCP hired and onboarded over 100 personnel, which included 69 compliance officers.
The new hires will support OFCCP’s efforts to rebuild and increase the agency’s impact as the federal government makes significant investments in the nation’s infrastructure.
WHD is responsible for administering and enforcing laws that establish the minimum standards for wages and working conditions.
WHD enforces and administers the minimum wage, overtime pay, and child labor provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA); the prevailing wage requirements and wage determination provisions of the Davis-Bacon Act and Related Acts, Service Contract Act, Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act, Walsh-Healey Act, and Copeland Act; the wages and working conditions under the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act; the Family and Medical Leave Act; the Employee Polygraph Protection Act; the garnishment provisions of the Consumer Credit Protection Act; and the Labor Value Content requirements of the United States-Mexico-Canada Implementation Act.
WHD also enforces the field sanitation and temporary labor camp standards in agriculture and certain employment standards and worker protections of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
Collectively, these labor standards cover most private, state, and local government employment.
They protect over 165 million of America’s workers in more than 11 million establishments throughout the U.S. and its territories.
WHD uses strategic initiatives to amplify the impacts of our investigations and help the greatest number of workers by specifically focusing on ensuring labor standards protections for low wage workers that are most vulnerable to wage and hour violations.
WHD has effectively adapted operations, modernized mission-critical infrastructure, and delivered on performance results.
With businesses reopening and the economy poised for growth – as well as critical investments in WHD’s workforce and infrastructure through the ARP – this year is an opportunity to reset, rebuild, and advance worker-focused priorities and strategies.
These priorities include protecting essential workers, continuing to account for the effects of COVID in strategies, advancing the goals of equity, addressing worker misclassification as independent contractors, preventing and remedying retaliation, and ensuring all workers receive the back wages they are due.
For FY 2022, WHD updated its performance measures consistent with the Agency’s mission, goals, and priorities; they reflect the Agency’s commitments to protecting essential workers; conducting strategic enforcement; and addressing misclassification, retaliation, and equity.
Three of the four performance measures outlined below are new measures being used by WHD starting in FY 2022.
As such, WHD modeled historical dat from prior fiscal years to arrive at the targets.
WHD seeks to increase the percent of outreach events of a target audience size associated with strategic initiatives to focus its outreach on essential workers and underserved communities.
Those activities will provide critical information for improving enforcement strategies and case selection.
Linking outreach to strategic initiatives will increase the use of strategic partnerships focused on the shared goal of improving compliance.
WHD has been tracking events associated with strategic initiatives, but starting in FY 2023 is emphasizing audience size in order to broaden the agency’s reach to key stakeholders and organize more meaningful and impactful events.
WHD also works to increase the percent of compliance actions associated to a strategic initiative.
This new measure aims to leverage the results of both complaint and directed investigations as part of strategic initiatives.
This approach recognizes the full range of impact cases that can support broader industry efforts.
WHD defines “impact” in several ways, including cases that: deter violations beyond the investigated employer; address violations that are egregious, willful, and/or persistent; and that reach the greatest number of essential workers and workers from underserved communities.
WHD uses initiatives to achieve the goals of protecting essential workers, advancing equity, addressing the impacts of COVID, addressing misclassification, and recovering wages for workers.
Through a systematic, deliberate, and data-driven methodology, WHD set targets that allow the agency to strive for steady and continuous improvement.
The targets reflect measured increases that allow the agency to adjust to a new measure and address compliance actions outside of strategic initiatives that serve vulnerable workers.
In FY 2022, WHD continued to measure the percent of FLSA compliance actions (excluding conciliations) with a severity score of 30 or more.
The case severity index captures violation data describing the magnitude and egregiousness of the findings as well as indicators of the employers culpability.
This supports a strategy of increasing the proportion of cases that are high impact, which WHD estimates can recover additional back wages for workers over time.
With increased resources to support enforcement, WHD anticipates the proportion of cases meeting that threshold will increase over time, as offices are better equipped with the time, expertise, and resources to pursue and develop significant cases, including cases involving liquidated damages, civil monetary penalties, and litigation.
WHD set increasing targets that account for fluctuations while also pushing the agency to continue a positive trend.
WHD has historically focused enforcement on industries that employ some of the lowest paid workers with the highest rates of wage violations.
WHD analysis determined that these same industries employed high percentages of workers of color.
Strong enforcement strategies in these industries are an important tool to advance racial equity and combat poverty.
WHD's industry focused strategies will be augmented by a place-based approach to enforcement in order to leverage unique enforcement opportunities in a particular state or city and to maximize enforcement power.
WHD will perform a comparative analysis of labor standards and worker protection laws, including the scope of worker protections, the enforcement capacity of state and local partners, and the remedies available.
This analysis will guide development of strategic partnerships and collaborative enforcement strategies to strengthen protection and enforcement in all regions and offices.
WHD aims to increase the percent of back wages paid to workers.
In most WHD investigations, the vast majority of back wages found due to workers are paid directly by the employers.
However, the subset of unlocated workers due back wages may represent some of the most vulnerable workers.
Media, outreach, and stakeholder partnerships will focus on underrepresented communities of color, immigrant workers, and those who may not receive wages because they are in a foreign country.
WHD will also expand the use of techniques during and following an investigation to ensure workers receive the wages they are due.
OFCCP Performance Goal 2.2 – Promote equitable and diverse workplaces for America’s federal contractor employees.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) is charged with protecting America's workers by enforcing equal employment opportunity obligations of employers that do business with the federal government.
To advance equal employment opportunity, OFCCP conducts enforcement activities, and provides outreach and education, and compliance assistance.
The federal government’s historic investments in the nation’s infrastructure, manufacturing, and technology will increase the number of contractors and projects under OFCCP’s jurisdiction, and OFCCP will play a vital role in ensuring that these investments create good jobs that provide equal opportunity to all.
The agency is strengthening compliance resources, tools, national training, and education and outreach activities.
In FY 2022, OFCCP continued its commitment to tackling long-standing employment practices that create barriers to opportunity and perpetuate inequality in our social and economic systems for underrepresented workers, including workers of color, women, LGBTQ+ individuals, workers with disabilities, and veterans.
By conducting compliance evaluations of contractors, and addressing complaints, OFCCP works to address systemic barriers to employment opportunity in hiring, compensation, and promotion.
OFCCP settled 34 discrimination cases totaling $11.8 million in monetary recoveries for 9,890 victims of discrimination and negotiated 320 job opportunities.
The agency recovered an additional $8.6 million in salary adjustments for 1,022 affected class members, bringing the total FY 2022 monetary recoveries amount to $20.4 million for 10,912 affected class members.
OFCCP also hosted 206 education and outreach events focused on workers’ rights, roughly 50 percent of all outreach events hosted by OFCCP.
Nearly 7,000 workers attended these events.
In FY 2022, OFCCP and Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) launched HIRE, a multi-year collaborative effort that engages a broad array of stakeholders to expand access to good jobs for workers from underrepresented communities and help address key hiring and recruiting challenges.
OFCCP prioritizes the timely completion of compliance evaluations and has implemented several strategies to close cases more quickly, such as weekly reports, monthly enforcement meetings to discuss cases post-desk audit, and the use of a specific approach to more efficiently identify and prioritize cases involving systemic barriers to equal opportunity.
However, some cases that involve discrimination are complex and involve multiple parties to reach a resolution.
OFCCP completed Supply and Service cases that involved discrimination in about three and a half years (1,294 median days), which is significantly longer than the target of 950 median days.
OFCCP found instances of discrimination in 3 percent of the 866 supply and service compliance evaluations completed in FY 2022.
OFCCP rigorously investigates complaints alleging employment discrimination at federal contractor workplaces.
In FY 2022, OFCCP received over 2,000 complaints from workers and 89 percent of those complaints were processed within the standard timeframe, exceeding the target of 88 percent.
In FY 2023, the agency will continue efforts to promote greater awareness among individual workers, worker organizations, and other stakeholders of OFCCP’s complaint process.
OFCCP will update its policies and procedures for complaint intake, assignment, and transfer to EEOC.
2023, OFCCP will deploy the complaint module in its Case Management System (CMS).
This will increase efficiency across the agency to enable complaint data to be directly uploaded, tracked, and reported in real time through CMS.
OFCCP will continue to provide language access and plain language resources, including complaint forms, with all translations being culturally competent.
OFCCP will also address complaint processing by separating the current measure into two measures to capture the timeliness of complaint perfection and investigations independently.
In FY 2023, OFCCP will focus on unleashing the agency’s full enforcement power by continuing to strategically allocate its resources where it can have the greatest impact.
Specifically, OFCCP will build on its efforts to strengthen the agency’s compliance evaluation process to identify contractors with greater risk factors for noncompliance and to remedy systemic discrimination in hiring, compensation, and other areas.
The directive, Effective Compliance Evaluations and Enforcement (DIR 2022-02), updates guidance on compliance evaluation policies, identifies strategic enforcement objectives, improves scheduling and data submission policies, and clarifies access to employees, applicants, and other witnesses in compliance evaluations.
Additionally, OFCCP will enhance its training on identifying and prioritizing compliance evaluations.
In FY 2022, OFCCP continued to build on its commitment to reinvigorate systemic enforcement in the Construction Industry.
OFCCP enhanced the construction contractor compliance evaluation process, moving from compliance checks to full compliance evaluations of federal construction contractors and federally-assisted construction contractors and subcontractors, performing desk audits prior to going onsite, and increasing construction worker outreach and contractor compliance assistance.
In FY 2023, OFCCP will launch an updated version of a previous initiative, its Mega Construction Projects Program, to foster equal opportunity in the workforce of federal contractors and subcontractors on large federal construction projects.
Projects eligible for designation as Mega are valued at $35 million or more in funding, some part of which must be federal funding, and are expected to last for at least one year.
This program is one of the agency’s most impactful tools to expand access to good jobs and a core component of DOL’s Good Jobs Initiative.
OLMS Performance Goal 2.2 – Promote union financial integrity, transparency, and democracy.
OLMS administers the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959, as amended, and related laws.
These laws primarily establish safeguards for union democracy and union financial integrity and require public disclosure reporting by unions, union officers, union employees, employers, labor relations consultants, and surety companies.
Timely resolution of election complaints accelerates the restoration of a democratic voice and a democratically operated union.
OLMS continues to fine-tune methods for further reducing its elapsed days (the number of days between a union member filing a complaint and its resolution), including the use of a team-based approach for handling election cases when resources permit and early engagement with the Office of the Solicitor in cases that may result in litigation.
This has meant reducing the average number of days to resolve union officer election complaints to 55.2 days in FY 2022 from 68.8 days in FY 2018.
Targets balance the changes OLMS can make to its processes with outside factors that can affect the resolution of these types of cases, such as cooperation from the unions being investigated.
OLMS invested in expanding the number of labor management forms available electronically, provided outreach to facilitate electronic filing these reports, and developed a rule that required electronic filing of certain reports beginning January 1, 2017.
These efforts led to greater transparency.
In FY 2020, OLMS made additional labor management forms available for electronic filing and made electronic filing for those reports’ mandatory in FY 2021.
The success of incorporating electronic filing is reflected in OLMS’ e-filing rate of 97.9 percent in FY 2022, up from 58 percent in FY 2017.
The “fallout rate” is the percentage of audits of labor unions that reveal evidence that the labor union has been the victim of fraud or embezzlement.
To increase the fallout rate and meet the goal, OLMS uses various data records and sources to select which unions to audit.
By becoming more effective at selecting targets, OLMS conserves its auditing resources.
When audits are opened on unions with red flags for embezzlement, fewer unions are burdened by audits that are less likely to find violations of the law.
OLMS seeks to increase disclosure of employer efforts to persuade workers on how to exercise their rights to organize and collectively bargain.
OLMS also seeks to increase disclosure of expenditures of employers who surveil employees in connection with a labor dispute.
Disclosure of employer activities that constitute “unfair labor practices” is also a priority.
OLMS will conduct targeted compliance assistance and investigations to better ensure compliance with these reporting obligations.
Overall, OLMS maintained its vigorous enforcement posture because the successful completion of its mission helps protect unions and their members from criminal activities while advancing democratic governing principles.
This mission strengthens unions and builds public confidence in them.
And a strong, well-respected labor movement lifts up all workers and is a force for creating equity among diverse communities.
OLMS’ efforts to empower workers and their unions require that OLMS operations and the data it collects be accurately maintained and presented in its full context.
OLMS continued to improve its web site, conduct outreach to stakeholders, engage with the public on matters linking the labor movement to social and economic advancement, and coordinate with other federal agencies.
Improve the security of retirement, health, and other workplace-related benefits for America’s workers and their families.
Workers must have confidence in and understanding of their retirement and health benefits.
EBSA’s mission is to ensure the security of the retirement, health, and other workplace related benefits of America’s workers and their families.
The Agency’s enforcement program uses a wide variety of approaches to accomplish its mission, such as establishing national and regional priorities, voluntary compliance programs, civil and criminal litigation, regulations and guidance, and research-based analysis.
The economic research program informs the Agency’s regulatory and enforcement work and provides important information to the public and policymakers on benefit plans.
Findings for this objective were grouped into two themes: Performance Management and Enforcement Capacity.
Evidence of progress included use of evidence to improve plan audit quality and effective response to challenges encountered during the pandemic.
Challenges were identified in performance measurement, hiring, and equity efforts.
We also noted that SOL is key to this objective’s success.
SOL needs sufficient resources and capacity to provide advice and counsel to worker protection agencies in order to help those agencies unleash their full power within legal boundaries.
EBSA’s performance measures include the Major Case Program, which focuses on identifying and pursuing investigations that have the greatest potential to correct Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) violations for many plans and plan participants.
With EBSA’s commitment to Terminated Vested Participant Project (TVPP) cases – EBSA’s most successful project – monetary recoveries increased each year from FY 2016 to FY 2020.
However, the TVPP results disproportionately affected EBSA’s recoveries and measures.
Starting in FY 2021, EBSA shifted to other Major Case priorities, a move that, predictably, resulted in a decline in overall monetary recoveries.
In FY 2018, EBSA instituted two new performance measures to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of the Major Case Program by its results.
Major Case Monetary Recoveries per Major Case Staff Day decreased from a high of $108,807 in FY 2019 to $51,205 in FY 2022.
Monetary Recoveries on Major Cases Closed per Staff Day decreased from a high of $79,773 in FY 2019 to $74,717 in FY 2022.
EBSA’s recoveries and measures were disproportionately affected by the results achieved in EBSA’s most successful project, TVPP.
During the last few years, the vast majority of results were obtained through the TVPP.
With the decision to deemphasize TVPP in FY 2021 and shift priorities in response to congressional mandates, EBSA expects these decreases to continue in FY 2023.
Even so, it bears emphasis that the Agency’s average recoveries of tens of thousands of dollars for each investigative staff day represents an extraordinary return on taxpayer investment.
In FY 2022, EBSA targeted Certified Public Accountant (CPA) firms that audit fewer than 100 employee benefit plans annually.
These firms were responsible for auditing plans that hold $156 billion in assets and impact 3.4 million participants.
In FY 2022, EBSA audited fewer plans and focused on improving audit quality, as an EBSA audit quality study in FY 2017 found that almost 40 percent of plan audits contained one or more major deficiencies.
A new audit quality study, which is slated for completion in FY 2023, will help assess whether audits have improved.
EBSA plans to include the American Institute of CPAs when planning for the new study.
The COVID-19 pandemic created several immediate and long-term challenges for EBSA and benefit plans.
For example, according to stakeholders, plans were initially concerned about how to implement provisions in the Families First Coronavirus Response Act and the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, but those concerns were addressed as the Agency issued Frequently Asked Questions and notices.
Similarly, EBSA officials reported that court closures temporarily slowed criminal cases, but as virtual hearings increased, litigation resumed.
Stakeholders and EBSA officials also described potential long-term challenges, including difficulties locating the many participants who may have left a job due to the pandemic and may be unaware they left behind retirement funds.
EBSA was able to hire enough staff to offset attrition and increase overall FTE.
In FY 2022, 119 employees were hired and 103 separated, resulting in an FTE increase from 815 to 831.
EBSA Performance Goal 2.3 – Improve the security of retirement, health, and other workplace-related benefits for America’s workers and their families.
EBSA is responsible for protecting more than 152 million of America’s workers, retirees, and their families, who are covered by approximately 747,000 private retirement plans, 2.5 million health plans, and 673,000 welfare benefit plans.
Together, these plans hold estimated assets of $12 trillion.
To accomplish its mission, EBSA uses a comprehensive, integrated approach that includes programs for enforcement, compliance assistance, interpretive guidance, regulations, and research.
In FY 2022, the agency recovered over $1.4 billion in direct payment to plans, participants, and beneficiaries.
Specifically, EBSA’s enforcement program detects and corrects violations, which results in monetary recoveries for employee benefit plans, participants, and beneficiaries or other corrective remedies, including significant reforms for large plans or common service providers.
Several of EBSA’s existing national enforcement projects directly influence underserved communities.
These projects include Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act (MHPAEA) enforcement and the Protecting Benefits Distribution project, which covers the Terminated Vested Participant Program (TVPP), abandoned plans, and financially distressed sponsors.
By their nature, these programs have a built-in focus on underserved individuals and communities, including vulnerable elderly populations and individuals struggling with mental health and substance use issues.
There are more opportunities within these programs to further enhance EBSA’s focus on underserved communities.
For example, under the TVPP project in FY 2022, EBSA targeted defined benefit plans in industries with high percentages of foreign-born workers to determine if they have disproportionate incidents of missing participants.
While EBSA has improved outreach to underserved communities through multiple efforts, there is an opportunity to improve data to capture the impact of enforcement on those communities and ensure adequate targeting.
In FY 2022, EBSA continued to concentrate a significant portion of its enforcement resources on the Major Case Enforcement Priority, which focused on cases likely to have the greatest impact.
Because Major Case results can be highly volatile from year to year, EBSA used metrics to evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of investigative time and based its enforcement measure targets on careful consideration of historical data.
While recoveries declined overall, over half of EBSA’s enforcement recoveries continued to result from a single initiative, the TVPP.
These cases obtained unusually large recoveries for participants and beneficiaries while expending minimal investigative resources.
Considering these factors, in FY 2023, EBSA adjusted its monetary recovery performance measures to reflect the decision to deemphasize, but not eliminate, large dollar TVPP investigations and to shift emphasis towards health investigations and, in particular, MHPAEA and other CAA related matters.
To this end EBSA is introducing revised metrics breaking our monetary results into three areas and focusing separately on results based on the amount of staff days devoted to each area so that, regardless of policy and legislative choices beyond the agency’s control, it will be able to focus on efficiencies and results within each area.
Those three areas will be Major Case – TVPP; Major Case – Health, and Major Case – Pension and Non-Health Welfare.
EBSA will continue diligently working on the implementation, enforcement, administration, and litigation of the provisions delineated in the FY 2021 Consolidated Appropriations Act (Pub. L. 116-260).
These provisions expand protections against surprise medical billing and focus on enforcement of MHPAEA and non-quantitative treatment limitations (NQTLs).
EBSA will review health plans for MHPAEA compliance to ensure that mental health and substance use disorder patients receive the benefits they are entitled to in parity with the medical/surgical benefits provided by their health plans.
The agency is using a service provider approach to achieve widespread corrections of MHPAEA violations, such as impermissible restrictions on medication-assisted treatment and exclusions of key services for autism and eating disorders.
EBSA will also continue to enforce MHPAEA’s provisions related to annual and lifetime dollar limits, quantitative treatment limitations, financial requirements, disclosures, and coverage in all applicable classifications.
Sources: Enforcement Management System.
Notes: The measure Percent of Delinquent Employee Contribution, Abandoned Plan, Bonding, Health-Part 7 Violation, and Other Reporting and Disclosure Non-Fiduciary Breach Cases Closed or Referred for Litigation in the Fiscal Year within 18 Months of Case Opening is a rewording for clarification of Percent of Less Complex Issue Cases Closed or Referred for Litigation in the fiscal year within 18 Months of Case Opening.
Targets and results are not affected.
Strengthen labor rights, improve working conditions, promote racial and gender equity, and empower workers around the world.
ILAB safeguards dignity at work, both at home and abroad – by strengthening global labor standards; enforcing labor commitments among trading partners; promoting racial and gender equity; and combating international child labor, forced labor, and human trafficking.
ILAB accomplishes this goal through Trade Enforcement, Policy Engagement, Technical Assistance, and Research and Reporting.
ILAB’s approach is validated by independent research from the United States International Trade Commission (2016) and the Inter-American Development Bank (2014) suggesting that including labor obligations in trade agreements leads to better labor laws and enforcement efforts in trade partner countries.
ILAB’s efforts position the United States as a leader on international labor rights by demonstrating the U.S. commitment to work with governments, workers, unions, employers and business organizations, civil society organizations, and other actors to achieve its mission.
Taken together, these activities support U.S. Government efforts to advance equity on all fronts, particularly in countries where vulnerable and marginalized populations are most susceptible to exploitative labor conditions.
By addressing exploitative labor conditions and advancing equity in key countries, ILAB supports efforts to combat poverty and structural racism in underserved and marginalized communities.
Findings for this objective were grouped into two themes: Implementing the President’s Trade Agenda and Measuring Progress.
Evidence of progress included United States –Mexico – Canada Agreement (USMCA) implementation and progress combatting child labor and forced labor.
Challenges were identified in performance measurement.
ILAB: Implementing the Labor Provisions of the USMCA in Mexico In cooperation with the United States Trade Representative (USTR), ILAB successfully used the USMCA Rapid Response Mechanism (RRM) three times in FY 2022, referring these cases to the Mexican government for review.
The RRM is a dispute settlement tool that provides for monitoring and expedited enforcement of labor rights in Mexico at particular facilities in priority sectors.
The course of remediation reached in these three cases resulted in workers freely exercising their collective rights to organize and win authentic union representation.
Additionally, more than 60 workers were reinstated with backpay and workers at one facility saw a 9.5 percent wage increase though a collective bargaining agreement negotiated by their new union.
In two additional cases, ILAB and the USTR determined that the claims in the RRM were insufficient to warrant using the tool.
In those two cases, ILAB and USTR worked with their Mexican counterparts to continue to monitor the ability of newly formed independent unions to exercise their rights at these facilities.
Despite travel-related challenges through the first half of the year, ILAB’s engagement, including through its labor attaché program, contributed to 32 high-engagement trade partner countries taking action to improve protection of labor rights, including combating child labor and forced labor.
These actions included strengthening legal frameworks to protect worker rights; policy and programmatic actions; and improving labor law enforcement.
ILAB conducted and published research related to its three flagship reports on child labor and forced labor, and undertook policy engagement efforts to assist governments in addressing findings in these reports, including over 1,500 concrete recommendations for strengthening laws and enforcement efforts to combat child labor.
ILAB continues to collect historical data that can provide a sense of how the agency is achieving or influencing outcomes over time.
ILAB also utilizes measures focused on outputs (active technical assistance projects, technical cooperation, oversight, and policy documents) to track performance.
GAO has commended ILAB for its robust evaluation efforts.
ILAB Performance Goal 2.4 – Strengthen labor rights, improve working conditions, promote racial and gender equity, and empower workers around the world.
ILAB safeguards dignity at work, both at home and abroad – by strengthening global labor standards, enforcing labor commitments among trading partners, promoting racial and gender equity, and combating international child labor, forced labor, and human trafficking.
When other countries do not comply with internationally recognized workers’ rights in violation of their trade-related labor commitments, they gain an unfair advantage that harms American workers and businesses.
ILAB uses the leverage, resources, and voice of the U.S. government to empower workers and strengthen labor rights globally, and positions the United States as a leader on international labor rights.
In FY 2022, ILAB implemented the President’s Trade Agenda by monitoring and enforcing the labor provisions of the USMCA Free Trade Agreement in Mexico and labor obligations in other free trade agreements and preference programs.
ILAB increased its efforts to combat the use of child labor and forced labor in global supply chains, including, for the first time, adding 10 goods identified through supply chain tracing to DOL’s List of Good Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor (the TVPRA List).
ILAB leveraged labor attachés in key trade partner countries and other strategic locations to expand its monitoring and enforcement of labor commitments and promote workers’ rights.
ILAB worked with interagency partners to implement the Root Causes Strategy and Collaborative Migration Management Strategy in Central America.
ILAB continued efforts to strengthen worker voice around the world, and promoted worker protections, including occupational safety and health and social protections, and expanded the US Government’s presence at international and intergovernmental organizations.
ILAB also supported research projects with the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) examining how Artificial Intelligence could impact labor market outcomes by perpetuating existing biases in hiring and promotion practices, and research that highlighted the working conditions of frontline workers.
Finally, ILAB integrated equity, inclusion and worker voice into policies, programming, research, technical assistance, and contracting.
In FY 2023, ILAB will continue to promote worker voice with international partners, provide targeted technical assistance in countries where governments and other actors have demonstrated the political will to improve labor rights, and elevate labor diplomacy.
ILAB will play a leading role in regional and international organizations to promote equity and inclusion in employment, as well as promote core labor standards, including occupational safety and health.
ILAB will continue strengthening worker voice through leadership of the Multilateral Partnership for Organizing, Worker Empowerment, and Rights (M-POWER).
ILAB will also develop new methods and tools to trace child labor and forced labor in global supply chains and build capacity of interagency partners to enhance the U.S. Government’s ability to prevent the importation of goods made with forced labor.
ILAB will continue to develop internal research capacity in the core issue of worker protection by exploring how trade impacts employment outcomes of historically marginalized groups, gender and racial equity, and labor market conditions in other countries.
Ensure timely and accurate income support when work is unavailable by strengthening benefits programs and program administration.
America’s economy must have a strong safety net to support unemployed, injured, and ill workers.
ETA’s Unemployment Insurance programs will focus on supporting unemployed workers and employers.
OWCP programs will focus on workers who were injured or became ill on the job.
The Department will also address inequity to underserved communities by identifying and mitigating delays and obstacles that impede claimants’ abilities to receive assistance.
The Department also plans to pursue development of modular solutions to support states’ efforts to improve information technology systems over the next several years.
Findings for this objective were grouped into two themes: Mitigating Risks; and Hiring, Customer Experience, and Equity.
Evidence of progress included OWCP’s program performance and hiring efforts.
Challenges were identified in detecting and preventing improper payments, and in focusing on workers of color in outreach and equity efforts.
In FY 2022, the Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA) program continued to assist agencies to improve the federal government’s performance in timely filing worker’s compensation and wage-loss claims, as well as the return to work of injured employees, to the highestever levels.
The Black Lung program met all of its FY 2022 targets for performance measures in the key areas of timeliness, quality, and productivity.
In FY 2022, the COVID-19 pandemic continued to impact pending claims volumes as the program continued to experience low incoming claims.
However, the program received nearly 1,000 claims in the final two months of FY 2022, the most since FY 2019, indicating that incoming claims volumes may be beginning to rebound to pre-pandemic levels.
In FY 2022, the program began tracking a new performance measure, “Percent of Black Lung claims pending at the start of the fiscal year that are resolved by the end of the fiscal year,” to help better manage the pending claims inventory.
OWCP’s FECA program met its improper payment target rate of 3.18 percent in FY 2022.
A major source of overpayments is duplication of workers’ compensation payments by OWCP and Federal Employees Retirement System payments by the Social Security Administration (SSA); the longer it takes to verify the proper amounts, the larger the overpayment becomes and the larger the burden on claimants to repay the funds.
In FY 2022, OWCP began using Treasury’s Do Not Pay program to receive a list of matches of concurrent OWCP and SSA payees for possible overpayments and automatically requesting those calculations from SSA, but it does not detail whether the payments made are for SSA disability or SSA retirement benefits.
OWCP and DOL’s Office of the Chief Information Officer are committed to working with SSA on a completely automated data exchange process to minimize overpayments and the financial burden on claimants.
In FY 2022, first payment timeliness continued to fall – to 61.2 percent from the pre-pandemic peak of 85.8 percent in FY 2019 – because of the ongoing fallout from the unprecedented volume of claims due to the pandemic.
For the same reason, the unemployment insurance (UI) improper payment rate more than doubled from 9.17 percent in FY 2020 to 21.52 percent in FY 2022 (in the twelve months ending June 30, 2022).
The Department of Labor has identified an Agency Priority Goal to increase the first payment timeliness rate and reduce the improper payment rate.
For FY 2023, targets are 66.4 percent for first payment timeliness and 17.50 percent for improper payments.
OWCP continued its hiring efforts in FY 2022 and was able to hire and onboard 177 employees by the end of the fiscal year, including a Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Accessibility (DEIA) Officer to advance OWCP’s internal equity efforts.
The Energy program within OWCP continued its High Impact Service Provider (HISP) Customer Experience (CX) efforts by submitting quarterly reports, conducting an annual assessment, developing an Action Plan and Customer Journey Map.
Feedback collection efforts in FY 2022 included a series of surveys.
Three surveys focused on claim development, medical travel reimbursement, and the experience of Authorized Representatives.
Two surveys included an optional equity assessment that was used to gather feedback to address potential program barriers to services within underserved communities.
The program also conducted a web-based survey on the Energy Document Portal (EDP), monthly post webinar surveys, and one-on-one customer phone interviews.
The CX Team analyzed survey results and provided recommendations for programmatic improvement to OWCP leadership.
The pandemic has exposed longstanding operational and technological challenges in state UI systems, which have resulted in delays and obstacles that disproportionately affect workers of color – creating potential racial and ethnic disparities in the applicants who received UI benefits during the pandemic.
Ensuring equitable access to UI benefits is a top priority for the Department and ETA will work with states to address access and equity issues, and ensure they have the capacity to handle higher volumes of claims and are better prepared for future crises.
ETA will support the use of ARPA funding to offer system-wide infrastructure improvements to the federal-state UI program.
A 2017 Mathematica Policy Research study found that non-Hispanic Black workers represented a larger share of UI benefits exhaustees than nonexhaustees (22.2 percent compared to 12 percent).
In general, individuals who exhausted UI benefits experienced worse post-claim outcomes than non-exhaustees, including lower rates of employment and labor force participation, even four to six years after the initial claim.
These findings from a previous recession suggest that Black workers, especially those who are long-term unemployed, may require additional outreach as well as reemployment and training services during the recovery from the pandemic.
OWCP Performance Goal 3.1 – Increase the efficiency and accuracy with which OWCP provides workers’ compensation benefits for certain qualified workers who are injured or become ill on the job and improve return-to-work outcomes for injured workers.
The role of OWCP is to provide workers’ compensation benefits for workers injured or ill on the job.
OWCP implements four statutory federal workers’ compensation programs that provide monetary, medical, and return-to-work benefits for work-related injuries and illnesses including, but not limited to federal employees, coal mine workers, nuclear weapons workers, longshore and harbor workers, contractors serving overseas, and certain other designated employee groups.
The agency adjudicates claims, administers the benefit funds authorized for these purposes, and provides oversight of claims resolutions by responsible parties.
The FECA program continued to coordinate with OSHA under the Protecting Employees, Enabling Reemployment (PEER) Initiative to recommit federal departments and agencies to safety goals, ensure that the workforce receives timely benefits through a modern and efficient workers compensation system, and work with agencies across the federal government to meet their individualized performance targets.
In FY 2022, returnto-work outcomes increased to 84.93 percent for injured federal workers during the initial 45-day post-injury period for traumatic injuries, exceeding the target of 69.12 percent and significantly improving upon the government’s FY 2020 baseline performance.
While the PEER Initiative concluded at the end of FY 2022, OWCP hopes to build on the progress made under the Initiative.
The Black Lung program began tracking a new performance measure, “Percent of Black Lung claims pending at the start of the fiscal year that are resolved by the end of the fiscal year,” to better manage the pending claims inventory.
In FY 2022, the program exceeded the first-year target of 86 percent by issuing decisions on 91 percent of claims pending at the beginning of the fiscal year.
Additionally, the program built on performance over the past three years and in FY 2022, completed Proposed Decision and Orders following completion of all claim development for all Responsible Operator Merit Claims within 24 days, exceeding the target of 34 days.
In FY 2022, the Black Lung program made efforts to reduce improper payments by reviewing and analyzing medical bills, Do Not Pay matching, and routine audits, and will continue those efforts in FY 2023.
The Energy program’s unit of quality assurance analysts continued the review of quality of individual cases throughout the year, formalized a process for reviewing quality reports quarterly, and implemented corrective actions where appropriate.
The quality assurance analysts also added a new category for review to assess letter decisions of acceptance.
In FY 2022, 95.14 precent of sampled Part B and Part E initial claims were rated as being accurate, exceeding the target of 90.00 percent.
Additionally, the Energy program continued to improve the customer experience by expanding access to digital case files through the OWCP Employees’ Compensation Operations and Management Portal (ECOMP).
In FY 2021, the portal served as a secure website for Division of Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation (DEEOIC) employee claimants to review status updates, view compensation payment information and access claimant medical and pharmacy bill information.
In FY 2022, the portal was expanded to allow access to Sole Survivors and Authorized Representatives.
The program made enhancements to the Ancillary Medical Services Module in the Energy Compensation System (ECS) to improve efficiency and accuracy in adjudication of requests for authorization of post-approval for medical equipment and services.
The program utilized the Energy Document Portal (EDP) to allow digital signatures on new applications and payment forms that currently require wet signatures and continued to expand the use of the Accountability Review Tracking System (ARTS) to provide an easily accessible and central way for managers at all levels to assess and report on the quality of work.
The Longshore program continued to build upon successful past performance in FY 2022.
The Longshore program received 93.5 percent of First Reports of Injury for non-Defense Base Act cases within 20 days,” exceeding the target of 92 percent.
The program will build on this success continuing outreach activities on the importance of timely filing and encouraging the use of electronic submissions.
OWCP continues to support the Department’s efforts to advance equity and support to underserved communities in order to combat poverty in affected communities.
In FY 2023, the Energy program will continue to work within the local communities (e.g., local community centers, churchorganized events, medical centers, etc.) to conduct outreach and surveys to traditionally low-income and rural communities with limited access to internet and Native American, indigenous, tribal communities, and/or those residing on Native American reservations; the FECA and Longshore programs will conduct analysis of voluntary demographic information, claimant surveys on barriers, and any other stakeholder demographic information; and the Black Lung program will place an emphasis on equity and CX initiatives by amending its claim forms for the voluntary collection of demographic data, utilizing census tract data to identify underserved communities, and conducting CX surveys to inform customer engagement strategies.
Additionally, OWCP will incorporate DEIA requirements in its contract actions for Medical Provider Network/Medical Bill Processing.
These requirements will advance equity by ensuring that services provided by OWCP’s contractors promote a diverse pool of medical service providers; adopt equitable policies and practices when engaging with, hiring and/or subcontracting for medical service providers; and identify and remove barriers that underserved communities and individuals may face in accessing medical services under OWCP programs.
In FY 2023, OWCP and FECA program leadership will work with SSA leadership to ensure that calculations of federal employees’ benefits are provided timely, and then will work with SSA and the Treasury Department to find ways to automate this process without relying on claimant notification, manual program requests, or manual calculations of the proper offset amount.
Sources: Integrated Federal Employee’s Compensation System (iFECS), OWCP Workers’ Compensation System (OWCS), Black Lung Program Automated Support Package (ASP), and Energy Compensation System (ECS).
ETA Performance Goal 3.1 – Support states’ timely and accurate benefit payments for unemployed workers.
The federal-state UI program, authorized under the Federal Unemployment Tax Act and Title III of the Social Security Act, provides temporary, partial wage replacement for unemployed workers, providing them with income support when suitable work is unavailable.
To be eligible for benefits, unemployed workers must meet eligibility requirements established by state laws that conform to federal law, including that they are involuntarily unemployed, and are able, available, and actively seeking work.
The federal role is to set broad policy for the program; establish performance measures and standards; provide technical assistance and training to states; monitor state performance, promote conformity and compliance of state laws and operations with federal law; and fund the administration of state and federal UI programs.
In FY 2022, the surge in claims experienced by states due to the pandemic and the CARES Act provisions continued to impact UI program performance.
First payment timeliness fell to 61.2 percent, lower authority appeals promptness fell further to 22.1 percent, and (in the twelve months ending June 30, 2022) the improper payment rate remained unacceptably high at 21.52 percent.
While states mobilized quickly to implement new temporary pandemic-related UI programs, because of years of low administrative funding, reductions in staff, outdated technology and a lack of resources, states were poorly positioned to provide quality services to the extraordinary number of claimants filing for unemployment compensation.
This resulted in longstanding operational and technological weaknesses in state UI systems and created backlogs continuing into FY 2022.
While claims volume fell dramatically in FY 2022, states continued to address ongoing fallout of the unprecedented increase in claims activity experienced in the prior two years (average weekly claims increased from 1.7 million per week in FY 2019 to 9.1 million in FY 2020 and 5.0 million in FY 2021) while experiencing an approximate 22 percent decline in administrative funding (which is tied to claims volume) from the previous year.
This resulted in severe negative impacts on state timeliness and improper payment performance results.
For FY 2023, ETA targets for first payment timeliness and lower authority appeals promptness are 66.4 percent and 30.0 percent, respectively.
The target of 17.50 percent for improper payments is above the statutory goal of less than 10 percent7F8 but still significantly below the program’s most recent performance level.
ETA continues work with the UI Integrity Center (a joint federal and state initiative focusing on the prevention, detection, and recovery of improper payments, fraud, and delinquent employer contributions) and leverage resources provided under the $2 billion appropriation under ARPA to provide technology, tools, technical assistance, and grants to states.
Activities under this ARPA initiative are focused on preventing and detecting fraud, promoting equitable access, and ensuring the timely payment of benefits.
For the measure Reemployment Rate in the 2nd Quarter after Program Exit Quarter for RESEA Participants (Unemployment Insurance), ETA plans to adopt performance targets established by a new regression-based model during FY 2023.
The model will use outcome data that inherently lags a few quarters and we are just starting to receive outcomes that has not been heavily influenced by the pandemic.
ETA will need at least another quarter of data to appropriately test the model.
Several major challenges have been identified in the UI system due to COVID-19.
After years of low administrative funding and reductions in staff, at the height of the pandemic, states were poorly positioned to address the economic emergency that struck the globe and to provide quality services to the extraordinary numbers of claimants filing for unemployment compensation.
In addition, states struggled to program their UI systems and implement the new temporary UI programs.
These challenges compounded the hardships to hard-working eligible Americans that depended on the UI system to provide financial support in their time of need.
Despite the challenges facing states, over the course of the pandemic, the UI system paid UI benefits to nearly 60 million workers, adding over $870 billion into states’ economies.
However, many individuals experienced significant barriers to access benefits in a timely manner.
States’ antiquated information technology systems were a major contributing factor in the states inability to provide quality services and benefits.
The UI system serves as one of the principal “gateways” to the public workforce system and is often the first program accessed by individuals who need workforce services.
The program keeps unemployed workers attached to the workforce and connects them to reemployment services.
ETA will continue to promote evidence-based strategies through the Reemployment Services and Eligibility Assessments (RESEA) program and encourage states to expand UI claimants’ participation in the program.
The purposes of the RESEA program are to improve employment outcomes of recipients of unemployment compensation and to reduce their average duration through employment; to strengthen program integrity and reduce improper UC payments; to promote the alignment with the broader vision of WIOA of increased program integration and service delivery for job seekers, including UI claimants; and to establish reemployment services and eligibility assessments as an entry point for UC claimants into other workforce system partner programs.
Provide timely, accurate, and relevant information on labor market activity, working conditions, price changes, and productivity in the U.S. economy.
BLS supports public and private decision making by publishing measures of labor market activity, working conditions, price changes, and productivity in the U.S. economy.
Hiring and maintaining a professional, highly-skilled workforce and being good stewards of the taxpayers’ money.
Findings for this objective were grouped into three themes: BLS Headquarters Move, Departmental Priorities, and BLS Response Rates and Products.
Evidence of progress included outreach regarding demographic data, efforts to improve workforce diversity, and program performance.
BLS continues to identify and overcome challenges identified in the headquarters relocation and hiring process.
BLS is working with the General Services Administration (GSA) and other stakeholders to relocate its National Office Headquarters to the Suitland Federal Center to be co-located with Census and the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
The relocation of the BLS National Office will utilize an approach that ensures any potential for mission disruption is minimized and leverages best practices.
In FY 2022, BLS successfully consolidated onsite workspace and vacated three floors of the PSB as further preparation for the move, while substantially complying with National Archives and Records Administration directives and upcoming deadlines on electronic recordkeeping.
BLS works to improve the accuracy, timeliness, and relevance of existing measures and expand coverage to enhance the usefulness of its data to its customers.
By engaging with its stakeholders, BLS gains a better understanding of customer needs to inform its priorities and foster greater public trust through continued transparency and improved clarity of methods.
Additionally, in support of the Administration’s priorities, BLS continues to assist agencies in determining the availability and use of BLS data for equity planning, action development, and tracking.
In FY 2022, BLS expanded the amount of demographic detail on labor market status available on a monthly basis.
BLS will continue to make its stakeholders aware of the considerable demographic data it has on black workers and other demographic groups, with detail on employment, wages, consumption patterns and other factors, which can inform equity initiatives.
In alignment with the Administration’s goals of advancing diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility, BLS is expanding and diversifying its recruitment channels, sponsoring special emphasis programs, and working with state partners to highlight inequalities in labor market outcomes.
BLS utilizes mass hiring vehicles to the extent possible, such as the Pathways program, to acquire entry-level talent with up-to-date skills in the most efficient manner.
BLS is piloting Data Science training courses and is participating in government-wide Data Science training opportunities.
Other activities include creating a hybrid work environment for the BLS National Office, fostering an innovation culture, supporting staff training and development, offering leadership development programs, providing speed mentoring to staff, and sharing information on free training and other career development opportunities.
BLS will continue to actively participate in recruitment activities such as outreach to targeted college campuses, speaker engagements, classroom visits, and career fair opportunities.
Moreover, we will continue to identify and disseminate job opportunities to a diverse list of organizations.
Despite experiencing a brisk pace of attrition, BLS exceeded its hiring goal for FY 2022, by ending the FY with 2,301 onboards, which was 14 above the goal.
BLS is exploring different sampling method designs that would potentially allow more targeted and efficient data collection.
BLS continues to rely on collection via the telephone, videoconferencing, online, and non-traditional sources of data in tandem with its in-person data collection efforts.
In FY 2022, BLS released more than 2 million data series, which along with other information on the website, were viewed on the BLS website roughly 15 million times on average per month.
BLS produces various estimates and indexes, including the Consumer Price Index, which is the nation’s principal gauge of inflation, and the Employment Situation, which includes Current Employment Statistics, a survey that measures employment, hours, and earnings by industry and geography from the payroll records of employers.
In FY 2022, BLS was largely successful in achieving its objective of producing timely, accurate, and relevant data for these and all of its Principal Federal Economic Indicators.
BLS Performance Goal 4.1 – Provide timely, accurate, and relevant information on labor market activity, working conditions, price changes, and productivity in the U.S. economy.
BLS is the principal federal statistical agency responsible for measuring labor market activity, working conditions, price changes, and productivity in the economy.
Its mission is to collect, analyze, and disseminate some of the nation’s most sensitive and important economic data to support public and private decision-making.
BLS executes its mission with independence from partisan interests while protecting the confidentiality of data providers and strives to meet the needs of a diverse set of customers for accurate, objective, relevant, timely, and accessible information and analysis.
BLS serves the general public, the U.S. Congress, DOL and other federal agencies, state and local governments, and business and labor.
Policies and decisions based on BLS data affect virtually all Americans, and the wide range of BLS data products is necessary to fulfill the diverse needs of a broad customer base.
BLS is committed to maintaining the highest level of scientific integrity in producing official statistics.
BLS complies with the Statistical Policy Directives and the Standards and Information Quality Guidelines from OMB, as well as the National Research Council’s Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency.
Together, these form the foundation for achieving and maintaining scientific integrity within and among the principal statistical agencies.
BLS also conforms to the conceptual framework of the Interagency Council on Statistical Policy’s quality dimensions.
BLS also measures the timeliness, accuracy, and relevance of its Principal Federal Economic Indicators (PFEIs) and accessibility of and customer satisfaction with accessing its statistical products.
These criteria are common among statistical agencies because they represent critical aspects of a statistical program’s performance.
Using these common concepts as a basis for measuring and reporting on statistical agency outcomes helps inform decisionmakers more consistently about the performance of statistical agencies.
BLS is committed to supporting the President’s Management Agenda of strengthening and empowering the Federal workforce; delivering excellent, equitable, and secure federal services and customer experience; and managing the business of Government to build back better.
BLS data support the President’s priority of providing evidence and supporting evaluation activities, consistent with the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act.
Furthermore, by producing gold-standard statistics and analyses, BLS supports the Secretary’s vision for the Department of Labor to empower workers morning, noon, and night.
BLS also publishes data on demographic groups in the U.S. economy, including information on employment, wages, workplace safety, and consumption patterns, which can inform efforts to advance equity.
The following table shows BLS success in achieving its objective of producing timely, accurate, and relevant data for its PFEIs in FY 2022.
The table also shows that BLS achieved its commitment to ensure that BLS data are available on the website.
BLS continued releasing objective statistics and analyses that are accurate and released on time and updated the information it collects and studies to remain relevant in describing the dynamic U.S. economy.
BLS continued to re-engineer its data sources and collection methods to balance the production of high-quality products while lessening respondent burden and survey cost.
Also, consistent with the Administration’s initiative to advance equity, BLS highlighted and directed stakeholders to publicly-available BLS data sets that describe various demographic groups in the U.S. economy.
BLS will continue to offer alternative response modes to reduce the burden and in-person interactions associated with collecting data from businesses and households.
Alternatives include collection over the telephone, videoconferencing, expanded electronic data interchange collection, as well as expanded use of corporate, administrative, and other large data sets from non-traditional sources that could complement and supplement directlycollected data.
BLS plans to continue these innovations in tandem with in-person data collection.
In FY 2022, BLS began publishing labor force estimates for American Indians and Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians and Other Pacific Islanders, and People of Two or More Races on a more frequent basis, with key economic metrics, including the unemployment rate, employment-population ratio, and labor participation rate, now published on a monthly basis.
Also, in FY 2022, BLS continued the development of a new Contingent Worker Supplement (CWS) to the Current Population Survey to be collected in FY 2023.
The CWS will include information on the number and demographic characteristics of workers in contingent jobs (that is, jobs that are structured to be temporary) and in alternative employment arrangements, such as independent contractors, on-call workers, temporary help agency workers, and platform workers.
These additional data will allow policymakers, stakeholders, and researchers to track trends in contingent work by demographic characteristics, and to examine emerging types of work arrangements.
In the upcoming years, BLS will continue to release new products in response to the needs of its stakeholders and data users.
In FY 2023, the International Price Program (IPP) will launch activities to integrate administrative trade data for homogeneous product areas into its news releases In addition, CPI will continue to improve the collection of the CPI Housing Survey by providing new functionality that will increase the quality of the data collected and provide an incremental step towards respondent self-reporting, which may reduce respondent burden and improve response rates.
Also, in FY 2023, the Occupational Safety and Health Statistics program will continue a two-year cycle for collecting detailed case characteristics for occupational injuries and illnesses that result in either days away from work or days of job transfer or restriction.
Sources: For most cross-cutting measures, internal BLS documents.
For the Availability measure, the BLS internal Quarterly Uptime Summary.
For the Mission Achievement measure, the cumulative BLS website Verint score for the FY.
Drive innovation in administrative, management, and financial services.
Administration, management, and financial services are the backbone of the Department of Labor, providing the critical infrastructure required to support the Department’s core mission work.
Ensuring these services are operating efficiently allows for more resources to go toward the programs that impact America’s workers.
OASAM and the OCFO are focusing on improving service delivery through modern, streamlined processes and IT infrastructure.
OASAM and OCFO are working together to implement programs which promote fiscal integrity and the effective and efficient use of resources, optimize DOL’s administrative services, and modernize Information Technology systems.
This work builds on the FY 2020 transition from multiple services providers to centralized functions for human resources, IT, procurement, and personnel security respectively.
Identifying and prioritizing the development of Federal shared products, services, and standards that enable simple, seamless, and secure customer experiences across High Impact Service Providers.
Build capacity in Federal financial management and through Federal financial assistance to catalyze American industrial strategy, address climate-related risks, and deliver equitable results.
Findings for this objective were grouped into two themes: Customer Service and Enabling the Department to Perform its Mission.
Evidence of progress included implementation of shared services, financial management, and process improvement.
Challenges were identified in implementing new cybersecurity requirements.
Beginning in FY 2020, client agencies had the opportunity to provide performance feedback for key shared services leaders in human resources, information technology, procurement, and personnel security.
In FY 2022, all leaders were rated highly and received at least 4.5 out of 5 from agencies in either of the FY 2022 surveys.
In FY 2022, all four shared services providers received at least a rating of 4.16 out of 5 in both of the FY 2022 OASAM Customer Satisfaction surveys.
OCFO works with agencies to reduce the amount of their cancelled appropriations.
Once cancelled, these funds are no longer available for obligation or expenditure and are returned to the U.S. Department of Treasury.
In FY 2022, DOL agencies reduced cancelled discretionary appropriation to 1.54 percent, compared to 1.85 percent in FY 2021.
In FY 2022, DOL continued to enhance the cybersecurity program by implementing enterprise-wide solutions to enhance encryption, multifactor authentication, information technology asset management, and incident response and monitoring.
These cybersecurity enhancements helped DOL in FY 2022 to experience zero cybersecurity incidents that resulted in compromise of an agency information system.
In addition, DOL scored an ‘A’ in six of seven categories on the Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA) 14.0 Scorecard (July 2022).
Recently, OIG assessed the maturity level (from Level-1 to Level-5) of DOL’s cybersecurity program in five function areas.
DOL was rated a Level-4 “Managed and Measurable” in one, a Level-3 “Consistently Implemented” in three areas, and a Level-2 “Defined” in one.
There is risk in OASAM’s ability to implement the requirements under Executive Order (EO) 14028, Improving the Nation’s Cybersecurity.
While the Department has already made fundamental progress in building towards Zero Trust Architecture, specifically having focused on capabilities such as Identity, Device, Data, and Network, without additional funding, its progress will be slowed.
Zero Trust architecture and capabilities require a substantial shift in strategy, technology, and implementation, all of which demand a complementary shift in resources.
The Department will continue to experience a higher level of risk until it is able to secure resources to implement the requirements under the EO.
The Administration has requested $44.8 million in the FY 2024 President's Budget to mitigate this risk.
OASAM completed an ambitious improvement agenda in FY 2021 and FY 2022, piloting enterprise-wide process improvements across OASAM.
In FY 2021, as a pilot, OCIO launched three Robotic Process Automation (RPA or Bots) to automate manual processes within the acquisition lifecycle.
For example, the Bots reduced the cycle time of the market research process from 8-16 hours to 5-13 hours and the time to create a Letter of Intent from 45 minutes to <5 minutes.
In FY 2022, OCIO established the RPA Center of Excellence, centralizing infrastructure and governance to host many Bots across the organization.
By the end of FY 2022, OCIO had launched and maintained 11 additional bots, saving an annual total of 4286.86 hours and $220,618.87 in cost avoidance.
In FY 2021, OCIO developed and implemented improved guidance, a tracking system, and an automated report using open data, open-source software, and Bots to improve compliance with the Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA).
In FY 2022, 86% of DOL’s Information Collection Requests (ICRs) were submitted to OMB at least 30 days before expiration (an increase of 65% over FY 2021) and 55% of DOL’s ICRs were submitted to OMB 60+ days before expiration, as required by the PRA statute (an increase of 150% over FY 2021).
In FY 2021, OHR streamlined the separation clearance process by reducing the opportunity for errors and improving accountability.
In FY 2021, OHR launched the Department’s new automated system for establishing, maintaining, and tracking telework agreements for employees and managers.
In FY 2021, OHR stood up the new Concierge Portal, a one-stop-shop for all DOL staff to find HR information.
In FY 2021 and FY 2022, OHR engaged leaders and employees, examined demographic data, identified challenges, and utilized data-driven approaches to develop the Department’s DEIA Strategic Plan.
In FY 2021 and FY 2022, OHR conducted a series of events focusing on specific topics for managers and supervisors: ER Unplugged from Employee Relations and Division-specific Empower Hour events.
In FY 2021, PMC streamlined the memorandum of understanding form and process, resulting in increased customer satisfaction ratings.
OCFO continues to make improvements on the core financial system, New Core Financial Management System (NCFMS).
Additionally, OCFO continues to engage OMB, GSA, and Treasury on shared services and the future of government-wide financial management through working groups and review.
OASAM works to enhance the customer experience of its human resources, information technology, procurement, and other primary customerfacing services by streamlining administrative services to improve the efficiency and quality of service delivery.
OASAM completed a transition of nearly all agencies’ functions for human resources, information technology, procurement, and personnel security to shared services models in FY 2020, consolidating staff and resources under one central authority respectively to increase efficiency and effectiveness.
OASAM’s OCIO provides IT leadership, products, and support for DOL.
OCIO plays a critical leadership role in driving reforms in systems development, better managing technology spending, and succeeding in achieving real, measurable improvements in mission performance.
OCIO provides guidance to DOL in support of government-wide directives for capital planning, IT security, information management, and enterprise architecture.
OASAM’s Office of the Senior Procurement Executive (OSPE) provides value-oriented acquisition and contracting operational support to DOL agencies to achieve their mission and departmental needs through innovative solutions while providing the highest level of customer service through leadership, guidance, and oversight of all procurement policy and services.
OASAM engaged with its client agencies to adequately plan for administrative services in support of their mission priorities.
OASAM regularly obtained feedback from its customers through a variety of sources, including a semi-annual Customer Satisfaction Survey, semi-annual feedback on OASAM leaders, and advisory/governance board feedback.
A top priority for OCIO is to ensure maximum network availability.
In FY 2022, network availability was maintained at 99.96% and will continue at 99.90% or more in FY 2023 and FY 2024.
In addition, more than 3,489 virtual onboardings and off-boardings of staff were performed in FY 2022 in a manner that protects DOL network operations.
The office also provided greater economies of scale, flexibility, and improved allocation of IT resources across the enterprise.
The office created an inventory of prioritized legacy information systems and applications to be modernized, and performed a technical assessment for each modernization candidate, which is being used to develop a schedule for IT updates.
This included updates to add simplified sign-on capabilities for systems year after year moving forward.
As of the end of FY 2022, OCIO has 108 DOL applications with this capability.
Maintaining a robust cybersecurity posture to protect the Department’s systems and applications continued to be a top priority.
In FY 2022, OCIO closed 100% percent of cybersecurity vulnerabilities by the date identified in each Plan of Action and Milestones (POA&M) for the systems it manages.
OASAM manages procurement services for the entire Department, which enables the efficient and effective procurement of goods and services, resulting in reduced procurement time, reduced cost, best value, and improved quality of goods and services procured.
OSPE provides and promotes DOL-wide procurement vehicles and Best-in-Class contract solutions to leverage the government’s buying power as a single enterprise.
These vehicles reduce redundancy in contract actions for the same services and achieve cost savings with DOL buying power.
Previously, spending under both Best-In-Class and Common Spend Under Management were measured using a dollar amount target, however in FY 2022, General Services Administration changed the measures for targets to a percentage of eligible obligations.
In FY 2022, 13.72 percent of procurement obligations were Best-in-Class solutions while 63.34 percent of procurement obligations were Spend Under Management.
OSPE continued to use its proven Department-wide small business approach to the maximum extent practicable to meet and exceed its small business goals, which include contracts to small businesses, small-disadvantaged businesses, and small women-owned businesses.
OSPE has met or exceeded its overall prime small business goal for the last 13 years.
The percent of contracts awarded to small-disadvantaged businesses and small womenowned businesses continues to be a priority area of focus.
In FY 2022, OSPE exceeded its target of 28 percent, for the percent of contracts awarded to small-disadvantaged businesses at 29.95 percent, and exceeded its goal of 5.0 percent, for contracts awarded to small women-owned businesses at 8.70 percent.
In FY 2023, OSPE will continue its focus on small-disadvantaged, women-owned, and minority-owned businesses through vendor outreach sessions that assist entities interested in doing business with the government in becoming more procurement ready.
Additionally, OSPE will host industry days to facilitate and foster connections between large businesses, Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU), Minority Serving Institutions (MSI), and small minority-owned businesses for mentoring and partnership opportunities.
OCFO Performance Goal M.1 – Promote fiscal integrity and the effective and efficient use of resources through innovation.
OCFO provides financial management leadership, direction, and guidance to the Office of the Secretary of Labor and all DOL program agencies on matters arising from financial statutes, as appropriate.
OCFO oversees DOL-wide accounting, financial management, and financial system, and leads DOL’s annual audit of the Consolidated Financial Statements and efforts to address findings resulting from the audit.
Accurate and timely financial information demonstrates DOL’s accountability to stakeholders and facilitates data-driven operational, budget, and policy decisions.
OCFO oversees DOL’s responsibility for internal controls by assisting program management in establishing and ensuring strong controls over all financial resources in DOL.
OCFO leads DOL’s annual financial audit and efforts to address findings resulting from the audit.
OCFO leads the Department through its annual audit in which DOL’s programs, accomplishments, challenges, and management’s accountability for the resources entrusted to DOL is summarized in the Agency Financial Report.
OCFO tracks the number of material weaknesses 13 identified through the annual audit after the conclusion of the fiscal year.
There was one material weaknesses identified during the FY 2022 audit and OCFO is working to address the finding.
Additionally, OCFO provides DOL’s managers and decision makers with the financial management tools to drive high performance and accountability and to responsibly manage financial resources.
A measure of spending efficiency is the “percent of discretionary appropriations cancelled after the five years period of obligation authority has expired” which tracks the amount of federal funds that are cancelled.
OCFO works with agencies to reduce the amount of their cancelled appropriations.
Once cancelled, these funds are no longer available for obligation or expenditure and are returned to the U.S. Department of Treasury.
In FY 2022, DOL canceled 1.54 percent.
Further, OCFO continued to process payments in a timely manner.
It is paramount that DOL must pay invoices on time; failing to do so is a waste of taxpayer dollars.
Strengthen the Department’s commitment and capacity for evidence-based decision-making.
Decisions should be based on evidence – especially those that affect the employment, safety and health, and retirement and benefits security of America’s workers.
The Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act (Evidence Act) outlines major government-wide reforms for making data more accessible and useful for decision-making.
To meet this objective, DOL must first strengthen its internal capacity, both in ensuring transparency and availability of data, and by advancing the framework that supports the decision making process.
DOL is taking significant steps to make evidence-based decision making a part of the culture by improving the integration of budget and performance with evaluation and risk management.
A strong culture of evidence-based decision making is creating improved policies and programs that support and protect America’s workers.
OCFO, in coordination with OASAM, collaborated with agencies to stand up the Enterprise Risk Management Council (ERMC) and mature the Department’s Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) program.
The ERM initiative provides senior leaders with an integrated, enterprise-wide view of risk, risk tolerances, and risk mitigation efforts to increase transparency and collaboration, reduce costs, and to more effectively manage risks to the DOL mission.
DOL continues to mature its ERM program by building ERM principles into the management disciplines at DOL.
Agencies within the Department have identified their top risks and have built mitigation plans to reduce risks to program objectives.
OCFO and OASAM convened a workgroup of ERMC members to address the Departmental-wide risk of a lack of thorough budget justification within agency proposals.
The ERMC is part of a larger effort to better integrate ERM, performance management, budget, and evaluation, for all strategic recommendations and decisions.
The offices work together such that the Budget, Strategic Plan, Agency Management Plans (AMPs), Risk Profile, and Learning Agendas and Evaluations support and inform one another.
Better coordination between OCFO, OASAM, and the Chief Evaluation Officer will allow the Department to pivot to Secretary priorities more quickly and better direct resources to support Secretary priorities, which will benefit Departmental execution and results.
OASAM Performance Goal M.2 – Integrate budget and performance with evaluation and risk management to improve decision-making.
DOL is committed to improving decision-making by integrating the management disciplines of budget formulation and execution, performance management, evaluation, and risk management.
OASAM’s Departmental Budget Center (DBC) and the Performance Management Center (PMC) will build on past successes in integrating budget and performance disciplines.
PMC and DBC will also coordinate with the recently formalized roles of the Chief Evaluation Officer and the Chief Data Officer, as well as the Office of the Chief Financial Officer, who manages the ERM function.
Through integration of budget, evidence, and key risks into DOL internal management plans, DOL agencies will develop and execute strategies and activities to achieve their mission and management priorities.
PMC and DBC established new baseline measures for FY 2022 to improve the performance and budget processes in their respective offices.
PMC rated the effectiveness of its AMPs.
DBC rated the effectiveness of its Budget Formulation and Budget Execution processes.
PMC surveyed DOL agencies and asked whether they believe their AMP is effective for their Agency’s strategic planning and budget execution.
64% of the survey respondents indicated that they do believe the AMP is effective.
In FY 2023, PMC is striving to raise this result by working with agencies closely on AMP development and fostering an increased level of comfort around the annual performance planning process.
In addition to general effectiveness feedback, PMC also collected feedback on specific elements and requirements of AMPs.
The feedback collected was used to adjust the AMP requirements for FY 2023 AMP development.
For example, most respondents indicated that the Operational Portfolio section of the AMP was not useful, resulting in its removal as a required section.
PMC will continue collecting Agency feedback on the process and making adjustment to future planning requirements accordingly.
DBC surveyed DOL agencies to assess the budget formulation and budget execution processes at DOL.
Of the agencies surveyed, 88% rated the budget formulation and budget execution processes as effective.
The survey helped DBC identify strengths and areas of improvement within its work products and procedures.
As a result of agency feedback to the survey, DBC implemented multiple training sessions throughout FY 2022 to better assist agencies with their understanding of budget guidance and its requirements.
In FY 2023, DBC will continue to build upon agency feedback and incorporate structural improvements to the budget processes within DOL.
The ERM provides an enterprise-wide, strategically aligned portfolio view of organizational challenges and opportunities to more effectively prioritize and manage risks to mission delivery.
DOL integrates ERM into agency operations planning, performance management, and budget processes to make strategic, risk-based decisions to make the Department more resilient, effective, and efficient.
Involving risk-based decisionmaking in the strategic planning, organizational performance management, and budget processes enables the Department to better allocate scarce resources to address the highest priority risks, enhance performance, drive efficiencies, and promote cost savings.
OCFO, in coordination with OASAM, collaborated with agencies and the ERMC to continually mature the Department’s ERM program.
The ERMC directed each component agency to identify and assess major risks to achieving their mission and goals.
The ERMC continued to integrate with major management structures to feed strategic decision making.
These include budget formulation and execution, development of agency learning agendas, and the development and execution of AMPs.
Additionally, the ERMC directed agencies to develop risk appetite statements around their respective goals in the FY 2022-2026 DOL Strategic Plan to reinforce the connection between ERM, Performance, and Strategic Planning.
OASP Performance Goal M.2 – Invest in strategic and evidence-based decision-making, policy and regulatory development.
OASP is the principal policy, regulatory, data governance, and evaluation office for the Department.
To that end, OASP plays a crucial role in helping design and execute evidence-based strategies across the Department.
Broadly, OASP continues to conduct new policy-relevant evaluations and research for agencies and department leadership, building a base of evidence and data for further policy development and program administration.
OASP worked to incorporate evidence-based strategies into the policy and regulatory development process, including conducting rigorous economic analysis to inform regulations; engaging external researchers; and producing reports, among other activities.
The office also made investments in new infrastructure to increase agencies’ ability to store and leverage data as a strategic tool.
OASP established four new measures in FY 2022, three of which reflect the office’s investment in data to better support the Department.
FY 2022 performance results centered on activities of the Chief Evaluation Office and the Office of Data Governance.
This work supported implementation of the Evidence Act and implementation of the first two FAIR principles 14 (Findability and Accessibility) by increasing the number of data sets findable and accessible for research and through self-service systems and enhancing the utility of those data sets.
During FY 2022, the Chief Evaluation Office and Office of Data Governance within OASP also led the development and release of several strategic planning documents that will guide activities and capacity building over the next several years including but not limited to a multi-year Evaluation Plan, an Evidence Building Plan, an Evidence Capacity Assessment, and an Enterprise Data Strategy.
Broad planning for FYs 2023-2024 continues this focus on evidence production and use to support Departmental decision-making.
Important parts of this planning reflected in FY 2023 performance measures include updating scientific integrity processes to bolster the rigor of established policies; expanding analysis of equity in DOL programs with a focus on quality, rigor and repeatability, ensuring data are fit for purpose by conducting peer data quality reviews and enhancing location data, and ensuring data serve as a strategic asset by establishing a Departmental metadata standard and linking DOL Data Board data policy to OCIO IT management actions.
The Department has also added data and evidence components to AMPs to significantly expand the ways in which these important topics are addressed and improved.
This will multiply the impact of existing and prospective efforts and reinforce the link between successful capacity building for data and evidence, and successful conduct of agency mission.
Many factors contributed to the Department’s success in carrying out its mission during the pandemic – investments in modern technology, use of workplace flexibilities, and new and innovative approaches to conducting our work – but no factor contributed more than the dedication, perseverance, and ingenuity of the DOL workforce.
As DOL seeks to turn the page on the pandemic and build America back better, DOL is capitalizing on this moment to advance the DOL’s future.
The Department is rebuilding the size of its workforce after several years of decline and developing the skills and capacity of its staff.
DOL is not reflexively returning to the way we worked pre-pandemic.
Instead, DOL’s staff is testing new ways of working, including increased workplace flexibilities and using modern technology to execute our mission.
DOL is doing all of this with the overarching goal of increasing DEIA throughout the Department.
As DOL harnesses the unmistakable benefits of a more diverse, equitable, inclusive, and accessible workplace, it is not only making DOL a model workplace but also setting a foundation to address inequity for our Nation’s workers.
Build the personnel system and support required to sustain the Federal Government as a model employer able to effectively deliver on a broad range of agency missions.
Findings for this objective shared a single theme: Hiring and DEIA.
Evidence of progress included developing and promoting the use of Standard position descriptions and recruitment packages to expedite hiring and the development of the DOL DEIA Strategic Plan.
Challenges were identified in continuing to assist agencies with aggressive hiring goals and to meeting the Administration’s DEIA goals for the federal workforce.
OASAM has implemented changes to improve hiring, including promoting and developing the use of standard position descriptions and recruitment packages, holding monthly strategic hiring meetings with large agencies, assisting OSHA and MSHA in addressing medical qualification requirements, obtaining approval for two direct hiring authorities from OPM, extending the non-competitive eligibility period for former Peace Corps/ VISTA volunteers, and developing Empower Hour trainings for hiring managers on topics such as recruitment, selection, and hiring authorities.
After some early struggles to meet aggressive hiring goals and offset attrition, most DOL agencies met or were near meeting their end of FY 2022 hiring goals.
In FY 2022, 192 Agency Standard Position Descriptions (ASPDs) and 74 Departmental Standard Position Descriptions (DSPDs) were published for standardization of Agency’s recruitment packages for mass hiring efforts.
Since the beginning of DOL’s hiring surge in April 2021, DOL has hired more than 3,000 new staff, to include more than 800 in Q4, FY 2022.
Department-wide hiring efforts have led to a net increase of 678 additional staff in FY 2022, from 14,211 staff as of October 1, 2021, to 14,889 on October 1, 2022.
Fostering a diverse, equitable, inclusive, and accessible workplace is a top priority.
In FY 2022, the Department has taken action to implement Executive Order 14035 on DEIA in the Federal Workforce, including by developing a self-assessment in October 2021 and a four-year DEIA Strategic Plan in March 2022.
The Department has taken steps to meet the strategies and activities outlined in the DEIA Strategic Plan including activities in the areas of data analytics, recruitment and outreach, employee engagement, and training.
Data analytics: OHR released the DEIA Workforce Analytics Tableau Server in FY 2022.
This server is an established self-service workforce DEIA data portal for leadership that is a filterable interactive data dashboard for the following reports: hiring demographics, applicant demographics, on-board demographics, separations demographics, hires versus separations.
These dashboards were built with historical information from FY 2017 to the current pay period.
Recruitment and outreach: OHR conducted workshops and participated in job fairs for underrepresented communities.
OHR also established a Recruitment and Outreach Branch in May 2022 focused on building strong partnerships with institutions and organizations reaching diverse candidates.
Lastly, OHR established a network of recruitment champions within each DOL agency that will champion and expand the Department’s efforts to educate the public on job opportunities.
Employee engagement: The Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management held a series of visits to the regions that included listening sessions with the regional employees, Regional Executive Committees, and the union.
DOL hosted its first virtual DEIA Employee Town Hall to highlight the strategies that we are implementing to advance equity at the Department.
OHR also regularly engaged with affinity groups, held an in-person and virtual Affinity Group fair in September 2022, and organized special emphasis month events.
Training: CRC provided training and technical assistance related to the Department’s reasonable accommodations and harassing conduct policies and processes.
OHR launched training for managers and supervisors on DEIA and special hiring authorities.
OCIO held trainings on Section 508 compliance to ensure that staff have the skills to create accessible documents and websites.
To further facilitate the implementation of the DEIA Strategic Plan, the Secretary established Equity@DOL in December 2021.
Equity@DOL is an overarching executive-level body comprised of members of the DOL community whose experience and expertise, will help ensure that a wide and inclusive range of perspectives inform the work of advancing DEIA principles within DOL.
Although adequate progress was made on advancing DEIA in FY 2022, staffing changes and resource constraints have made it challenging to meet all expectations in the near-term.
OASAM will continue to leverage, existing resources, and advocate for the resources that are needed to ensure the success of this important effort.
The FY 2024 President’s Budget includes $3 million for DEIA activities to address these challenges.
As OASAM continues to execute the DEIA Strategic Plan, OASAM will collect more data on the effectiveness of these efforts.
OASAM is rebuilding the Department’s workforce by providing leadership, guidance, and technical expertise to achieve a workforce that is reflective of the American public we serve and comprised of vetted candidates for suitable character and conduct.
OASAM led the development of the Department’s DEIA Strategic Plan, which outlines the values and vision for DOL’s workforce.
OASAM’s Office of Human Resources (OHR) is dedicated to providing the best-in-class Human Resources services by working with DOL agencies as partners.
OHR is leading the Department’s efforts through strategic agency engagement and recruitment planning to rebuild its workforce and support the Administration’s plans to rebuild the American economy.
OHR is building long-term capacity to support the Department’s recruitment and hiring through the development of strategic partnerships that will enable DOL to better reach diverse and inclusive talent pools.
OASAM’s Security Center (SC) is dedicated to ensuring a safe and secure workplace, responsible for the protection of life and property of DOL owned/leased facilities, and ensures that Federal and contract employees are suitable and/or fit for employment with DOL.
Moreover, the SC is also implementing initiatives directed by the Suitability Executive Agent (the Office of Personnel Management) and the Security Executive Agent (the Office of the Director for National Intelligence), on ensuring a Trusted Workforce.
The SC is also responsible for the development and maintenance of appropriate working relationships with federal, state, and local agencies that perform critical security, national security, emergency response, and law enforcement functions.
OASAM’s Civil Rights Center (CRC) is responsible for enforcing nondiscrimination, equal opportunity (EO) and equal employment opportunity (EEO) requirements for two primary populations: employees of, and applicants for employment with, DOL (through its Office of Interna Enforcement (OIE)); and the more than 40 million individuals served by the nation’s employment and workforce related service programs (through its Office of External Enforcement (OEE)).
CRC also manages the Reasonable Accommodation Resource Center (RARC) to support the Department’s compliance with its obligation to provide appropriate accommodations for employees and applicants with disabilities.
CRC will contribute significantly to DEIA, including internal diversity efforts by influencing recruitment practices and retention efforts to ensure equal opportunity in DOL’s workforce.
Emphasis will be placed on anti-harassment prevention and response including training to establish a culture of accountability in the Department.
Reasonable accommodation will be stressed so that the Department can realize the benefits of a workforce that leads in the employment of people with disabilities.
Specifically, OHR improved hiring outcomes and reduced burden on hiring managers, particularly for mission critical positions.
Through strategic agency engagement and recruitment planning, OHR supported the Administration’s plans to rebuild the American economy and workforce.
In FY 2022, DOL’s average time to hire was 96 days, despite an unprecedented hiring surge.
In FY 2022, the Hiring Manager Satisfaction Index Score was 80%, up from 72% in FY 2019.
OHR sought innovative ways to promote opportunities, receive DOL employees’ feedback, and make datadriven decisions and approaches to recruitment.
Data from the Federal Employment Viewpoint Survey has reflected an increase in employee engagement from 68% in FY 2019 to 75% in FY 2022.
In FY 2022, the Department continued to implement the Administration’s post-reentry Future of Work initiative, including engagement with its collective bargaining unions and the DOL workforce to expand workplace flexibilities.
The Future of Work bargaining team successfully negotiated with Unions over a six-month period on the Department’s Future of Work initiatives, including the impact and implementation of DOL’s Reentry and Post-Reentry Future of Work Plan.
The Department established an extensive MOU that covered DOL’s Flexible Work Schedules and changes thereof, Expanded Work Schedule Flexibilities, Telework and Remote Work Policy Shifts, the Creation of Future of Work Teams, and paved the way for DOL to implement TeleworkXpress.
In FY 2022, OASAM took significant steps to draft and begin implementation of the Department’s DEIA Strategic Plan, to include the areas of improved data analytics, hiring authorities to support diversity outreach, student intern enrichment, Executive candidate development, and DEIA training.
OHR built self-service, demographic dashboards in Tableau using personnel, applicant, and Fedscope data.
The dashboards can be filtered by agency, as well as other demographic indicators.
OHR established policy guidance for the Post-Secondary Student and College Graduate Hiring Authorities.
OHR established a 10-week DOL Foundations Student Intern Enrichment Program, to include: 8 Sessions on Leadership Development, 7 Sessions - Conversations with Leadership, and 2 Sessions on IT and Technology.
OHR revitalized the Department's SES Candidate Development Program (SESCDP), to include: obtaining OPM certification of the program in FY 2022, partnering with Department of Interior to host an immediate cohort in FY 2023, and hosting a Lunch & Learn for DOL employees to generate interest in the Senior Executive Service.
OHR partnered with Cornell University to offer three, expert-led DEIA focused courses for DOL managers and supervisors.
DOL requires managers and supervisors to enroll and virtually attend one of the three courses provided: Building Diverse Talent Pools, Adopting Inclusive Hiring Practices, and Promoting Inclusive Onboarding and Employee Success.
In FY 2023, OASAM will continue to implement activities in support of the Department’s DEIA Strategic Plan, to include increasing outreach and recruitment to underserved communities, implementing paid internships and leveraging special hiring authorities and the Pathways Programs to increase the number of recruited college students and recent graduates from underserved communities to fill vacant positions, providing employee engagement and training opportunities, and analyzing data to understand our progress and identify gaps.
Developing an on-boarding guide for OASAM managers and supervisors by leveraging OHR best practices in support of client agencies.
The SC utilized its personnel security program to ensure efficiency in the vetting process and afford transparency to client agencies.
The average number of days to submit a background security investigation request to DOD decreased from 17 days in FY 2018 to 4 days in FY 2022.
The average number of days to adjudicate a background investigation for suitability increased from 9 days in FY 2018 to 39 days in FY 2022, but remained below its target of 90 days.
SC has decreased the average number of days to adjudicate a background investigation for national security from 17 days in FY 2020 to 2 days in FY 2022.
To further promote inclusion within the Department, CRC provided training and technical assistance to employees, managers, and supervisors on antidiscrimination and antiharassment, with a particular emphasis on the proper tools to confront and resolve incidents of discrimination or harassing conduct before they violate the law, and to hold individuals accountable for their actions.
CRC continued to provide guidance and information about and facilitate the provision of reasonable accommodations for DOL employees and applicants for DOL employment with disabilities.
The average days for a Reasonable Accommodation request to be successfully deployed by CRC met its target at 37 days in FY 2022.
CRC’s OIE administers DOL’s EEO complaint program, including intake, counseling, investigation, adjudication, and compliance monitoring of EEO complaints; develops and submits civil rights-related program plans and accomplishment reports; and provides training and technical assistance to DOL managers, supervisors, and employees about internal EEO matters.
OIE also supports efforts designed to resolve workplace complaints and increase awareness of the EEO complaint program and the Department’s Harassing Conduct policy.
In terms of compliance with regulatory processing requirements, since FY 2018, OIE has exceeded the targets on its key performance indicators, completing no lower than 98% of all investigations, EEO counseling sessions and Final Agency decisions within regulatory timeframes in any given year.
To continually improve the efficiency and effectiveness of its programs, DOL uses results-based, data-driven management techniques.
Each DOL agency prepares an Agency Management Plan that details the strategies and resources it will apply to reach goals and objectives at all levels of the organization.
Departmental leaders review performance against those plans each quarter to monitor progress and hold agencies accountable for implementing the plans, achieving milestones, and making adjustments as needed.
This review process has focused Departmental leadership on strategic management of core functions through the use of program performance data, risk assessments, evaluations, and budgets.
Identification and discussion of key measures; annual and seasonal targets; and how budgets, workload, and strategies affect results have helped clarify priorities and improve performance.
The CEO in OASP leads DOL’s evaluation agenda, working closely with agency staff to implement program evaluations to answer key questions, as detailed in the FY 2022-2023 Evaluation Plan.
The results from evaluations inform policy and improve DOL’s performancebased management initiatives in support of the GPRMA.
Further, as described in DOL’s Evidence-Building Plan for Fiscal Years 2022-2026, CEO coordinates key evidence-building activities (as per the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018, Public Law No. 115-435).
For more information, see http://www.dol.gov/asp/evaluation/.
Because this APR is primarily a planning document that uses historical information to inform future strategies and targets, it is organized around goals and measures selected to represent Departmental goals for the budget year (FY 2024).
Under GPRMA, performance goals, measures and targets are identified for reporting purposes in the Congressional Budget Justification (CBJ) issued during that fiscal year.
Therefore, DOL is obliged to report results for measures with PY 2021 or FY 2022 targets in its FY 2021 Annual Performance Report, which was published as part of the FY 2023 CBJ in March 2022 (www.dol.gov/dol/budget/).
The table below provides this information for performance measures that have since been revised, replaced, or discontinued.
Results are not provided for measures that were collecting baseline data.
THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR (Interior or the Department) conserves and manages the Nation’s natural resources and cultural heritage for the benefit and enjoyment of the American people.
The Department provides scientific and other information about natural resources and natural hazards to address societal challenges and create opportunities for the American people.
Interior honors the Nation’s trust responsibilities or special commitments to tribes, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and our affiliated insular communities.
The Department manages the Nation’s public lands and minerals, including providing access to more than 480 million acres of public lands, 700 million acres of onshore subsurface minerals, and 2.5 billion acres of the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS).
Interior is the steward of 20 percent of the Nation’s lands, including national parks, national wildlife refuges, and other public lands; manages resources that supply approximately 17 percent of the Nation’s energy; supplies and manages water in the 17 western states and supplies 15 percent of the Nation’s hydropower energy; and upholds federal trust responsibilities to 574 federally recognized Indian tribes and Alaska Native villages.
Interior is responsible for migratory bird and wildlife conservation; historic preservation; endangered species conservation; surface-mined land protection and restoration; and mapping geological, hydrological, and biological science for the Nation.
The Fiscal Years (FY) 2023–2024 Annual Performance Plan and FY 2022 Report (APP&R) is aligned with the Interior FY 2022–2026 Strategic Plan.
This plan highlights the strategies, performance goals, and performance measures the Department uses to assess and rate performance.
This report was prepared and submitted to maintain compliance with the requirements of the Government Performance and Results Modernization Act (GPRAMA) of 2010, P.L. 111-352.
The success of the Department in achieving its mission outcomes is predicated on several guiding principles that reflect tenets of the Biden-Harris Administration and Secretary Haaland.
We use science and evidence-based information to guide our decisions.
We balance our decisions to best meet the needs of today and tomorrow.
We value diversity and inclusion in our activities, operations, and services.
We manage and achieve through meaningful collaboration, engagement, and partnerships.
The Department plays a central role in how the United States stewards its public lands, increases environmental protections, pursues environmental justice, and honors our government-to-government relationship with tribes.
The priorities of the Biden-Harris Administration and Secretary Haaland require bold action desperately needed to ensure all communities—including communities of color and urban, rural, and Native communities—benefit from an aggressive and whole-of-government response.
Water is a sacred resource essential to feeding families, growing crops, sustaining wildlife and the environment, and powering agricultural businesses.
Unfortunately, drought conditions in the West continue to worsen, and water allocations are at historic lows, including in areas like the Klamath River Basin and the Colorado River Basin.
To address this growing crisis, Interior is helping lead the Biden-Harris administration’s whole-of-government approach to drought mitigation by coordinating with partners across the Federal Government, providing assistance to impacted communities, and developing long-term solutions to climate change.
Communities of color, rural and indigenous communities, low-income families, and people in the U.S. Territories have long suffered disproportionate and cumulative harm from the climate crisis, from air and water pollution to environmental hazards left behind at toxic sites.
The Biden-Harris administration has mobilized an all-of-government approach to advance environmental justice.
The Department has partnered with agencies across the Federal Government to develop programs, policies and activities that address long-standing environmental injustices and ensure that historically marginalized communities have greater input on and receive enhanced benefits from federal policies and decisions.
In response to the climate and biodiversity crises, environmental injustices, and broad recognition that healthy ecosystems can strengthen the economy and create jobs, the Biden-Harris Administration proclaimed a call to action for all Americans to join together to help conserve, protect, connect, and restore the lands and waters that sustain us.
This call to action is called “America the Beautiful”—a first-ever national conservation goal of conserving at least 30 percent of our lands and waters by 2030.
The America the Beautiful initiative is rooted in the desire to better support and honor the people and communities who serve as stewards of our lands, waters, and wildlife—from tribes and indigenous peoples, to fishermen, farmers and ranchers, to local and state governments—and to ensure that all people of this Nation benefit from America’s rich and vibrant lands and waters.
Climate change poses an existential threat—not just to the environment, but to people’s health, communities, and the Nation’s economic well-being.
Renewable energy—including solar, onshore and offshore wind, geothermal, and wave and tidal energy projects—will help communities across the country be part of the climate solution while creating good-paying union jobs.
Interior has partnered with other federal agencies to increase renewable energy production on public lands and waters— including a goal to deploy 30 gigawatts of offshore wind by 2030 and a goal of permitting at least 25 gigawatts of onshore renewable energy by 2025.
Nature is essential to the health, well-being, and prosperity of every family and every community in America.
These are the places that connect us, that support economies, and that keep people healthy.
The Department is committed to supporting the outdoor recreation economy and the many benefits that hiking, hunting, fishing, boating, biking, and other activities offer for healthy communities, economies, and wildlife.
But not everyone has the same access to nature.
Bringing the outdoors, and the wonders of the natural world, closer to people is at the heart of Interior’s mission.
To help address inequitable access to nature and its benefits, the Department is working to create more protected land and waterways and safe outdoor opportunities in nature-deprived communities, many of which are communities of color or low-income communities.
Through the Great American Outdoors Act, Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, and Inflation Reduction Act Interior is investing in numerous initiatives that benefit the environment and communities the Department directly serves.
These investments focus on legacy pollution, supporting tribal communities, addressing drought, managing wildland fire, ecosystem restoration, and scientific innovation.
Appendix A: Interior Investments in Facilities and Infrastructure, provides a summary of the Department’s infrastructure plans and accomplishments.
Honoring the government-to-government relationship between tribes and the Federal Government and upholding trust and treaty responsibilities are paramount to Interior’s mission.
Secretary Haaland is taking a leading role to improve relationships, while acknowledging the past and working toward a better future for Indian Country.
Interior is focused on improving tribal consultations to ensure a meaningful dialogue and exchange, addressing the crisis of missing and murdered indigenous peoples, and recognizing the troubled legacy of federal Indian boarding school policies with the goals of addressing their intergenerational impact and to shedding light on the traumas of the past.
The Secretary chairs the White House Council on Native American Affairs to ensure collaborative interagency work across the Executive Branch, regular and meaningful tribal-federal engagement, and to foster an all-of-government approach in meeting treaty and trust obligations to tribes.
The climate crisis is transforming where and how we live and presents growing challenges to human health and quality of life, the economy, and the natural systems that support us.
As the climate crisis disproportionately affects underserved communities, the Department of the Interior is supporting the Administration’s commitment to tackle the climate crisis and put environmental justice at the center of its mission.
In doing so, Interior is working to build a modern, climate-resilient infrastructure and clean energy future that will create millions of good-paying union jobs, while protecting the communities, natural, and cultural resources on which we rely.
The Interior Climate Action Plan demonstrates Interior’s commitment to use science as the foundation for decisions, recognizing that the Department’s approach to adaptation should evolve as science informs an understanding of climate change risks, impacts, and vulnerabilities.
The Department has taken a fresh approach to establishing performance outcomes in the strategic plan to better support the Government Performance and Results Modernization Act (GPRAMA) of 2010.
In developing strategic goals and strategic objectives, Interior focused not only on legislative and statutory requirements that govern what we do, but on synergies within and across the Department to maximize the benefits realized by the American people.
The performance goals track progress on strategic objectives to keep the end goal in sight and better aim efforts on what Interior can change and improve.
The Department is also taking steps to build evidence where there are gaps in knowledge about program outcomes, incorporate known science into management decisions, and fully use the breadth of data within the Department to support planning and decisions.
Interior is using rigorous program evaluation to increase the Department’s knowledge of what works and why and ensure that more data is transparent and open to the public.
Safeguarding Interior’s ability to meet its strategic goals and objectives requires identifying risks that could adversely impact the programs, operations, and activities that support those goals and threaten accomplishment of the objectives.
Interior’s Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) program works with bureaus, offices, and program managers to identify risks that could derail Interior efforts.
The Department’s ERM approach helps identify risks and develop effective risk treatment strategies.
These risk treatment strategies reduce the likelihood of critical risks happening and/or reduce the severity of their impacts.
Interior’s ERM program and Department-wide ERM community of practice is fostering a risk-aware culture that is proactively managing risk, promoting successful delivery of programs and services, and safeguarding public trust in our stewardship over taxpayer resources.
To promote efficient and effective program operations, the Department has developed program and project management standards and principles in alignment with the Program Management Improvement Accountability Act of 2016.
Standardizing and improving program management across the Department is necessary to better ensure the delivery of intended program and project outcomes to beneficiaries and stakeholders.
The Department is working across bureaus and offices to embed program and project management tools and best practices into the design and daily operations of our work.
The Department’s Chief Data Officer (CDO) works to improve and ease the use of data to inform decisions.
The CDO in partnership with bureaus and offices leverages the work of a data governance board to align the use and management of data to achieve the goals and outcomes in the FY 2022– 2026 Strategic Plan.
The Department is making its data assets more available, increasing data literacy across the workforce, and highlighting data used to measure strategic outcomes.
LEADING THE MISSIONS OF THE DEPARTMENT are the Secretary of the Interior, the Deputy Secretary, and six Assistant Secretaries.
Supporting them and implementing program responsibilities and operational activities are Interior’s bureaus and offices.
Each Interior organization has specialized responsibilities and the expertise to identify, enable, and pursue the goals and objectives set forth in this plan.
THE OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL’S (OIG) Fiscal Year 2022 Report on Major Management Challenges addresses the Department’s major management challenges and findings which are summarized below along with how Interior is responding to the management challenges and where they are addressed in the performance plan.
Interior is charged with managing significant financial assets, including contracts, grants, property, and other resources.
According to USAspending.gov, Interior awarded approximately $5.2 billion in grants and $6.5 billion in contracts, totaling $11.7 billion in FY 2022.
The OIG, in prior work has identified deficiencies in Interior’s contract oversight, pre-award processes, and post-award monitoring.
Interior is addressing these issues by improving its internal controls and contract and grant oversight.
By the beginning of FY 2023, Interior closed 21 of the 32 OIG recommendations for contract and grant oversight.
The Department is addressing outcomes related to this management challenge in strategic goal 4.
Over the years, Interior has not had sufficient funding for annual maintenance, resulting in a deferred maintenance backlog of $30.9 billion reported in FY 2021.
Deferred maintenance can be more costly and time consuming than annual maintenance and can pose more of a risk to the public.
The National Park Service’s deferred maintenance and repair backlog is the largest out of all Interior’s bureaus.
In August 2020, the Great American Outdoors Act (GAOA) became law which will distribute $9.5 billion over 5 years for deferred maintenance.
By the beginning of October 2022, Interior had obligated more than $1.58 billion in Great American Outdoors Act funding and initiated 222 projects under the Act.
With an estimated budget of $2.6 billion, Interior will address critical deferred maintenance and improve transportation and recreation infrastructure in national parks, national wildlife refuges and recreation areas, and at BIE schools.
The Department is addressing outcomes related to this management challenge in strategic goal 4.
Interior manages critical infrastructure that is instrumental to protecting the Nation’s natural resources, supporting American jobs, and providing water to the Western United States.
In November 2021, the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA), also known as the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL), provided an investment to rebuild the Nation’s aging infrastructure.
The legislation distributes $28.1 billion to Interior to restore critical habitats, address the drought crisis, assist with wildland fire management, and help communities prepare for extreme weather events.
With the influx of IIJA funding, Interior will face challenges ensuring it can promptly deploy the funding, maintain staffing and resource capacity, produce reliable information, and establish appropriate program controls.
The Department is addressing outcomes related to this management challenge in strategic goals 1, 2, 3, and 4.
Interior continues to face challenges in implementing an enterprise IT security program that balances compliance, cost, and risk while enabling bureaus to meet their diverse missions.
The FY 2021 annual independent Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) audit identified weaknesses in Interior’s information security programs.
The Department is working to improve its sustainability and resiliency of operations to protect its critical information assets from cyber exploitation and attack and ensure that employees and the public can rely on the confidentiality, integrity, and reliability of Interior’s data and information systems.
The Department is addressing outcomes related to this management challenge in strategic goal 4.
Interior relies on a wide variety of data to perform its mission ranging from information about diversity, access, and equity for its decisions on staffing and contracts to geophysical and water quality information needed for its decisions about wetland management, mineral and resource leases, scientific and environmental research, and recreational site maintenance.
The quality and accuracy of data substantially affects how effectively Interior accomplishes its mission.
The OIG identified data reliability issues across a variety of Interior programs including concerns within the mineral leasing program, royalty reporting, a previous Freedom of Information Act review process, and the compensatory mitigation program.
In the FY 2022–2026 Strategic Plan, Interior outlined plans to fully use the breadth of data within Interior to support planning and decisions and to harness technologies to expand data management to make it searchable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable for staff, collaborators, and the public.
The Department is addressing outcomes related to this management challenge in strategic goal 4.
The Department has responsibility for balancing conservation and energy production.
Revenue from energy resources is distributed to several federal programs, as well as to states, tribes, and Indian mineral owners.
The OIG identified that Interior is challenged to manage complex energy operations, including collecting revenues, overseeing leasing, and ensuring that development is safe, efficient, and sustainable and with the inspection process for both onshore and offshore production activities.
GAO identified that Interior continues to face challenges with ensuring that the federal oil and gas program provides a “fair return” to taxpayers.
Interior is working to improve oil spill preparedness, inspection processes, and internal controls on revenues.
The Department is addressing outcomes related to this management challenge in strategic goal 3.
The U.S. Bureau of Reclamation is the largest supplier and manager of water in the Nation and the second largest producer of hydroelectric power.
Interior faces challenges in managing the delivery of water, protection of fish and wildlife habitat, and the generation of hydroelectric power during this ongoing historic drought.
Interior will commit significant investments from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) to improve water efficiency and recycling programs, rural water projects, WaterSMART grants, and dam safety to ensure that irrigators, tribes, and adjoining communities receive adequate assistance and support.
The Inflation Reduction Act will provide much needed investment for drought mitigation in the West, with priority given to Colorado River Basin activities, including compensation for reduction in water diversions and funding for system conservation projects, and ecosystem restoration to address drought.
The Department is addressing outcomes related to this management challenge in strategic goals 2, 3, and 4.
Interior is the primary federal agency charged with carrying out the United States’ trust responsibility to American Indians and Alaska Natives.
The OIG, for many years, has identified weaknesses in Bureau of Indian Education school facilities and cited numerous and significant financial management issues at the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the Bureau of Indian Education that leave federally funded programs and operations susceptible to fraud, waste, mismanagement, and abuse which impact Interior’s ability to uphold the United States’ trust responsibilities and to serve American Indians and Alaska Natives.
Interior has committed to improving the relationship between the Federal Government and tribes through regular consultation with tribes, the Secretary’s Tribal Advisory Council to inform policy, and transparent engagement.
School facilities will continue to be improved as the Department continues to prioritize building safety issues.
Interior will continue utilizing the Site Assessment and Capital Investment (SACI) program to assess the conditions of bureau-funded schools, resulting in a longterm facilities plan that is continuously updated and adjustable to changes in funding and criteria.
The Department is continuing to invest in remote learning and broadband capabilities.
The Department is addressing outcomes related to this management challenge in strategic goal 1.
Interior’s wildfire management program addresses wildfire response for more than 400 million acres of national parks, wildlife refuges and preserves, other public lands, and Indian reservations.
In 2022, the National Interagency Coordination Center recorded 68,988 fires on all lands and over 7.5 million acres burned.
With fire seasons now extended throughout the calendar year, there is a need for a strengthened year-round workforce with increased capacity that can respond at any time.
The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) authorized an additional $1.5 billion for Interior’s wildland fire management program to strengthen the resilience of communities and ecosystems by investing in rangeland restoration, hazardous fuels management, science, early wildfire detection technology, post-wildfire restoration activities, and federal wildland firefighters.
In 2022, Interior implemented pay incentives for wildland firefighters.
These incentives went to approximately 3,500 Interior firefighters and met the President’s commitment that no wildland firefighter would make less than $15 per hour.
During 2023, Interior and the Department of Agriculture are implementing special pay supplements for wildland firefighters.
Further, the Administration is working to implement BIL initiatives to improve these firefighters’ mental health, safety, and well-being, and to improve their training and professional development opportunities.
In addition, the Administration is working on improving compensation, workforce capacity, and other long-term reforms.
The Department is addressing outcomes related to this management challenge in strategic goal 2.
The Department’s law enforcement responsibilities include service to Native communities as well as resource protection, regulation of wildlife and cultural trade and commercial activities, visitor safety, special event management, and crowd management across all Interior jurisdictions.
The Department has devoted resources and is committed to overseeing law enforcement-related issues in the face of increased visitation, responsibilities, interest and scrutiny over policing, accountability, and enforcement priorities, while simultaneously facing a significant decrease in law enforcement staffing.
These workforce challenges require the Department and bureau law enforcement programs to promote and implement policies and oversight to ensure operational consistency and implement policing practices to promote accountability, transparency, and public trust.
The Department is committed to investing and strengthening Interior law enforcement programs and is working to improve policies that enhance public trust.
Through Interior’s Law Enforcement Task Force, the Department is working on recommendations to strengthen trust in its law enforcement programs; ensure appropriate policy and oversight is implemented; and ensure supportive resources are available for officer mental health, wellness, and safety.
The Department is addressing outcomes related to this management challenge in strategic goal 4.
According to the Fourth National Climate Assessment, climate change is causing potentially harmful effects on marine and other animal life, increased high temperature extremes and heavy precipitation events, warming and rising seas, more frequent flooding, and increasing wildfires.
Interior faces challenges in effectively and efficiently implementing its policies that confront the effects of climate change on its mission, programs, operations, and personnel.
Interior’s Climate Action Plan emphasizes Interior’s role in protecting and mitigating impacts to public and tribal lands and lays out goals for climate adaptation and mitigation strategies that are both effective and equitable.
The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) and the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) provide funding to help address climate change, restore ecosystems, address drought in the West, improve climate resiliency, and assist tribes, Native Hawaiian, and insular communities.
The Department is addressing outcomes related to this management challenge in strategic goals 1, 2, 3, and 4.
The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) provides Congress, the heads of executive agencies, and the public with timely, fact-based, non-partisan information that can be used to improve government and save taxpayers billions of dollars.
GAO’s work is done at the request of congressional committees or subcommittees or is statutorily required by public laws or committee reports, per congressional protocols.
GAO maintains a High-Risk List, updated at the start of each new Congress, of programs and operations that are vulnerable to waste, fraud, abuse, or mismanagement, or in need of transformation.
The Department is actively working to address the recommendations in the six identified high risk areas and make improvements to better achieve the Interior mission.
THE FY 2022–2026 STRATEGIC PLAN identifies strategic goals and strategic objectives that align with the priorities of the Biden-Harris Administration and Secretary Haaland to tackle the climate crisis; promote diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility; advance environmental justice; support tribal and Native communities; and support a strong outdoor recreation economy.
The priorities are cross-cutting and support Interior’s achievement of the outcomes in the plan.
The strategic plan sets the vision, strategic goals, and strategic objectives.
This strategic plan established many new performance goals that look at outcomes that show how Interior’s work is having an impact.
The Department tracks performance goals and those outcomes with performance measures.
At the end of each fiscal year the performance measures are rated and compared to planned targets.
In FY 2022, Interior met 71 percent of the performance measure targets.
Of the 55 performance measures with established targets, 39 measures met or exceeded their targets and 16 did not meet their targets.
Interior was able to meet a high level of performance through efforts that included increased coordination between tribes and the Department, executing sound program and project management, and through availability of grants and funding that support Interior’s outcomes.
There are many reasons why performance measures in FY 2022 did not meet the targets and these range from staffing and hiring issues, level of demand for permitting, to constructing and contracting issues and delays.
The performance results of FY 2022 will inform future planning to ensure that Interior can continue to make better progress on the goals and objectives to deliver results for the American people.
AGENCY PRIORITY GOALS (APGS) are two-year goals with milestones that the Department updates quarterly on www.performance.gov.
APGs support measurable improvements in near-term outcomes and advance progress toward the longer-term, outcome-focused strategic goals and strategic objectives.
APGs reflect the top implementation-focused, performance improvement priorities of the Biden-Harris Administration and Interior leadership.
By September 30, 2023, the coordination of Indian Affairs, the Office of the Solicitor, and the Bureau of Land Management activities will reduce the average time of processing land into trust applications from 985 days to 365 days to better meet the principles and guidelines established in the Indian Reorganization Act and reaffirmed in the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act.
By September 30, 2023, the Department of the Interior will complete plan reviews and environmental analyses for projects capable of cumulatively generating 14.8 gigawatts (GW) of commercial offshore wind energy capacity and hold 5 renewable energy lease sales to support the national goal of deploying 30 GWs of offshore wind capacity by 2030.
By September 30, 2023, the Bureau of Reclamation will facilitate water conservation capacity of 55,236 acrefeet to help reduce the impact of drought.
The Annual Performance Plan and Report is the Department’s performance plan for the next two fiscal years and report of the previous fiscal year.
The plan translates the priorities, goals, and objectives of the Biden-Harris Administration and Secretary Haaland from the FY 2022–2026 Strategic Plan into performance goals and measures that can be assessed on an annual basis.
The document is organized by the strategic goals and strategic objectives in the Strategic Plan.
1. Identification and description of the strategic objective.
Progress Summary–Highlights of accomplishments that support progress on the strategic objective.
Strategic Actions Planned–Broad strategies the Department will implement to achieve the strategic objective in the upcoming fiscal years.
Performance goals–Customer-focused outcome goals that identify how the stakeholder benefits from Interior efforts.
Performance Measures–Measurements of progress toward the performance goal with annual targets for the next two fiscal years.
Performance measure targets are set based on requested funding levels in the budget justifications, anticipation of successful execution of strategic actions, and treatment of any enterprise risks to the strategic goals, strategic objectives, or performance goals.
Baseline–As new measures are being developed, some data is being baselined or data is being gathered in order to better target the measure in the future.
N/A–Some target data is not available due to the need to baseline, or the measure will not be counted until a later year.
ONE OF THE PRIMARY GOALS of the Department is to promote equity and justice for tribes, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and insular communities.
The scope of the Department’s responsibilities includes fulfilling fiduciary trust responsibilities, supporting tribal selfgovernance and self-determination, and strengthening the government-to-government relationship between the Federal Government and tribal nations.
Additionally, the Department funds 33 tribal colleges, universities, technical colleges, and post-secondary schools that provide quality education for students to equip them to meet the demands of the future.
The Department also provides technical assistance through partnerships with Native Hawaiian and insular communities to efficiently and effectively secure and manage federal funds through planning and program activities.
The Department is the lead federal agency for upholding the trust and treaty responsibilities that the U.S. Government has with tribal nations.
Interior is working to improve the governmentto-government relationships with tribes and support tribal governments’ rights of sovereignty, self-determination, and self-governance.
Interior rated Strategic Objective 1.1 as a focus area for improvement.
This was in part due to the challenges in standing up multiple new processes, actions, and investments; establishing cross governmental coordination and strategies to achieve results; and improving consultation with tribal governments.
Over the course of the year, Interior conducted numerous consultations and held cross-governmental consultations that informed planning and investments to support the government-to-government relationships between the Federal Government and tribal governments.
At the end of FY 2022, this objective made significant progress in part by the coordination of the White House Council on Native American Affairs to bring federal agencies together; convening the first Secretary’s Tribal Advisory Committee (STAC) to establish the first formal body for tribal leaders to engage in routine and robust conversations directly with the Secretary of the Interior; and engaging tribes on key issues such as broadband and the Boarding School Initiative.
Priority Goal (APG) to improve the processing time of applications for fee to trust lands.
In FY 2022, the APG made good progress to clear the backlog with the work focused on updating policies to improve the process to be able to enforce a new expedited timeline.
By the end of FY 2023, the Department expects that processing times will be reduced for new applications.
Additionally, BIA’s Probate Services was designated a High Impact Service Provider (HISP) in FY 2022 to improve the customer experience for probate service users.
Build stronger government-to-government relationships with federally recognized tribes and engage in opportunities that promote sovereignty through meaningful consultations and shared technical expertise with tribal communities.
Assess the impact of Federal Government plans, projects, programs, and activities on tribal trust resources and ensure through consultation that tribal governmental rights and concerns are considered during the development of such plans, projects, program, and activities.
Remove procedural impediments to working directly and effectively with tribal governments on activities that affect the trust property and governmental rights of tribes.
Collaborate across the Federal Government to address priority data issues impacting Indian Country through the Indian Country Data Working Group.
Develop performance measures to assess progress for performance goals 1.1.1, 1.1.3, and 1.1.4 (see Appendix B).
Enhance appropriate and meaningful engagement with the respectful and proper use and treatment of the Native Hawaiian Language (‘Ōlelo Hawai‘i) in communication with the Native Hawaiian Community.
The Department is committed to inclusive, safe, and healthy societies that respect the rights and cultures of all.
Through this commitment, the Department pledges improved safety and health conditions for American Indians and Alaska Natives and supports sustainable development in insular communities.
It is important that communities are inclusive and stable while providing safe conditions for disadvantaged and vulnerable groups and persons.
The Department’s policies and strategies will provide support for tribes, Native Hawaiian, and insular communities that builds upon the need for equitable law enforcement, judiciary systems, family and education services, trust services, and investments in health-related initiatives and infrastructure.
Interior focused on supporting safe and healthy communities and making information accessible to the communities through different methods.
Through cross-governmental efforts Interior is making progress in this objective.
In FY 2022, Interior awarded $18.7 million to the U.S. Territories for health-related projects and initiatives.
The Department also connected 294 tribal homes to potable water systems.
Secretary Haaland has made it a high priority to address the Missing or Murdered Indigenous Peoples crisis.
Missing and Murdered Unit (MMU) which at the end of FY 2022 has investigated a total of 503 missing and murdered persons cases and has solved 68 missing persons cases and 5 murder cases since its inception; and Interior and the Department of Justice launched the Not Invisible Act Commission (NIAC), a cross jurisdictional advisory committee to propose recommendations to combat the Missing and Murdered Indigenous Peoples crisis.
Through these efforts, Interior and the Federal Government are working to improve safety in Indian Country.
In FY 2022, Interior conducted assessments on water systems and facilities owned by the Bureau of Indian Affairs to identify water sanitation deficiencies.
Deliverables included an inventory of lead service lines to identify lead fixtures that need replacement and a sampling of BIA-owned water sources for per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances– known as PFAS to the public.
Assessments identified systems that need funding, some of which qualify for funding under the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
Knowledge gained from this assessment will be used to make data-informed decisions regarding resource distribution and prioritization to achieve the greatest benefit to health and reduction in violation vulnerability.
Improve public safety for tribes by filling critical public safety vacancies at the local tribal level as well as new positions for the Missing and Murdered Unit, ensuring effective utilization of public safety resources in service to tribal communities, and updating performance data to better gauge effectiveness of the violent crimes program.
Assess tribal court readiness at various locations throughout Indian Country related to the provisions of the Violence Against Women Act of 2022 (VAWA) and the Tribal Law & Order Act (TLOA) as well as assess overall tribal court processes.
Support routine and preventive maintenance of critical Interior infrastructure, increase coordination of rehabilitation and reconstruction of BIA owned bridges, and increase the number of road and bridge safety inspections/audits with funds and investments from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) to support tribal communities.
Construct treatment plants, storage tanks, pumping stations, and pipelines to connect tribal homes to water systems.
Component, Rocky Boys/North Central Montana Rural Water System, and Navajo-Gallup Water Supply Project.
Fund healthcare operations projects that respond to emergent needs of insular communities, provide for proactive planning and execution of programs that serve insular communities, and invest in healthcare infrastructure and operations.
Fund healthcare infrastructure projects that address facilities’ needs, including repairs and preventive maintenance, to ensure operability and availability of healthcare facilities for insular communities.
Identify excess federal property and implement new land boundary survey activities in Hawaii to advance the restoration of lands to the Hawaiian Home Lands Trust.
Improve coordination of Interior bureaus to prevent the extinction of iconic, endemic Hawaiian forest birds.
Implement natural and cultural resource conservation actions to establish a new Native Hawaiian Climate Resilience Program (Kapapahuliau).
Develop performance measures to assess progress for performance goal 1.2.5 (see Appendix B).
Interior has a long-standing commitment to supporting enhanced quality of life and promoting economic opportunity for tribes, American Indians, and Alaska Natives.
However, tribal, Native Hawaiian, and insular communities have historically been unable to fully benefit from economic growth and, in many cases, have been disproportionately excluded from economic opportunities.
The Department is investing in strategies to support these communities in developing and growing their local economies; leverage infrastructure investments and opportunities which facilitate job creation and stimulate economic activity; strengthen resilience and environmental justice; and improve financial literacy and the application of financial assistance.
Interior’s commitment to promoting economic development in Indian country is bolstered by progress to expand and enhance procurement and contracting opportunities for Indian owned businesses.
The Department issued the final revised Buy Indian Act Implementing Rule in April 2022, which provides the Department with authority to set aside procurement contracts for Indian-owned and controlled businesses.
These revisions eliminate barriers to Indian Economic Enterprises from competing on certain construction contracts, expand Indian Economic Enterprises’ ability to subcontract construction work consistent with other socio-economic setaside programs, and give greater preference to Indian Economic Enterprises when a deviation from the Buy Indian Act is necessary, among other updates.
Interior allocated $2.7 million in funding to support feasibility studies and planning activities for the installation or expansion of tribal broadband internet.
The National Tribal Broadband Grant program is expected to improve the quality of life, spur economic development and commercial activity, and create opportunities for self-employment in tribal communities.
In support of the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law orphaned well programing, the Bureau of Land Management held virtual Industry Day Sessions in June 2022 for multiple award contracting.
As a result of data gathered from these sessions and subsequent evidence building, it was recommended that two of the four regional award pools for the Indefinite Delivery Indefinite Quantity (IDIQ) solicitations would be set aside entirely for Indian-owned Small Business Economic Enterprises (ISBEEs).
In addition to expanding access to departmentwide opportunities, IDIQs will be open to usage by the U.S. Forest Service and are expected to have a substantive impact on public and environmental health within tribal communities.
In FY 2022, Interior awarded $2.3 million to the U.S. Territories for technical assistance and projects that supported economic developmentrelated activities ranging from grants providing resources for road improvement projects in the U.S. Virgin Islands, leveraging aquaculture technology to enable a sustainable and economically viable mangrove crab farming industry in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, investments in a shipyard in American Samoa, and a summer youth employment program in Guam.
The National Scenic and Historic Trail (NSHT) program partnered with the American Indian Alaska Native Tourism Association (AIANTA) to support the Native American Tourism & Improving Visitor Experience (NATIVE) Act and assisted underrepresented communities to pilot and promote tribal tourism along NSHTs.
Interior also assisted tribes with the integration of federal employment, training, and related services in order to provide employment opportunities for clients.
The Department is also working to improve its customer experience for all.
The Bureau of Trust Funds Administration (BTFA) is a High Impact Service Provider (HISP) and in FY 2022 assessed the Digital Service Delivery Capacity, finalized the Individual Indian Money journey map which defined a compelling vision, conducted a maturity assessment, and prepared to launch the first ever Tribal Relationship Survey.
These efforts are improving the experience for the tribes and tribal members for whom Interior manages accounts and investments.
Finalize and implement a performance management framework to support the FY 2022 revised Buy Indian Act Implementation Rule.
Coordinate with the 477 Tribal Workgroup to conduct a review of the P.L. 102-477 plan to update the MOA for unsubsidized employment, with a focus on steps for review and approval as well as the development of new reporting forms used in the process.
Improve financial literacy for beneficiaries by providing 16 training sessions so that they can make informed decisions regarding their Indian Trust Funds.
Invest in economic development activities and fund public infrastructure projects that attract investment and provide technical assistance for economic development activities in insular communities.
Implement a new Native Hawaiian Climate Resilience Program (Kapapahuliau) to promote Native Hawaiian Community capacity building actions.
The Bureau of Indian Education’s (BIE) mission is to provide students at BIE-funded schools with a culturally relevant, high-quality education that prepares students with the knowledge, skills, and behaviors needed to flourish in the opportunities of tomorrow, become healthy and successful individuals, and lead their communities and sovereign nations to a thriving future that preserves their unique cultural identities.
Students succeed when the Department devotes energies to continuously improve their experiences in and out of the classroom.
Through BIE, the Department continues to enrich the lives of each student and lay a path for future success while supporting their cultural traditions and Native languages.
Interior’s strategy is focused on student achievement and success in the future.
The Department has made good progress in this objective and addressed GAO recommendations by increasing investments in schools, teachers, and students.
In FY 2022, BIE continued to meet the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic by leveraging innovation and strengthening resilience across the organization including strengthening online learning and technology in the classroom; targeting facility investments to address public health conditions; increasing mental and behavioral health support for students and staff; improving parent engagement; and expanding strategies to retain and recruit teachers.
Interior also worked to improve BIE facilities.
On January 6, 2022, Interior announced a new logo for the BIE.
The initial logo design was created by Kayla Jackson, a member of the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe who is also a graduate of the Bureau’s Haskell Indian Nations University located in Lawrence, Kansas.
The center of the logo is an Indigenous student placed on an open book indicating the power of knowledge and lifelong learning.
The four lines on the book represent the four directions, the four seasons, the four stages of life and four sacred plants.
The logo represents the ongoing commitment of the BIE to its mission as it provides educational services to its students and tribal communities.
This is the first logo for BIE since becoming a bureau in 2006.
Invest in information technology (IT) to deliver comprehensive online educational courses to students and professional development opportunities for teachers and staff.
Strengthen outreach and recruitment of highly qualified students for internships and careers in education and target underserved tribal communities with culturally relevant education and career pathways.
Establish a School Operations Office of Self-Determination to strengthen development of tribal capacity and promote maximum Indian participation in BIE funded educational programs and services.
Improve understanding of the current levels of deferred maintenance to improve awareness and ability to target actual deferred maintenance which will improve the condition of schools and allow for managers to better address those schools that are on the threshold of falling into Poor condition.
Promote training and awareness of enhanced delivery of operations and maintenance and minor facilities improvements and repairs at the local facility level to affect future reductions in in the growth of deferred maintenance backlogs at schools.
Improve oversight and technical assistance to tribal organizations to enhance tribal capacity to manage major construction projects.
Interior is a steward of more than 480 million acres of public lands, accounting for approximately 20 percent of the nation’s land mass, over 700 million acres of subsurface minerals, and over 2.5 billion acres of the Outer Continental Shelf.
Interior ensures that America’s natural endowment, the natural land and water resources of the United States, is managed for the benefit, use, and enjoyment of current and future generations.
In the face of climate change and other stressors, the Department uses the best available science, evidence-based natural resource management techniques, technology, engineering, and partnerships and alliances to guide stewardship of public lands and waters.
Interior manages public lands and minerals, national parks, and wildlife refuges and upholds federal trust responsibilities to Indian tribes and Native Alaskans.
Furthermore, Interior regulates management and leads conservation and protection of federally listed endangered and threatened species, migratory birds, and other federal trust species.
The worsening impacts of climate change pose an imminent threat to nature and society, and the well-being of future generations.
Recognizing this immediate crisis, Interior commits to taking bold action to steward the nation’s public lands, strengthen important environmental protections, pursue environmental justice, and honor our relationships with tribal nations.
Interior recognizes that successful land stewardship requires a holistic approach including engagement, cooperation, and partnering with neighboring landowners, land managers, and a diverse array of stakeholders.
Interior will prioritize the remediation of legacy pollution, an essential component in improving public health and safety, especially for vulnerable communities.
Interior will expand its efforts in collaborative conservation to care for and more effectively tell the story of our nation’s national parks, monuments, seashores, wildlife refuges, wilderness areas, national conservation lands, and cultural resources.
In addressing legacy pollution, Interior provided grants to help states complete closure and remediation of high priority abandoned coal mine lands and close orphaned oil and gas wells.
In furtherance of our trust responsibilities, grants were awarded to address orphaned oil and gas wells on tribal lands.
In efforts to preserve and learn from our nation’s heritage, Interior’s museum community worked to increase the online discoverability of museum collections.
Interior used the Land and Water Conservation Fund to acquire over 37,000 acres, including 860 acres of historic battlefield land, that are now federally protected within the boundaries of the National Park Service.
Interior made significant advances in development of a Protected Areas Database of the United States (PAD-US), America’s official national inventory of U.S. terrestrial and marine protected areas, with new contributions from 8 federal agencies and 3 states.
PAD-US is foundational in measuring progress towards landscape conservation goals.
Interior also improved management across millions of acres of wilderness by instituting a national database to monitor trends on the preservation of wilderness characteristics and trained staff on wilderness management.
Utah, Alaska, and New Mexico.
This standardized data collection is gaining traction across agencies and proves to be a valuable decision support tool in informing resource management planning efforts, ensuring the protection of the nature and value of congressionally designated trails.
Develop a comprehensive inventory of coal and hardrock abandoned mine lands (AML) and orphaned oil and gas well (OW) sites to align and track program activities, conduct equity analysis, and improve budget and planning.
Conduct an evaluation on the benefits of AML reclamation and OW remediation, focusing on affected disadvantaged communities.
Prioritize improving the AML and OW grant processes.
Increase the number of digital platforms approved for Department-wide use to make more museum collections available online to the public for research, education, and enjoyment.
Continue development of the American Conservation and Stewardship Atlas to provide an integrated view of on-theground conservation, restoration, and stewardship activities.
Develop performance measures to assess progress for performance goals 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 (see Appendix B).
The Department is responsible for the protection of fish, wildlife, native plants, and the ecosystems that support them.
This trust responsibility transcends jurisdictional boundaries and includes oversight and actions that affect all 1,683 species listed under the Endangered Species Act and more than 1,000 migratory birds that receive federal protection under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act.
Interior’s strategy includes managing invasive species, restoring lands and waters to a condition that is self-sustaining, and ensuring that habitats support healthy native wildlife populations.
Interior will combat domestic and international wildlife trafficking by improving enforcement of domestic laws, strengthening international cooperation and global enforcement.
Furthermore, Interior’s strategy for wildland fire management across more than 400 million acres of public and tribal lands includes strengthening Interior wildland fire preparedness, improving year-round response to wildfires (as fire seasons are prolonged due to climate change), and increasing fuels management and burned area rehabilitation efforts.
Interior made notable progress towards this objective.
Wildland fire preparedness and response needs were met, and increased investments in preventative measures such as prescribed fire and other fuels management work were made.
In addition, Interior continued improvements for its wildland fire workforce as reflected in improvements to pay, staffing, and health and wellness.
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) is developing strategies that empower managers to help people, ecosystems, and wildlife adapt to impacts of climate change.
Through conservation partnerships, and applying a new framework built upon decades of research: The RAD framework provides three pathways to consider: Resist uses traditional wildlife management actions to counteract changes and restore habitats and populations to baseline conditions.
Accept is a conscious decision to take a hands-off approach to the transformation and accept the loss of some species and habitats and the establishments of others.
Direct allows managers to incorporate future projections of the land and steer change in ways that continue to support biodiversity and provide ecosystem services.
Some of FWS-managed lands using RAD include: Billy Frank Jr.
Nisqually NWR, Washington; Chassahowitzka NWR, Florida; and, Kenai NWR, Alaska.
Interior’s Bureau of Land Management removed 20,193 wild horses and burros from overpopulated rangelands and applied fertility control treatments to 2,055 animals gathered and returned to the range.
Seeds of Success (SOS) crews completed 424 native seed collections across the western U.S., trained more than 100 participants, and began the transition from paper data forms to digital data collection.
The 20-year national native seed collecting program has amassed nearly 27,000 seed collections to date.
The Department’s invasive species efforts are guided by the Interior Invasive Species Strategic Plan.
Examples of efforts in FY 2022 include providing $4.3 million in grant funding through the Office of Insular Affairs to U.S. Territories for invasive species control and eradication; building capacity to manage infestations, including the creation of five new USFWS strike teams to manage priority infestations across the Refuge System; and delivering targeted invasive species control and other management projects across Interior managed public lands, such as 378,694 acres of treatments by BLM.
Furthermore, Interior leveraged funding through BIL to make substantial progress on Hawaiian forest bird conservation and other priority projects identified by tribes and U.S. Territories.
Interior also prioritized “3 in 3 for the WIN,” an effort to advance three signature invasive species initiatives in three years: wildfire and invasive species (W); islands and invasive species (I); and a National Early Detection and Rapid Response Framework (N).
Each endeavor has a strong network of federal and nonfederal partnerships, a solid foundation of science-based solutions, and opportunities for near-term success.
Establish a restoration service center to increase capacity to restore aquatic resources affected by past and present impacts, such as aquatic invasive species, wildfire, drought, and floods; and maintain or increase their resistance and resilience to the impacts of climate change.
Increase capacity to acquire, protect, and manage federal reserved and state-based water rights and negotiate agreements to ensure water of sufficient quantity and quality is physically and legally available to sustain resilient aquatic resources and other beneficial uses on public lands.
Implement the National Seed Strategy through a nationwide network of seed collectors, farmers and growers, nurseries, seed storage facilities, and research to develop sciencebased native seed mixes to restore resilient ecosystems and support the implementation of restoration projects.
Increase applications of Nature-based Solutions to address natural resource management needs while simultaneously providing societal benefits.
Improve plant materials development through wildland native seed collection, native seed conservation, and training in seed use for restoration, which are critical to restoring degraded habitats and improving fire resilience in fire prone areas.
Strengthen co-stewardship of federal lands and waters in a manner that protects the treaty, religious, subsistence, and cultural interests of federally recognized Indian tribes including the Native Hawaiian Community.
Develop performance measures to assess progress for performance goal 2.2.5 (see Appendix B).
There is a long history of Americans and visitors to the United States, finding adventure and enjoyment in outdoor recreation, learning from historic locations, and being in places where they can find a personal connection to nature and our heritage.
The Department balances preservation, conservation, and opportunities for visitors to recreate and enjoy public lands.
Visitors can enjoy hiking, camping, climbing, boating, wildlife viewing, hunting, and fishing.
The Department provides educational and interpretive services through programs, visitor centers, exhibits, publications, and online learning resources that connect visitors to the Nation’s natural and cultural resources and foster an understanding of their value that leads to lifelong stewardship.
Public lands are available for visitors to reflect, take pride in, and enjoy.
Interior rated this strategic objective as having noteworthy progress.
The Interior strategies supported enhanced outdoor recreation, public land access, public engagement, and climate resiliency.
Interior promoted public lands for recreational use and improved access to recreation and outdoor spaces for underserved communities.
Interior invested in the Youth Corps and partnered with states, tribes, and local communities to recruit and engage young people in activities to sustain and improve the health, diversity, and productivity of public lands.
Projects ranged from maintenance work, trail crews, and STEM opportunities with efforts that focus on Native youth, veterans, and individuals with disabilities or from underserved communities and underrepresented populations.
The Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) and the National Park Service (NPS) are Interior’s two High Impact Service Providers that supported this strategic objective in FY 2022.
FWS is initiating digital approaches to facilitate recreation on FWS lands and improve the Recreation.gov permit platform.
NPS was named a High Impact Service Provider in FY 2022, with two designated services: Volunteer.gov and the NPS Digital Experience.
In FY 2022, NPS completed initial action planning for these efforts.
The National Park Service and the Bureau of Land Management are working collaboratively with the Federal Interagency Volunteer Team and the Volunteer.gov Business User Group, to pilot and implement a volunteer reporting system, projected to be available in the spring of FY 2023.
This system will support the Department in more efficiently and consistently tracking volunteer contributions to public lands.
Annual volunteer data can provide trend information on number of individual volunteers, total number of hours contributed, value of service, and benefiting program areas.
Volunteer program data collection allows the Department to communicate the important role volunteers play as stewards of public lands and presents a cogent, agency-wide picture of volunteer contributions to internal and external stakeholders.
Expedite the development of BLM’s online permit applications system, to streamline the permit and use authorization process and help inform and educate the public.
Correct or remove barriers at recreation sites or facilities to enhance visitor health and safety and improve access for people with disabilities.
Continue opportunities for volunteer service and employment for underserved youth, tribes and veterans through the Youth Corps Program projects supporting recreation on public lands for present and future generations.
Improve the online resources Recreation.gov and Volunteer.gov, as well as other websites and app-based platforms to provide visitors opportunities for recreation and volunteering on public lands.
As manager of one-fifth of the Nation’s land, mineral, and energy resources, and 2.5 billion acres of the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS), Interior plays a critical role in meeting America’s energy needs and moving the Nation toward a clean energy future.
From oil and natural gas to renewable resources such as geothermal, hydroelectric, solar, and wind power, a comprehensive energy strategy ensures responsible energy development.
Projects on Interior-managed lands and waters are producing energy to power our homes, vehicles, and businesses; creating jobs; and providing on average more than $10 billion in annual revenue supporting federal, state, local, and tribal economies.
The Department facilitates the development and use of wind, solar, geothermal, and hydropower energy to help transition the Nation to a clean energy economy and strengthen energy security.
Connecting renewable energy projects to the transmission grid and key markets is central to making renewable energy generation projects viable.
The Department works to promote domestic energy production by ensuring that renewable energy resources on Interior-managed lands and waters are efficiently developed in an environmentally responsible manner that considers the needs of all users of those lands and waters.
Interior rated this strategic objective as having noteworthy progress.
In FY 2022, Interior implemented strategies to actively pursue renewable and sustainable energy sources on public lands, including offshore wind energy development and onshore solar, wind, and geothermal production.
This effort is supported by plans to facilitate prompt environmental reviews and assessments and to employ science to identify additional areas for renewable energy development in partnership with private industry to meet renewable energy goals.
As directed by President Biden’s Executive Order 14008, Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad, Interior initiated partnerships with other federal agencies to increase renewable energy production on public lands and waters.
By accelerating and streamlining the permitting process, reducing rent, and expanding the energy grid for renewable projects, the Department is moving quickly to meet the future energy needs of the American public.
Collaborate with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Energy, and the U.S. Department of Transportation’s Maritime Administration to implement an “All-of-Government” approach for facilitating offshore wind development that ensures robust interagency coordination and cooperation.
Complete seven records of decision for offshore wind projects to meet the goal of deploying 30 GW of offshore wind by 2030.
Publish refinements to the offshore renewable energy regulations and guidelines for their interpretation.
Conduct comprehensive engineering, geotechnical, and environmental reviews of renewable energy site assessment and project plans.
Hire additional employees to meet the capacity to manage proposed and projected wind, and solar renewable energy activity on the Outer Continental Shelf.
Launch a regional approach to permitting and environmental review within the Bureau of Land Management that helps address common issues, eliminates duplication, and sites and designs projects in a way that reduces resource conflicts and reduces impact to the climate.
Conduct integrated assessments of subsurface pore space availability for carbon and initiate a national assessment of carbon mineralization potential.
Support new regional approach to permitting and environmental review that help address common issues, eliminate duplication, and site and design projects in a way that reduces resource conflicts and incorporates a climatesmart approach.
The Department supports balanced stewardship of natural resources to help meet the Nation’s energy needs and to meet the Administration’s goal of a carbon pollution-free power sector by 2035.
The Department is committed to promoting economic growth and safeguarding the environment for future generations.
As the Nation transitions to a clean energy economy to address climate change, Interior will work to ensure that conventional energy development on lands and waters is done in a safe and environmentally responsible manner.
The Department is advancing the development of energy sources with low or zero carbon emissions, wind, solar, and other renewables.
By conducting renewable lease sales, identifying new offshore areas for renewable leasing, and identifying exclusions areas to protect the ecosystem, the Department can continue to meet the energy needs of the nation during our transition from conventional to renewable energy sources.
Additionally, the Department is working to develop the new National Outer Continental Shelf Oil and Gas Leasing Program which will include no more than 10 potential sales in the Gulf of Mexico and one potential lease sale in the northern portion of the Cook Inlet Planning Area offshore Alaska, which is the same as in the Five-Year Program finalized in 2016.
Conduct five renewable energy lease sales by the end of FY 2024, including the first lease sales offshore of the Pacific and the Gulf of Mexico.
Prepare and publish the Proposed Final Program and associated Final Program Environmental Impact Statement and obtain Secretarial approval for the new 2023–2028 National Outer Continental Shelf Oil and Gas Leasing Program.
Develop assessments of both geologically and economically recoverable resources to inform Outer Continental Shelf conventional energy leasing decisions.
Identify potential oil and gas exclusion areas through environmental analyses and environmental studies.
Update existing agreements with the States of Louisiana, Texas, and Alaska that cover spill preparedness and response coordination for oil and gas facilities in state waters seaward of the coastline.
Further regulations to improve operational safety, human health, and environmental protections offshore, while providing clarity to industry on the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement’s review of projects proposing to utilize new or unusual technology, including equipment used in high pressure and/or high temperature environments.
Conduct at least one root cause analysis of offsite impacts from active coal mining operations to ensure any future negative impacts to people and the environment from energy development are minimized.
Finalize staffing of the Oklahoma federal program to fully implement the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA) in the state.
Proactively assess power facility equipment condition and maintenance needs–thereby increasing power facility reliability and decreasing generating capacity at risk– through development and validation of automated power data collection and archiving systems.
Develop performance measures to assess progress for performance goal 3.2.2 (see Appendix B).
Managing the resources of America’s public lands and waters has been a core Interior responsibility since its founding.
The water supplies that America depends on continue to face difficulties due to population increase, development, and climate change.
Dwindling water resources, protracted droughts, and increasing demand are forcing communities, stakeholders, and governments to explore new concepts and find new solutions that will help ensure stable, secure water supplies for future generations in many different parts of the world, including the arid West of the United States.
Interior is addressing water issues by offering strong leadership and technical support both abroad and in the U.S. to improve water management and conservations strategies.
The Department is called upon to determine where, when, and to what extent both renewable and non-renewable economic resources on public lands should be made available.
Making such a resource determination demands that Interior appropriately balances resource protection responsibilities with the economy’s need for non-energy minerals including hard rock, sand, and gravel; forest and rangeland products to ensure that communities’ economic and environmental health is sustained.
Interior aids communities in drought-stricken regions by improving water supply and conservation, restoring watersheds, and resolving long-standing water disputes.
Interior has a suite of scientific tools in development and operation to support decisions and understand how land, water, and mineral resources may or are currently being used, and implement strategies to ensure maximum efficiency.
In FY 2022, Interior implemented a comprehensive response to address the drought crisis in the western states, including drought response operations and preliminary work to develop long-term reservoir and water management strategies.
Bolstered by the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL), the Department also made unprecedented investments to advance drought resilience and water management, and accelerate ongoing maintenance actions and studies.
In FY 2022, Reclamation conducted the Upper Missouri Basin Impacts Assessment and Missouri Headwaters Basin Study to develop and evaluate strategies for addressing water resource challenges under a range of potential future conditions, including population growth, changes in future water supply and demand related to climate change, and supply conditions based on a broad range of historical conditions drawn from paleohydrology analysis.
The modeling will support planning, mitigation, and project implementation in eight watersheds in the Missouri Headwaters to help prepare for and manage drought when it occurs, as well as to incorporate and adapt to changing drought characteristics in the future.
The working group will bring together experts in mine permitting and environmental law to review existing mining regulations and permitting processes and make recommendations for improvements necessary to ensure that new production meets strong environmental and community and tribal engagement standards during all stages of mine development.
Solicit WaterSMART Grants proposals to provide cost‐shared funding for water conservation and efficiency projects and provide cost‐shared funding for water reclamation and reuse projects.
Conduct thorough environmental and technical reviews of applications to explore for or use Outer Continental Shelf sand and gravel.
Fund contracts and financial assistance awards with state and federal partners to identify Outer Continental Shelf sand and gravel for beach nourishment and coastal restoration.
Deliver the National Water Availability Assessment report in response to the SECURE Water Act to outline integrated trends and drivers in water availability, highlight focal topics that impact water availability, and describe trends in selected regional locations.
Modernizing the National Water Information System (NWIS) to consolidate and enhance delivery to the public and advance research and development of new watermonitoring technologies.
Conduct foundational research to prototype models that simulate water availability metrics regarding ecoflows, wildfire, per- and poly-fluoroalkyl substances and harmful algal blooms.
Integrate water quality into enterprise model capacity to evaluate the possible effects of changing climate, land-use, and management practices on water quality and its impact to water availability.
Conduct at least one regional evaluation of a mine site in portions of the western United States with the largest concentration of mine waste sites.
Conduct a program evaluation to investigate the extent to which the Utah Lake Drainage Basin Water Delivery System project has met construction timelines and balanced the needs of the community to improve drought resilience.
Implement efforts to ensure water of sufficient quality and quantity is physically and legally available to sustain aquatic habitat management resources and associated resource values and ecosystem services of water on public lands.
Improve water quality and focus on reducing releases of pollutants, thermal loading, and sediment into public waters.
Improve water availability and focus on building drought resilience through low impact restoration techniques and ensuring sustainable, secure water supplies on BLMmanaged lands.
Treat forest and woodlands to enhance resilience to disturbances such as fire, insect, disease, and drought as well as restoring ecosystem functions and habitat.
Collect and interpret high-resolution geophysical data in strategic areas through Earth MRI to identify potential domestic mineral resources, including critical minerals necessary for the energy transition.
Collaborate with State Geological Surveys to conduct initial evaluations of mineral resource potential at legacy mine sites in Arizona, Colorado, Florida, and New Mexico.
Trust and confidence are cornerstones of the Department’s unique and expansive mission, which includes a geographically distributed workforce, a vast set of management responsibilities, and diverse stakeholders with varying needs and responsibilities.
The American people have entrusted Interior with the sustained use of critical natural resources, the preservation of our most iconic places, and the science to ensure robust decision making, all of which require assurance and fairness at the highest levels.
Data, science, and reliable information are key components of the Department’s mission and central to both equitable program delivery and the development and iterative improvement of sound policies.
The Department’s goal to serve and honor the public trust include improving discovery of information to ensure Interior data is findable and accessible and easily reusable; improve interoperability and utility of information to ensure Interior data drives continuous improvement; and provides equitable access to information to ensure Interior data is responsive and available for researchers, stakeholders, partners, and other end users.
In FY 2022, Interior rated this strategic objective as achieving noteworthy progress.
The Department made strides in implementing FAIR data principles to improve discovery and interoperability of the Interior datasets and completed baseline studies needed to develop monitoring infrastructure.
Interior also made significant advancements to expand capabilities for finding and interpreting scientific information on hazards and their potential impacts to critical assets and vulnerable communities.
These enhanced capabilities are expected to have a substantive impact on at-risk communities in mitigating, preparing for, responding to, and recovering from threats, hazards, and extreme events.
Complete categorization and labelling for all sensitive data across its moderate IT investments as part of the Administrations push towards Zero Trust.
Complete the development of a Customer Relationship Management (CRM) module where industry and other stakeholders will report and acquire data.
Expand engagement with interested tribal, Alaska Native, and Insular communities to avail the best available hazards information and support decision-makers to identify, understand, and plan for hazards.
Interior is collaborating with the National Tribal Emergency Management Council to host a workshop for tribal emergency managers that focuses on evidence-based response planning.
This pilot workshop will aim to share hazards information with tribal emergency managers and offer them training on hazards and response planning from subject matter experts using the Interior Strategic Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment Project (SHIRA) during the event.
The pilot workshop to be held in Washington State will lay the foundation for future response planning workshops with tribal emergency managers located in other parts of the country.
Provide access to the Strategic Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment tools and services to at least 20 federally recognized tribes to provide them the best available hazards information, including information on hazards that may be exacerbated by climate change.
Develop a next-generation, cloud-based collections management system for Interior’s museum collections to allow enterprise data to be used for Interior decision-making, research, and other applications.
Integrate partner data and initiate nationalscale analytics and data delivery for the Protected Areas Database of the United States (PAD-US) inventory.
Implement the National Volcano Early Warning System to improve volcano monitoring of highthreat and very-high-threat volcanoes in the U.S. and its Territories.
Continue the ShakeAlert/EEW buildout.
It is estimated that ShakeAlert/EEW will be 93% built out by the end of FY 2024.This effort also contributes to build out of the Advanced National Seismic System (ANSS).
Meaningful engagement, especially for individuals from underrepresented groups and underserved communities, is essential to fulfilling our obligations and delivering Interior’s mission with trust and transparency.
By ensuring diverse participation for research, learning, employment and business opportunities, more Americans will have access to economic and developmental benefits from Interior operations, and the Department’s programs will benefit from diverse experience and expertise.
The Department’s strategies include increasing awareness for traditionally underserved populations, increasing collaboration and engagement with a wider variety of partners, identifying, and eliminating barriers to participation, and applying an environmental justice lens to Interior’s land management actions and decisions.
The Department’s commitment to promoting diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility (DEIA) and equal opportunity will influence not only what we do, but who we are and how we serve, reflected in all aspects of the Department’s work.
In FY 2022, Interior implemented vendor experience surveys to inform future engagement strategies and best practices for advancing equity for small and disadvantaged businesses.
The surveys included foundational research, and data to assess vendor satisfaction with Interior’s small business counseling and effectiveness of vendor products and resources.
Justice Working Group has met biweekly to foster coordination and collaboration on environmental justice across the Department.
In May 2022, the Department held its first-ever Department-wide Environmental Justice Symposium.
During the three-day virtual event, Interior employees and federal partners highlighted work advancing environmental justice through science, policy, and engagement.
The Department also initiated measure development and baselining to support Justice40 goals.
In FY 2022, Interior conducted foundational fact finding, including research and data collection to develop the Minority-Serving Institutions (MSI) Dashboard and enable essential funding analysis and data modeling needed to assess barriers to achieve the Interior’s equity outcomes.
Interior utilized the Department of Education’s MSI datasets, to create various MSI Dashboards to initiate the analysis of Interior financial assistance and procurement funding to Minority Serving Institutions.
As the Department continues efforts to assess how Interior’s policies and programs may perpetuate barriers for underserved communities, data collected through the MSI Dashboard is expected to support additional analysis to shape strategy development to ensure Interior’s programs and policies yield equitable outcomes for all Americans, including underserved communities.
Interior also made strides in advancing equity in the Department’s opportunities by building capacity for data-driven improvements within MSI grantmaking and implementing a series of stakeholder engagement sessions to increase awareness of Interior’s mission, organizational structure, and engagement opportunities.
The initial session, Increasing Economic Literacy in Federal Opportunities, held in September 2022 was well attended, providing participants with valuable tips and tools to navigate grant, fellowship, and student employment processes.
Expand recruitment and partnerships with historically minority colleges and universities to increase the diversity of fellowship applicants.
Employ customer service survey findings to inform/improve the vendor journey map and initiate product testing of counseling resources aimed at supporting small business vendors.
The Office of Environmental Policy and Compliance will develop tools and guidance to coordinate stakeholder engagement through the Office of Intergovernmental and External Affairs and strengthen relationships between state and local partners and external stakeholders.
Initiate engagement with stakeholders to improve the federal, state, and tribal grants processes.
Develop and implement tools, guidance, and policy for reporting financial benefits of infrastructure investments and methodologies for tracking them.
Update and implement an Environmental Justice strategic plan and performance management framework.
Interior employs over 70,000 people and a cadre of volunteers to perform a wide range of duties that span various disciplines and require varied skills.
Interior’s ability to maintain a highly effective organization that meets the needs of the American people is dependent upon attracting the best talent and ensuring that workers are fully engaged and committed to carrying out the Department’s mission.
This includes creating pipelines to attract, recruit and retain diverse talent; maintaining an inclusive and safe workplace culture which prioritizes employee health and safety; providing fair, equitable, and accessible opportunities for professional growth and advancement; and leveraging technology and innovation to drive efficiency and improve the applicant and employee experience.
In FY 2022, Secretary Haaland highlighted innovative hiring practices, and advancing diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility; and employee health, wellness, and safety as key priorities for the Department.
Working one office at a time, one report at a time, one data set at a time, Interior leaders, equal opportunity employment experts, human capital practitioners, hiring managers, learning and development experts, and employees have engaged in numerous and varied efforts to increase diversity and to include and engage people of diverse backgrounds.
These strategies enabled Interior to maintain the diversity ratios in its workforce, however, more work is needed to yield significant and sustainable increases in demographic representation among the Interior workforce.
Interior continues to prioritize employee health and safety and made significant progress towards maintaining an inclusive and safe workplace culture for its workforce, and taking better care of Interior’s first responders charged with safeguarding our communities, public lands and waters, and critical resources.
In FY 2022, the Department’s Law Enforcement Task Force implemented the Law Enforcement Officer Survey which collected data from across the Department’s 3,200+ law enforcement and correctional officer workforce.
This data, combined with feedback from various internal and external stakeholders informed recommendations to ensure supportive resources are available for officer mental health, wellness, and safety among other recommendations.
Bolstered by the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, Interior also pursued continued improvements in its wildland fire workforce as reflected in the Office of Wildland Fire workforce priorities, including improvements to pay, staffing, and health and wellness among others.
Ensure the whole of the conservation sector considers ways to recruit and retain diverse talents, working with universities to better equip students with skills and experiences sought by the environmental and conservation field.
Work through the Diversity Joint Venture to partner with federal and state agencies, universities, non-governmental organizations, foundations, and professional societies to increase the number of women, minorities, underserved, and disadvantaged people in the conservation workforce.
Implement resources, toolkits, and webinars to advance the use of annual learning plans to support and enhance career mobility and variety.
Revise and implement the Department’s reasonable accommodations policy to align with EO 14035 and EO 13164.
Add peer-to-peer and microlearning to the professional development portfolio offered to Interior’s museum community.
Sustainably managed assets, responsible management of resources, and fair and equitable service delivery are essential to building confidence and satisfaction for the American public.
The Department will apply continuous learning and improvement principles, including robust maturity models, vigorous evidence building, and risk management to deliver on its strategic priorities and provide better services to our customers.
This includes leveraging infrastructure investments to benefit vulnerable communities, optimizing maintenance, repair, and construction for our highest-priority facilities, and prioritizing visitor and customer safety on Interior-managed properties.
Through a multipronged approach with an emphasis on efficiency, investment, and portfolio rightsizing, the Department will also reduce energy and greenhouse gas emissions from Interior vehicles and facilities and pursue proactive lifecycle management for the Department’s facility portfolio.
Interior rated this strategic objective as a focus area for improvement.
Administration expectations of using evidence to better serve customers requires Interior to develop implement new strategies and evidence-building approaches for the Department.
Substantive capacity building begun late in FY 2022 is expected to yield meaningful results in coming years as Interior continues to inculcate outcome-based planning and performance management and develop a robust, actionable Learning Agenda.
Expand Hatchery Modernization Assessment pilot program to assess 55 additional facilities.
Initiate phase II and III of National Wildlife Health Center modernization projects to reduce deferred maintenance and enhance research and surveillance on economically and ecologically harmful wildlife diseases.
Prioritize construction of the new Energy and Minerals Research Facility to enable interoperability with geoscience and energy professors at the Colorado School of Mines.
In FY 2022, the Department’s Law Enforcement Task Force completed a series of 12 listening sessions and received public comment on ways to strengthen public trust and confidence in the Department’s law enforcement programs, ensure appropriate policy and oversight, and assure supportive resources are available for officer mental health, wellness, and safety.
The body of evidence was instrumental in reforming key Interior policing practices, including policies related to body-worn cameras, use of force, and no-knock entry; and helping strengthen the unique connection that law enforcement officers have with the communities that they serve.
Initiate modernization on 2 hydropower generating units at Grand Coulee Dam as part of a phased approach to extend safe and reliable electrical power delivery in the Pacific Northwest.
Acquire 90% of light duty fleet vehicles as Zero Emission Vehicles to reduce GHG emissions in Interior operations.
Develop an Emergency Management Strategic Plan to protect our lands, trust communities, and visitors and address the substantial increase in disasters due to climate change and other hazards.
Baseline and implement Key Performance Indicators to monitor the impacts of Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) investments.
Initiate a cyber Supply Chain Risk Management (SCRM) program to identify, assess, and mitigate risks associated with technology assets and minimize damage and impacts to Interior systems, data, and mission delivery.
Develop performance measures to assess progress for performance goal 4.4.3 (see Appendix B).
The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA), commonly known as the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL), passed in 2021, is a once-in-a-generation opportunity for Federal investment in the Nation’s infrastructure and economic competitiveness and will allow Interior to stand up and expand services and infrastructure.
BIL makes significant investments in Interior programs and initiatives that benefit the communities and areas Interior directly serves.
The Department will invest more than $28 billion in six key BIL program areas.
As Interior works to advance the priorities of the Biden-Harris Administration, the Department will also track progress to show results.
In future performance plan and reports, Interior will include performance measures to show the impact the BIL is making for the Nation.
The Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) authorized $4 billion in funding specifically for water management and conservation efforts in the Colorado River Basin and other areas experiencing similar levels of drought.
The Department is investing in long-term system efficiency improvements across the Basin, including at least $500 million in the Upper Basin States of Colorado, Utah, Wyoming, and New Mexico, that will result in additional water conservation for the entire system.
In FY 2022, Interior announced 37 climate adaptation projects that will assist tribal governments with climate adaptation and preparedness and eleven projects for community relocation planning.
An additional 13 projects will support improvements to tribal irrigation and power systems and the safety of dams and water sanitation facilities.
Interior also Established two IDIQ set-asides for Indian-owned Small Business Economic Enterprises (ISBEEs) to conduct orphaned well plugging and abandonded mine land reclamation work which will support not only environmental restoration on tribal lands, but create jobs and economic growth for those tribes.
In FY 2024, Interior will continue to invest BIL funds to support tribal climate adaptation and preparedness projects including pilot projects for tribes to prepare for full community relocation to new sites and protect-in-place measures.
Interior will also improve tribal irrigation and power systems and the safety of dams and water sanitation facilities to ensure longevity and reliability of these critical infrastructure projects for tribal communities.
The reclamation of abandoned mine land (AML) and remediation of orphaned wells reduces methane emissions, improves water quality, and restores habitat, contributing to healthy and sustainable ecosystems, and creates jobs and provides new economic opportunities.
To achieve these ecosystem benefits, in FY 2022 Interior provided grants to states enabling them to complete high priority abandoned mine land projects and close orphaned oil and gas wells on tribal, state, and federal lands.
To ensure accountability and measurable outcomes, the orphan well program completed pre-plugging surveys for measuring methane and other environmental contaminants.
In FY 2024, Interior will perform additional well plugging, remediation, and reclamation on federal, state, and tribal lands; and will announce funding to states and tribes to fund BIL AML projects and award grants.
The intensity, frequency, and size of wildfires continue to grow.
The most critical action that Interior can take to strengthen its ability and effectiveness in addressing this threat is ensure a larger skilled, well equipped, and well compensated workforce of federal wildland firefighters.
Interior commits to multi-million dollar investments in these workforce needs, as well as employ diverse state of the art approaches and technologies throughout wildland fire management activities.
BIL funding will bolster Interior’s ability to fund post-fire rehabilitation, mitigate the damaging effects of wildfires, and set landscapes on a path toward natural recovery and resilience.
In FY 2022, Interior announced $103 million for wildfire mitigation and resilience efforts in 39 states, to support nearly 2 million acres of fuels management work.
More than 3,800 Interior wildland firefighters are receiving temporary pay raises and improved health benefits to bolster our workforce.
In FY 2024, Interior will continue workforce development efforts, allocate additional funding for fuels management activities to reduce wildfire risks and impacts, support post-fire mitigation, strengthen the Joint Fire Science Program, and catalyze partnerships and research agreements.
Specifically, BIL funding will bolster wildfire preparedness activities, including satellite detection of wildfire and radio interoperability to ensure critical and time-sensitive communications.
In a continued effort to invest in the wildland firefighters, a new mental health initiative is planned.
Interior’s ecosystem restoration efforts strategically leverage the BIL investments towards restoration and resilience in a variety of categories: resilient islands, resilient coasts, fire-resilient ecosystems, drought-resilient basins, resilient freshwater systems, conserve and restore cultural resources, and healthy ecosystems for healthy human communities.
Desired outcomes are identified as measurable improvements in biodiversity and ecosystem function at landscape scales, and just and equitable investments that positively impact disadvantaged communities.
In FY 2022, Interior began ecosystem restoration projects for the Klamath Basin, Lake Tahoe, and the Delaware River, as well as investing BIL funds to improve the Sagebrush-Steppe ecosystem and improve fish passages, opening an estimated 3,722 miles of streams and rivers.
In partnership with the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation, Interior provided grants that will conserve, restore, and connect habitats for wildlife while improving community resilience and access to nature.
In FY 2024, Interior will continue funding ecosystem restoration projects for the Klamath Basin, Lake Tahoe, and the Delaware River, as well as investing BIL funds to improve the Sagebrush-Steppe ecosystem and improve fish passages.
Interior continues to refine a framework and national level planning for ecosystem restoration to strategically focus the BIL funding to achieve impact towards ecosystem restoration and resiliency.
In FY 2022, Interior announced $1.4 billion for 129 projects to boost water infrastructure and tackle western drought, including funding for rural water systems, dam safety, water recycling and reuse projects, and repairs for aging water systems.
Projects funded include a $75 million investment which will enable the Lewis and Clark Rural Water System–which serves over 350,000 residents in South Dakota, Minnesota and Iowa–to be completed, delivering clean drinking water to families and farmers across the region.
The Department of the Interior also announced funding for tribal water systems and for irrigation and power in Indian Country.
Interior announced $1.7 billion to fulfill enacted Indian Water Rights Settlements, to ensure communities receive the water resources they have long been promised.
Over the next five years, the Administration, through the Bureau of Reclamation, will invest $8.3 billion in western water infrastructure and projects addressing drought through projects for aging infrastructure, rural water, large water storage projects, small storage projects, large scale water recycling programs, and endangered species and drought projects on the Colorado River.
In FY 2022, Interior invested over $74 million for the Earth Mapping Resources Initiative (Earth MRI) to map critical minerals that power everything from household appliances and electronics to clean energy technology like batteries and wind turbines.
The USGS also provided competitive grants to 35 State Geological Surveys to preserve, modernize, and make publicly available geological and geophysical data and assets.
USGS issued funding to design and construct a new federally owned building for energy and mineral science on the Colorado School of Mines (CSM) campus.
In FY 2024, the Administration will advance Earth MRI to accelerate mapping efforts and build toward an initial comprehensive national modern map of our domestic mineral resources.
During the development of the Interior FY 2022–2026 Strategic Plan the Department developed outcome-focused performance goals that are tracked with performance measures and reported in this Annual Performance Plan.
In many cases, Interior was able to create new measures and begin baselining data, but for a few performance goals in this plan Interior is still working on developing performance measures.
Many new performance measures require further discussion and coordination with tribes, engagement with working groups across Interior, and final implementation plans for new legislation and funding to be set.
In future Annual Performance Plans and Reports Interior will publish performance measures to support the Strategic Plan performance goals below as they are developed.
The GPRA Modernization Act of 2010 established the need for agencies to identify performance goals, report progress against targets, and conduct data-driven reviews.
These practices serve two key purposes for stakeholders within and outside of the organization: (1) to assess the organization’s health and impact; and (2) to inform decision making, resource allocation, and strategy.
The Department will review strategic objectives and performance goals and measures annually, and agency priority goals quarterly, to continuously learn and improve as we advance our outcomes in the Department’s strategic plan.
The Interior organizational performance reviews provide a regular forum for open dialogue and coordination between Department, bureau, and office leadership, bringing together different perspectives to set and align priorities, identify, and solve problems, review agency performance goals, and drive evidence-informed decisions and results.
The annual and quarterly cycles integrate statutory requirements to conduct organizational performance reviews of agency strategic objectives, agency priority goals, and cross-agency priority goals.
Along with reviews of strategic objectives, agency priority goals, and cross-agency priority goals, Interior assesses the past year’s performance and sets targets for the next fiscal year.
The results of these reviews are published in the Interior Annual Performance Plan and Report and published on the Interior performance management website.
Means used to verify and validate measured values: All performance data reported in the APP&R and on http://www.performance.gov/ by the Department is subject to the data verification and validation standards initially published in 2003 and reissued in 2007 (see https://www.doi.gov/ performance/data-validation-and-verification).
Implementing organization heads or chief officials confirm in writing the validity of the data and present the data on a quarterly basis to the Deputy Secretary.
Sources for the data: Program managers provide performance data based on their observations that can include extrapolations of selected representative samples or history adjusted for estimates of changing conditions.
The data is tracked and maintained in separate systems.
Following review by the providing bureau or office, data is collected, reviewed, integrated, and maintained by the Department’s Office of Planning and Performance Management (PPP) in its APP&R available through the Department’s Budget and Performance Portal (www.doi.gov/performance), and www.performance.gov.
Level of accuracy required for the intended use of the data: Performance data reported in the APP&R and on http://www.performance.gov/ is used for management purposes, as a representative indicator of progress in relation to a target or goal established by the corresponding implementing organization.
Limitations to the data at the required level of accuracy: Performance data is subject to potential errors from the use of estimations and extrapolations (especially where direct measurement is impractical and/or too costly, individual observation, miscommunication, and/or failure to effectively employ the guidance described in the performance measure template or the “Indicator” description in http://www.performance.gov/.
However, based on multiple review levels and accuracy certifications, these limitations are not significant.
How the agency has compensated for such limitations if needed, to reach the required level of accuracy: The measurement procedures for each performance measure used in the APP&R are described and documented in data measurement templates posted on the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) MAX website, or described in the “Indicator” block for each APG on http://www.performance.gov/.
Along with the implementing organization’s official assurance of faithfully employing the data verification and validation standards, submitted data are reviewed within the context of the scope and nature of the activity, plans, and experience to help confirm accuracy.
Following review and verification by the submitting bureau or office, the data is reviewed again by PPP to determine if further consultation with the data provider is necessary to adjust or correct the reported data before publication.
Senior management and leadership consider this level of accuracy to be acceptable for their use of the data.
Experience in using the data, historical trend and programmatic context assessments, and bureau data quality certifications indicate that the limitations are considered minor and compensating measures are not considered necessary.
In addition to employing the Department’s data validation and verification standards, and internal reviews of submitted data, the best “test” of the data’s accuracy is in its use.
APG updates are reviewed during quarterly status reviews where senior officials report their data directly to the Deputy Secretary and are made publicly available through http://www.performance.gov/.
Performance information is provided with historical, organizational, and supporting context to provide the reader with a fuller perspective of the data and is reviewed annually at the strategic objective level.
This Fiscal Year 2023–2024 Annual Performance Plan and FY 2022 Report was prepared and published by the Office of Planning and Performance Management.