This document explains how the Department of Labor (DOL) improves the lives of America’s workers through the management of its agencies and programs.
As required by the Government Performance and Results Modernization Act of 2010 (GPRMA), it provides information on planned and actual performance and progress in achieving the four strategic goals, one management goal, ten strategic objectives, and twenty performance goals identified in the DOL FY 2022-2026 Strategic Plan and presented in the table below.
Vision: Empowering all workers morning, noon and night.
Mission: To foster, promote, and develop the welfare of the wage earners, job seekers, and retirees of the United States; improve working conditions; advance opportunities for profitable employment; and assure work-related benefits and rights.
Outlined below is the basic structure of this document, which provides an overview of each Strategic Goal and Objective,1 a Strategic Review Summary of Progress at the objective level, and an overview of each partner agency’s performance goal.
DOL agencies with performance goals contributing to the objective are listed; a brief introduction follows.
This section includes highlights of progress or obstacles for each strategic objective.
Each DOL partner agency section includes a brief introduction of their mission and programs.
The narrative in this section presents performance information supported by a table with applicable measures, targets, results, and status (whether or not results reached or exceed the target, indicated by Y or N).
Where “baseline” appears in the target cell for new indicators, no data were available for establishing a numerical target.
If results improved over the prior year but did not reach the target, “I” appears in the status cell.
Agency Priority Goals (APGs) identify near-term improvements in outcomes, customer service, or efficiencies that advance progress toward longer-term strategic goals and objectives.
They are two-year goals that reflect the top implementation-focused, performance improvement priorities of agency leadership and the Administration, and therefore do not reflect the full scope of the agency mission.
Implementation and management of APGs require decisions about agency priorities, trade-offs, measurement, evidence, strategies, timing, and leadership that are reviewed at least quarterly to see that sufficient time, resources, and attention are allotted to addressing specific problems or opportunities related to the goal.
Building upon the work of the previous two years, by September 30, 2025, DOL will demonstrate concrete and sustained progress toward outcomes in the advancement of diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility through key strategies and priority measures and milestones.
2) reduce the estimated improper payment rate of unemployment benefits.
The Department will also plan and offer new, innovative technical assistance and grants to strengthen Unemployment Insurance (UI) service delivery, fraud prevention, and equitable access.
More information about each goal is available on Performance.gov/agencies/dol.
This page is intentionally left blank.
Advance training, employment, and return-to-work opportunities that connect workers to higher-wage jobs, especially in ways that address systemic inequities.
The American economy must work for all workers.
ETA, VETS, WB, and ODEP oversee programs and develop policy as part of the nation’s public workforce system, providing support to workers and employers.
In the coming years, these agencies will strengthen their efforts to expand opportunities to advance equity, inclusion, and job quality.
These agencies invest in workforce development and modernized employment practices; they also build upon established collaborations with other DOL agencies, as well as federal, state, community-based, non-profit, and other organizations to influence evidence-based policy changes, conduct important research, and strengthen employer engagement.
Collectively, these agencies’ performance goals contribute to helping workers access quality jobs today and tomorrow, and to improving DOL’s agility to evolve in an ever-changing environment.
Additionally, DOL’s Civil Rights Center investigates and adjudicates alleged discrimination and other violations of equal opportunity requirements and provides technical assistance (TA) to ensure that the workforce system is operating in compliance with the law.
Findings for this objective were grouped into three themes: Promote Inclusion and Address Systemic Inequities; Advance Employment Entry, Retention, and Higher-Wage Opportunities; and Diversity and Hiring.
Evidence of progress included the advancement of equity goals through grant programs and technical assistance.
Challenges were identified in limited staffing and resources to meet the increased demand for services.
In FY 2023, ETA adjusted its competitive grant award criteria to prioritize grantees with plans to address inequities.
Adjustments included scoring criteria that recognized applicants who serve low-income communities, have staff who share experiences with the population served, and who explicitly name strategies and services to improve equity as a grant activity.
The scoring criteria also took into account whether the applicant was working with a union or worker voice partner.
ETA awarded over $65 million in State Apprenticeship Expansion Formula Grants to 46 states to increase their ability to serve, improve, and strategically enhance the National Apprenticeship system.
These awards included annual formula funding to 46 states and territories and additional funding to seven states committed to increasing sustainability, increasing the diversity of Registered Apprentices, and increasing the number of Registered Apprenticeship Programs (RAPs) that support in-demand industry sectors.
ETA awarded $49.4 million in Pathway Home grants to provide training, employment and supportive services to adults reentering the workforce following incarceration in a local jail or state correctional facility.
ETA also awarded $45 million in Growth Opportunities grants, serving justiceinvolved youth and young adults, which incorporated Community Violence Interventions strategies as a key focus in serving populations that have higher incidence of poverty and violence in their communities.
ETA awarded $50 million in Strengthening Community Colleges Training Grants to 15 community colleges to expand their capacity to meet the skill development needs of employers and workers.
Specifically, these grants focused on addressing equity gaps and expanding accelerated career pathways for historically marginalized populations.
ETA awarded approximately $78 million in DOL Nursing Expansion Grants to 25 public-private partnerships to increase the number of nursing instructors and educators and to diversify the pipeline of nursing professionals who can fill quality jobs.
The grant program placed an emphasis on training individuals from historically marginalized and underrepresented populations to address growing health equity gaps and the lack of diversity in the healthcare workforce, particularly within the middle-to-high skilled nursing professions.
ETA awarded approximately $94 million in DOL Building Pathways to Infrastructure Grants to 34 public-private partnerships to develop, implement, and scale worker-centered sector strategy training programs.
These programs will train and prepare the skilled workforce needed to mee the demands of the sizeable infrastructure investments made through the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL).
This grant program will train individuals from historically marginalized and underrepresented populations, as well as individuals from smaller and/or rural communities.
ETA awarded $16 million in Critical Sectors Job Quality Grants to 12 organizations to pilot strategies to improve job quality and increase the availability of good jobs in the care, climate resiliency, and hospitality sectors.
The grants will enable recipients to design and deploy programs aligned with the Good Jobs Principles developed by the Department of Labor and Department of Commerce.
These grantees will help create workercentered partnerships and support established partnerships that incorporate equity, job quality, and worker voice.
In FY 2023, ETA continued to engage with stakeholders that represent underserved communities.
Engagements included participation in stakeholder events with Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and other minority-serving institutions, community-based organizations, tribal representatives, apprentices of color, and professional and trade organizations that represent communities of color.
ETA worked closely in partnership with the Diversity and Inclusion Registered Apprenticeship Technical Assistance Center to provide customized support to employers, education providers, intermediaries, and government entities.
Support focused on improving the understanding of registered apprenticeship equal employment opportunity regulations, outreach to underrepresented populations, diversity and inclusion in the RAP, recruitment and retention, and gathering recipients’ feedback from web-based trainings.
ETA continued the Department’s Scaling Apprenticeship Readiness Across the Building Trades initiative with TradesFutures, and in partnership with the National Urban League.
This initiative advances equitable opportunities in construction and bolsters commitments from the Department to increase the use of pre-apprenticeship to improve access to good jobs with family-sustaining wages, particularly for underserved communities.
From April 1, 2023, through June 30, 2023, TradesFutures served 1,126 participants, of which 924 were male, 199 were female, and 821 were people of color.
WIOA Adult program performance data indicate that the number of individuals with disabilities served under WIOA is incrementally increasing (6.6 percent of total participants served in Program Year (PY) 2017, 7.3 percent in PY 2018, 7.6 percent in PY 2019, 6.9 percent in PY 2020, 7.7 percent in PY 2021, and 8.3 percent in PY 2022).
In FY 2023, VETS established employment-based performance metrics for TAP that the agency will baseline in FY 2024.
This represents the culmination of a multi-year effort to match Transitioning Service Member information with National Directory of New Hires data and will allow VETS to monitor outcome data for the TAP program for the first time.
In FY 2023, VETS issued a revised quarterly performance report to states to improve awareness of outliers in JVSG record counts for participant services and demographic data.
VETS expects these reports will lead to more complete and accurate demographic data.
VETS also completed the development of a multi-year trend report that compares participant outcomes by relevant demographic categories.
VETS will use the outcomes from these reports to continue program improvements, specifically for underserved populations.
In FY 2023, VETS worked with the National Veterans’ Technical Assistance Center (NVTAC) to deliver technical assistance.
On October 31, 2022, NVTAC hosted a Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Accessibility (DEIA) webinar for grantees to learn about successful delivery methods and best practices for helping reduce disparities in the homeless services system, specifically related to serving underserved communities and historically marginalized veterans.
On March 30, 2023, NVTAC conducted a grantee community of practice listening session on Service Delivery in Rural Areas that discussed the infrastructure and labor market challenges specific to rural locations, shared best practices for addressing those challenges, and provided useful resources for connecting veterans with partner services in rural communities.
In FY 2023, VETS completed revisions to the VETS 1010 claim submission form.
The revised form allows for entry of claimants’ disability status, age, race, ethnicity, and gender.
These new data fields will allow VETS to capture additional demographic information.
VETS will use the information to continue program improvements, specifically for underserved populations.
In FY 2023, WB awarded a record-high $5 million in funding via seven new WANTO grants.
WB capitalized on the moment of historic federal investments by giving preference to applicants that detailed a plan to accelerate local efforts to increase women’s inclusion and equity in projects funded through the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, Creating Helpful Incentives to Produce Semiconductors (CHIPS) and Science Act, Inflation Reduction Act, and other federal funding These efforts were supplemented by two related sole-source, place-based grant awards to firmly embed equity practices and principles into local-level projects and job sites.
WB launched the FARE grant program in FY 2021 to help women workers who earn low wages learn about and access their employment rights and benefits.
In 2021, the FARE grant program awarded approximately $2 million to six state and territory agencies.
In 2022, to continue and extend WB’s education and outreach efforts among marginalized and underserved communities, the FARE grant program awarded approximately $2 million to six non-profit organizations to connect women workers to services, benefits, and legal assistance.
In 2023, the FARE grant program awarded almost $1.6 million to five community-based organizations to support women who have been impacted by gender-based violence and harassment in the world of work.
The period of performance for FARE grants is 18 months.
In FY 2023, ODEP held 291 technical assistance events, significantly exceeding its target of 257.
The Retaining Employment and Talent After Injury/Illness Network (RETAIN) and the State Exchange on Employment and Disability (SEED) are two of several ODEP initiatives that have contributed to this measure.
In Phase 1 of RETAIN (launched in September 2018), ODEP awarded eight cooperative agreements to state applicants.
In FY 2022 and FY 2023, Phase 2 grantees implemented program expansions and began serving injured and ill workers in geographic areas that have a high concentration of residents from underserved communities.
In FY 2022, ODEP expanded and strengthened partnerships with organizations representing critical state and local legislative and administrative bodies.
In FY 2023, SEED established a multi-intermediary Mental Health and Employment Policy Task Force consisting of state legislators, mayors, and governors’ office representatives.
The Task Force reviewed and proposed a range of mental health-related policies, plans, practices, and implementation strategies for adoption by states and localities.
In FY 2023, Job Corps required operators to submit a Build-Up Plan to improve student enrollment and retention in the program.
Job Corps onboard strength recovery continued to progress more slowly than expected due to ongoing center staff vacancies and turnover, student retention challenges with competitive labor markets, and construction rehabilitation challenges with campus buildings.
In FY 2023, the result for student onboard strength was 20,354, below the target of 30,000 students.
Agricultural employers submitted a record 21,018 H-2A applications requesting 389,908 temporary workers in FY 2023.
Despite the record workload, OFLC exceeded its target, issuing decisions on 98.2 percent of complete H-2A applications at least 30 days before the date of need.
Employers also filed a record number of applications in the Permanent Labor Certification (PERM), H-2B, and Prevailing Wage Determination programs.
Total employer application levels in OFLC’s most workload-intensive programs (H-2A, H-2B, CW-1, PERM, and PWD) have more than doubled in the last decade, from 219,141 applications in FY 2014 to 452,243 in FY 2023.
Employers requested over 1.7 million worker positions through the foreign labor certification programs in FY 2023.
In FY 2023, ETA published the final set of American Apprenticeship Initiative (AAI) evaluation reports, issue briefs, and infographics.
Key findings show registered apprenticeship is a viable workforce training option for all job seekers.
Over half of AAI apprentices were from underrepresented populations, compared to 46 percent of all registered apprentices.
Findings also show that pre-apprenticeship programs can promote diversity in registered apprenticeship programs.
Following their release in November 2022, these reports, briefs, and infographics were posted on apprenticeship.gov and shared widely during National Apprenticeship Week.
During FY 2023, ETA and the Department of Labor’s Chief Evaluation Office (CEO) released an implementation study and related issue briefs from the America’s Promise Job-Driven Training Grants program, an H-1B Training Grant.
This grant program encouraged the development of regional partnerships that meet employers’ needs and prepare American workers for middle- and high-skilled jobs.
This report and related issue briefs highlighted lessons learned and promising practices to inform how workforce agencies identify and engage employers in sector-based strategies, support individual participants with wraparound and supportive services, and engage local partners in developing training aligned with employer needs.
These studies, which were issued in December 2022, and future releases from this evaluation will increase ETA’s understanding of how to operationalize sector strategies and career pathway approaches that benefit employers and program participants.
DOL continued to promote the use of the Career Trajectories and Occupational Transitions Dashboard to share information about career pathways with career advisors and American Job Center staff from state and local workforce agencies.
ETA continued to collect and disseminate Occupational Information Network (O*NET) information on occupations, including new and emerging tasks, technological aptitudes, and skills on all occupations, with renewed emphasis on those related to the green economy, to monitor changes in skill demands and provide information to help individuals make informed training and career choices.
The release of the O*NET 27.1 Database, in November 2022, updated the approach to identifying “Hot Technologies” and introduced the concept of “In Demand” technology skills.
Hot Technologies are software and technology requirements most frequently included across all employer job postings, data that now augments the longstanding statistically rigorous survey of incumbent workers.
In Demand technology skills are software and technology requirements frequently included in the employer job postings for a particular occupation.
VETS continues to support the Good Jobs Initiative through the development of resources focused on job quality.
The JVSG program median earnings (2nd quarter after exit) increased from $6,420 in PY 2018 to $8,853 in PY 2022.
The HVRP Median Earning (2nd quarter after exit) increased from $4,373 in PY 2018 to $8,650 in PY 2022.
VETS is committed to ensuring median earnings at minimum align with the state living wage.
Each year, VETS conducts a robust public outreach campaign to educate service members, employers, and others on their rights and responsibilities under USERRA.
In FY 2023, VETS conducted over 1,425 compliance assistance events nationwide, informing employees and employers alike of their rights and responsibilities under USERRA.
WB published multiple interactive dashboards highlighting the results of the 2017/2018 American Time Use Survey (ATUS) Leave and Job Flexibilities Module, including data on how access to and use of leave varies by sex, race and ethnicity, age, educational attainment, and occupational grouping.
WB finalized the survey instrument for the 2024 ATUS Leave and Job Flexibilities Module in FY 2023.
WB commemorated the 30th anniversary of the Family and Medical Leave Act in February 2023 by publishing a micro website aggregating a variety of WB- and DOL-developed resources about state-level paid leave programs.
In May 2023, WB published the study, Lifetime Employment-Related Costs to Women of Providing Family Care.
The study provides a better understanding of the personal economic cost caregiving has on mothers and the differences across race, ethnicity, and educational attainment.
It used dynamic microsimulation modeling to project the lifetime earnings and retirement income lost due to child and adult caregiving.
The estimated employment-related costs for mothers providing unpaid care averages $295,000 over a lifetime or 15 percent of a mother’s lifetime earnings.
When measured as a share of lifetime earnings, lifetime caregiving related earning losses are especially high for less-educated mothers and Hispanic mothers.
In 2022, WB published the NDCP, the only federal data source that provides county-level childcare prices.
In January 2023, in conjunction with a formal launch of the database, WB published interactive maps of childcare prices by county and share of family income, as well as a brief showing how prices vary across the country and how these prices impact maternal employment.
Counties that had higher childcare prices had lower rates of maternal employment.
This data will allow researchers and policymakers to accurately measure potential economic impacts of childcare affordability, evaluate how childcare prices are linked with gender and racial inequality in the labor force, and identify strategies for enhancing employment options and economic security for women.
As originally published in 2022, the NDCP made use of data collected between 2008 and 2018.
In FY 2023, WB contracted to update the NDCP for 2019-2022 data and began the preparation of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) package for another round of data collection from the states.
In FY 2023, ODEP produced 43 policy outputs (recommendations of laws, regulations, orders, or guidance related to disability employment), exceeding the target of 42.
ODEP produced most of its policy outputs from its state intermediary work.
Through this work, state legislatures and governors introduced or passed legislation, executive orders, and other policies designed to improve employment outcomes for people with disabilities.
In FY 2023, ODEP issued 140 implementation tools (formally developed tools that support the adoption/implementation of ODEP-recommended practices, policies, strategies, models, or theories), exceeding the target of 122.
These tools aided entities in adopting and implementing proven practices in disability employment.
An important example is the “Creating a Disability-Inclusive Workplace: The Role of Accommodations” learning guide developed by the Employer Assistance and Resource Network, which was released in September 2023.
The Office of Apprenticeship (OA) has reorganized and leveraged information technology (IT) to streamline operations, but risk remains around having sufficient capacity to properly manage historically high numbers of active RAPs and participants.
The OA management portfolio also includes performance and risk management of OA’s grants and contracts, and implementation of new initiatives related to proposed rulemakings, the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, CHIPS and Science Act, and Inflation Reduction Act of 2022.
Additionally, infrastructure funding and new recommendations from the Secretary’s Advisory Committee on Apprenticeship are putting pressure on the National Apprenticeship system’s capacity to support the demand for RAPs.
ETA Performance Goal 1.1 – Create customer-focused workforce solutions that serve all workers, including underserved communities.
ETA oversees the provision of training and employment assistance, labor market information, and education through programs authorized by the WIOA—for adults, dislocated workers, youth, Job Corps, and employment services authorized by the Wagner-Peyser Act, amended by title III of WIOA, and National Programs; Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) authorized by the Trade Act of 1974, as amended; Foreign Labor Certification activities authorized by the Immigration and Nationality Act; the Senior Community Service Employment Program authorized by the Older Americans Act; and Apprenticeship programs authorized by the National Apprenticeship Act.
Additionally, ETA oversees the federal-state UI program, which is authorized under the Federal Unemployment Tax Act and Title III of the Social Security Act (see ETA Performance Goal 3.1).
The public workforce system provides access to training, employment services, and supportive services to a broad array of customers at all skill levels.
These services include career counseling, case management, assessments that identify transferable skills, and skill development.
ETA and the workforce system are committed to expanding access to Registered Apprenticeships; providing and improving strategies and tools that help connect employers and skilled workers and connect workers to quality jobs; and continuously improving the effectiveness, efficiency, and equity of workforce development programs by ensuring accountability and applying evidence of what works in these programs.
Since Program Year 2016,2F3 the WIOA core programs and ETA’s other WIOA-authorized and partner programs have been required to report on six WIOA primary indicators of performance: employment in the 2nd quarter after exit, employment in the 4th quarter after exit, median earnings in the 2nd quarter after exit, credential attainment, measurable skill gains, and effectiveness in serving employers.
ETA has established national targets for many of these measures.
In addition, ETA has aligned performance reporting definitions and calculations and implemented a streamlined performance reporting system for WIOA and other DOL partner programs.
Eighteen workforce grant programs use a common record layout (the Participant Individual Record Layout) to report program participant service and outcome information.
Using one system enhances data reliability and accuracy.
In PY 2022, ETA exceeded the target for the percentage of exiters engaged in work-based learning opportunities, including apprenticeships.
Performance fell below the target for the percentage of exiters attaining credentials within one year after exit and exceeded the target for percentage of program participants employed in the second quarter after exit.
The percentage of exiters engaged in work-based learning opportunities not only exceeded the target of 42 percent, but was the highest outcome achieved in the four years of tracking this measure.
The metric for credential attainment fell short of the target of 65 percent but was higher overall than the prior year’s result of 53.1 percent.
This measure remains difficult for states to track due to the manual nature of customer follow-up one year after exit.
The second quarter employment performance indicator outcome of 71.7 percent is ten percentage points higher than two years ago and is even higher than pre-pandemic levels in PY 2019.
States are emphasizing these outcomes in their service delivery and have matured data collection systems and processes nearly a decade after the inception of WIOA.
The PY 2022 result reflects a cohort of participants who exited the program in the transition period out of the most severely pandemic-impacted quarters, and therefore saw increases in many of these indicators that had previously dropped due to the pandemic’s effects.
ETA continued to provide TA and guidance to assist grantees in adjusting their program delivery models as needed to virtual settings, and where available, to virtual work experiences.
ETA continues to provide TA to grantees to assist and support programs’ ability to identify, provide, and report on quality credentials.
Throughout the adjustment to virtual service delivery and services, ETA also provided guidance and TA on best practices for remote delivery.
In PY 2023, ETA will continue to improve performance outcomes by providing technical assistance using numerous methods.
ETA staff is committed to providing group presentations specific to performance-related topics and providing one-on-one assistance to states for nuanced topics.
ETA is updating the Participant Individual Record Layout in FY 2024, which will add new data elements and streamline existing variables.
H-1B Skills Training Grants provide training and supports to workers to gain the skills needed to obtain or upgrade employment in high-growth industries or economic sectors, particularly through the development of worker-centered sector strategies.
Grantees train participants for the good jobs in middle- and high-skill occupations for which employers hire foreign workers using H-1B visas.
Recent H-1B Training Grant investments addressed critical training needs for skilled nurses, and occupations key to the jobs created by the Invest in America agenda.
These included advanced manufacturing, information technology, and certain occupations that support renewable energy, transportation, and broadband infrastructure sectors.
In FY 2024, ETA will launch technical assistance for Building Pathways to Infrastructure Jobs grantees and additiona community stakeholders to continue strategic partnerships that support infrastructure-related worker pipelines in FY 2025.
Strengthening Community Colleges Training Grants, authorized as WIOA demonstration grants, build community college capacity to meet the skills development needs of employers and workers more effectively.
The fourth-round opportunity, announced in August 2023, focuses on equitable access to good jobs in high-demand industries.
Critical Sectors Job Quality Grants, also WIOA demonstration grants, pilot strategies to improve job quality and increase the availability of good jobs in the care, climate resiliency, and hospitality sectors.
Tier One recipients received funding to help create worker-centered partnerships, while Tier Two recipients received funding to support established partnerships that incorporate equity, job quality, and worker voice.
The WIOA Youth formula-funded program continued focusing on work experience.
ETA continued to provide technical assistance which included ETA’s inaugural cohort of the Youth System Building Academy where nine communities received intensive technical assistance to develop strategic plans around connecting youth systems in their community.
In FY 2024, ETA will select and provide assistance for a second cohort of Youth System Building Academy communities.
The Reentry Employment Opportunities grants prepare individuals who were involved with the justice system for employment that stabilizes their income and creates opportunities for career pathways.
The Partners for Reentry Opportunities in Workforce Development (PROWD) grants and Pathway Home grants build upon evidence from the Linking Employment Activities Pre-release grants and seek to determine if consistent services begun while in federal custody, state prisons, or local jails lead to better employment outcomes.
Meanwhile, the Growth Opportunities grants prepare justice-involved youth and young adults for the world of work.
With a focus on youth (15-18) and young adults (18-24) most impacted by community violence, particularly in areas of concentrated crime and poverty, the grants partner with community violence interrupters and deliver employment and training services.
In PY 2023, the Department plans to continue its investments in and support of PROWD, Pathway Home, and Growth Opportunities grants.
The WIOA Adult program is integral to reaching adults most in need of assistance from the public workforce system in a rapidly evolving environment.
In PY 2022, ETA was below the target for the number of states in which at least 75 percent of the state’s WIOA Adult program participants are from at least one of the three priority groups.
For the states with the lowest enrollments, ETA will conduct targeted technical assistance and continue to broadly coordinate state efforts to achieve higher levels of success in PY 2023.
In FY 2023, ETA’s nationwide Job Corps program facilitated a path to economic security for opportunity youth.
Job Corps continued implementing Job Corps 2.0 – a student-centered program design that focuses on innovation, modernization, automation, and strategic partnerships with national employers and organizations to accelerate program performance and improve student outcomes.
Job Corps repositioned itself as a pre-apprenticeship academy to meet the increased demand for infrastructure jobs created by the Investing in America Agenda.
Job Corps also launched an IT application to modernize the enrollment process for applicants and integrated refinements to promote diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility (DEIA) into the program.
Leveraging partnerships and demonstration grants, Job Corps built substantive relationships with employers of the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) designated Megaprojects, Community Colleges, HBCUs, and the Department of Navy’s shipbuilding Industrial Base Task Force.
These relationships will expand career development resources for students.
Job Corps also assessed its career technical training (CTT) offerings for clean energy skills.
Through Job Corps’ demonstration grants, 64 Job Corps-eligible students received services on campus at two HBCUs.
The period of performance for the demonstration grants ended on September 30, 2023.
In FY 2024, Job Corps will continue to improve all aspects of the program, including exploring new ways to strengthen its relationship with RAPs.
In FY 2023, ETA supported workforce system alignment through a Registered Apprenticeship (RA) Technical Assistance (TA) Center of Excellence focused on national strategic partnership and system alignment.
Partnerships support alignment of the national workforce and education systems to accelerate RAP adoption and expansion.
In FY 2024, ETA will develop and publish assessments reports related to education system and registered apprenticeship system alignment to identify gaps and corresponding technical assistance opportunities.
ETA is committed to expanding Registered Apprenticeships, through increasing the number of apprentices served.
In FY 2023, 886,677 apprentices were served, exceeding the target of 850,000.
In FY 2022, OA implemented the Secretary’s Advisory Committee on Apprenticeship.
In FY 2023, OA expanded registered apprenticeship into high-demand, priority industries including clean energy, infrastructure, healthcare, agriculture, and early childhood education, and will continue these efforts in FY 2024.
In FY 2024, OA expects to continue to fund a range of initiatives that increase access for underrepresented populations and ensure registered apprenticeship opportunities are available for all Americans.
U.S. employers filed a record number of applications for foreign labor certification in FY 2023, with requests reaching all-time highs in the PERM, H-2A, H-2B, and Prevailing Wage Determination programs.
The majority of OFLC case adjudications are financed by Congressional appropriations rather than by application fees.
Therefore, the resources available to the Department to process applications do not automatically adjust as more applications are filed.
In the H-2A program, for example, agricultural employers requested over three times more H-2A temporary foreign workers than a decade ago (389,908 in FY 2023; 123,528 in FY 2014).
Despite these surging application levels, OFLC exceeded its performance target, resolving over 98 percent of complete H-2A labor certification applications at least 30 days before the employer’s date of need.
Enactment of the Department’s Budget proposal enabling the Department to retain existing H-2A fees—which it has collected under statutory authority since 1987 but does not currently have a mechanism to keep—would help DOL manage these sharply increasing application levels and reduce the risk of delays without imposing additional fees on employers or increasing federal appropriations.
In FY 2024, OFLC will continue to seek operational improvements and IT enhancements to reduce barriers to timely processing and help manage its rapidly rising workloads.
OFLC will also continue its efforts to focus grant resources on State Workforce Agencies where H-2A and H-2B workload demands are greatest, conduct on-site grant-monitoring reviews, and provide technical assistance to state staff to improve program administration.
As a result of outreach to members of underserved communities, ETA continued to take steps to increase access to ETA programs, including making significant adjustments to virtually all of its competitive grant programs.
Adjustments included scoring applications based in part on the degree to which applicants would increase services to underserved communities and focusing on quality jobs as a strategy to achieve equitable outcomes.
ETA also clarified common myths that were limiting outreach and thus impeding potential participants from knowing about or accessing its programs.
VETS oversees programs that assist veterans seeking employment and provides outreach to employers seeking skilled workers.
These efforts are focused on enabling all veterans to reach their full potential in the workplace.
VETS administers several programs to meet the employment and training needs of veterans, service members and spouses.
The JVSG program provides funding to states for Disabled Veterans’ Outreach Program (DVOP) specialists and Local Veterans’ Employment Representative staff.
The HVRP addresses one of the most vulnerable populations by reintegrating homeless veterans into society and the workforce.
DOL’s TAP, administered in conjunction with the Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans Affairs, provides workshops to support a successful transition from military to civilian employment.
Pursuant to the USERRA and the Veterans’ Employment Opportunities Act of 1998, VETS investigates complaints received from individuals who believe their employment or reemployment rights under USERRA and federal employment preference rights under Veterans’ Preference were violated.
Also, VETS operates the Honoring Investments in Recruiting and Employing (HIRE) Veterans Medallion Program—the only federal-level veterans employment award that recognizes a company or organization’s commitment to recruiting, employing, and retaining veterans.
VETS provides veterans, service members, and their families with targeted training and resources, through four programs that leverage partnerships to improve employment outcomes.
DOL offers a mandatory one-day Employment Fundamentals of Career Transition workshop, as well as the DOL Employment Workshop and the Career and Credential Exploration workshop, which are both elective two-day courses.
In addition, VETS offers specialized TAP curricula: Transition Employment Assistance for Military Spouses and the Wounded Warrior and Caregiver Employment Workshop.
VETS reviews the Transition Assistance Curriculum Participant Assessment (TACPA) results received quarterly from the Department of Defense and TACPA written comments for use in improving facilitator performance and curricula content.
In FY 2023, the post-course survey result for facilitator satisfaction was 96 percent through the third quarter.
DVOP specialists provide individualized career services to veterans with significant barriers to employment, eligible transitioning service members, and wounded, ill, or injured service members and their caretakers.
VETS tracks the employment outcomes for those served by DVOP specialists, such as the median earnings in the second quarter after exit.
The PY 2022 result for this measure was $8,784.
VETS began tracking state median earnings quarterly outcomes against their goals and found that over 96 percent of states met or exceeded their goal in PY 2022.
While the national targets have been adjusted to account for the increase in wages, JVSG state-level goals have not.
VETS is committed to improving the methodology used to forecast participant wages and will consider adjustments for inflation in relation to state-level targets in FY 2024 and FY 2025.
HVRP grantees provide a variety of services along with federal, state, and local partners to best serve the unique needs of veterans experiencing homelessness.
Median earnings in the second quarter after exit have continued to increase, as the PY 2019 result was $4,836, and the PY 2022 result was $8,650.
Additionally, HVRP served 17,389 participants and placed 55.2 percent of program exiters into employment with an average hourly wage of $18.34 in PY 2022.
VETS recently introduced participant location information in the HVRP reporting form and is committed to ensuring median earnings align with the state living wage.
VETS manages its USERRA investigations to ensure each complaint is investigated appropriately in terms of quality and timely completion.
In FY 2023, VETS continued to monitor and report on its current statutory requirement measuring the percentage of cases closed within 90 days or within an extension of time agreed to by the claimant, resulting in an outcome of 99.8 percent for the year.
WB Performance Goal 1.1 – Promote policies and support programs focused on improving women’s employment and economic outcomes.
WB conducts research to formulate practices and policies aimed at increasing economic and employment opportunities and advancement for the more than 77 million working women and their families in the U.S. WB identifies trends, data gaps, policy and programmatic needs, and strategic mechanisms to safeguard the interests of working women.
These efforts allow WB to inform and educate individuals and organizations at the local, state, and national levels about the issues facing women in the labor force.
For more than 100 years, WB has been committed to advocating for equality and economic security for working women and their families.
In FY 2023, WB focused on reducing occupational segregation for women workers, increasing equity in pay and hiring, increasing access to paid leave and affordable child care, increasing access to benefits and knowledge of worker rights, and eliminating gender-based violence and harassment in the world of work.
WB exceeded its target for the number of policy and research deliverables, producing a total of 61 deliverables focused on equity for marginalized sub-groups of working women.
In FY 2023, WB invested more than $8.1 million in grants to fund effective programs working to increase women’s equity and inclusion in higher-paying, non-traditional jobs.
Through a combination of grants, programming, stakeholder engagement activities, communications products, and sustained participation in a variety of intra- and inter-agency equity initiatives, WB led efforts to bring greater gender and racial equity to the workforce and the skilled trades.
In FY 2024 and FY 2025, WB will engage with worker organizations, community-based organizations, and other stakeholders to advance equity, job quality, and worker voice as part of DOL’s place-based strategy for implementing the Biden-Harris Investing in America agenda.
Through a cooperative grant agreement with Accelerator for America (AFA), WB and AFA will provide technical assistance and capacity-building support to scale partnerships with the goal of training and placing more underrepresented populations in infrastructure-funded good jobs.
WB will support OFCCP Megaproject implementation, conduct an analysis on the economic impact of care infrastructure, continue working with elected officials to support investments in care infrastructure, and provide technical assistance on paid leave program design and strategies to increase female recruitment and retention in infrastructure jobs.
In partnership with DOL’s Wage and Hour Division, WB created sample employment agreements for domestic workers that provide child and long-term care and will initiate a coordinated outreach and dissemination plan in FY 2024 to encourage widespread use.
In FY 2024, WB and the Bureau of Labor Statistics will engage in a data collection effort for the updated American Time Use Survey Leave and Job Flexibilities Module.
The data will provide insight about leave and work policies before and after the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
ODEP Performance Goal 1.1 – Develop evidence-based policies, practices, and tools to foster a more inclusive workforce to increase quality employment opportunities for individuals with disabilities.
ODEP promotes policies and practices, and coordinates to increase the number and quality of employment opportunities for individuals with disabilities.
ODEP employs strategies to help employers meet their business objectives by fully integrating the skills and talents of job seekers and employees with disabilities.
Additionally, ODEP uses data and evidence to promote the adoption and implementation of policy strategies and effective practices to increase the number and quality of job opportunities for people with disabilities.
Based on research and evaluation, ODEP develops or identifies effective policy and practices, conducts outreach to share this critical information, and provides technical assistance to all levels of government and employers to aid them in adoption and implementation.
ODEP plans to continue engaging all of its stakeholders as it seeks input to address their specific needs.
For example, ODEP will continue efforts with state intermediaries to identify state-level policy development opportunities.
ODEP will also continue to seek ways to incorporate input from stakeholders in the development of implementation tools and to provide targeted technical assistance that meets their needs.
Aligned with the Department’s broader equity efforts, ODEP will expand its reach and assist underserved communities in culturally and linguistically competent ways.
This includes developing tools that are customized to meet the needs of the diverse groups ODEP engages with.
In FY 2023, ODEP exceeded each of its four targets.
ODEP will continue to fund RETAIN and SEED, as well as initiatives supporting competitive integrated employment for people with disabilities.
ODEP funded a cooperative agreement targeted to employers through the Employer Assistance and Resource Network as well as an agreement to continue the work of the Center for Advancing Policy on Employment for Youth.
In FY 2024, ODEP will fund a new initiative, the Equitable Transitions Models Demonstration, to develop scalable strategies to enable low-income youth and young adults with disabilities ages 16-24, including those experiencing homelessness, leaving foster care, or involved in the justice system, to successfully transition into the workforce.
Secure safe and healthful workplaces, particularly in high-risk industries.
All workers have a right to a safe and healthful work environment.
OSHA and MSHA recognize that some workers are more vulnerable than others and that some workplaces are more hazardous than others.
By strategically scheduling inspections and outreach in high-risk areas, in addition to completing mandated enforcement activity, DOL expects to have the greatest effect on overall compliance.
With more employers in compliance, workplace injuries, fatalities, and illnesses should decline – the ultimate outcome for workers.
The Administration’s vision provides workers a voice in the workplace so that they may actively participate in the protection and promotion of thei workplace rights without hindering their employment growth opportunities.
Workers are more likely to have a voice in the workplace if they are better informed of their employment rights and are better able to freely exercise those rights and overcome their fear of adverse consequences.
OSHA and MSHA provide a range of protections for workers who claim that their rights are being violated.
Findings for this objective were grouped into three themes: Safe and Healthful Workplaces; Ensuring Equity and Protecting the Most Vulnerable Workers; and Workers’ Rights/Whistleblower and Miners’ Rights.
Evidence of progress included targeted enforcement of workplace safety and health standards and protecting miners’ rights.
Challenges were identified in keeping up with the volume of workplace retaliation complaints received under the Whistleblower Protection Program, efforts to protect the safety and health of miners, and in attracting, hiring, training, and retaining a diverse workforce.
In FY 2023, OSHA conducted 34,249 inspections, exceeding the 33,790 targeted.
Of these, 28,114 were safety inspections and 6,135 were health inspections.
This represents a seven percent increase over the number of inspections conducted in FY 2022.
OSHA conducted 955 fatality inspections in FY 2023, a 14 percent reduction from FY 2022.
Additionally, OSHA exceeded the number of hazards abated for powered industria vehicle hazards in the warehousing industry by 55 percent.
OSHA’s VPP establishes cooperative relationships between participants, management, and labor to implement comprehensive safety and health programs to exceed OSHA standards.
In FY 2023, approvals and reapprovals of VPP sites continued to be impacted by COVID-19 due to the backlog of on-site evaluations caused by the pandemic that needed to be addressed in the fiscal year.
Despite this impact, new approvals increased from 19 in FY 2022 to 23 in FY 2023 and re-approvals increased from 264 in FY 2022 to 279 in FY 2023.
The 5-year rolling average of fatal injuries per 200,000 hours worked increased for the third consecutive year.
The estimated FY 2023 result of 0.0132 was a 19 percent increase from FY 2022.
The 5-year rolling average of reportable injuries associated with powered haulage equipment per 200,000 hours worked increased four percent from FY 2022 and the 5-year rolling average of all injuries per 200,000 hours worked increased one percent from FY 2022.
The DOL Office of Inspector General (OIG) has identified Protecting the Safety and Health of Workers as a top management and performance challenge.
A concern for MSHA to address is exposure in coal mines to high levels of crystalline silica, a carcinogen and contributing cause of black lung disease.
More than three times as many coal miners were identified as having black lung disease from 2010 to 2014 compared to 1995 to 1999, and crystalline silica, a component of respirable coal mine dust, has been linked to this increase.
In November 2021, the OIG reported that MSHA’s allowable limit for respirable crystalline silica has remained unchanged for more than 50 years, and MSHA has been working on a rule to lower the limit for over two decades.
In June 2022, MSHA implemented a Silica Enforcement Initiative to protect miners’ health by limiting their exposures to respirable crystalline silica.
The four components of the initiative are inspections, sampling, compliance assistance, and miners’ rights.
In July 2023, for the first time, MSHA published a proposed rule lowering miners’ exposure to respirable crystalline silica and improving respiratory protection at all mines.
The comment period on the proposed rule ended in September 2023.
After reviewing public comments, MSHA will develop and publish a final rule that will improve health protections for all miners and lower the risk of material impairment of health or functional capacity.
MSHA initiated impact inspections in April 2010 after an explosion at the Upper Big Branch Mine in West Virginia claimed the lives of 29 miners.
The program continued until 2017 when MSHA began conducting a limited number of targeted inspections at mines that warranted additional enforcement.
The agency ended the practice of publishing the results in March 2020.
MSHA continued to conduct targeted inspections through December 2022.
In January 2023, MSHA resumed conducting monthly impact inspections at mines that merit increased agency attention and enforcement due to factors that include poor compliance history; previous accidents, injuries, and illnesses; and other compliance concerns.
MSHA also resumed the practice of publishing the results on the agency's website.
In FY 2023, MSHA’s impact inspections identified 2,092 violations, including 604 significant and substantial and 40 unwarrantable failure findings.
Some of these were repeat violations.
Safety training is a critical piece of OSHA’s effort to prevent workplace fatalities, injuries, and illnesses.
OSHA conducts training programs at the OSHA Training Institute (OTI) and administers the OTI Education Centers Program and the Outreach Training Program.
OSHA also provides training through its compliance assistance efforts in support of agency regulatory, enforcement, and outreach initiatives.
OSHA continued to use a mix of traditional in-person and virtual training.
In addition, it enabled events that were planned and implemented at an area or regional office level to be accessible to a national audience.
The implementation of virtual training increased access to training for many workers and OSHA personnel.
OSHA developed a performance measure to track the percentage of Susan Harwood Grant Applicants proposing to deliver or develop materials for training in languages other than English.
In FY 2023, OSHA achieved a result of 71 percent, just below the target of 75 percent.
In FY 2023, the agency laid groundwork for significant changes to its Capacity Building funding opportunity, which will be proposed in the FY 2024 funding opportunity announcement.
The changes are intended to solicit more applications from smaller non-profit organizations that do not have a current capacity to deliver occupational safety and health training.
OSHA also secured approval from OMB to collect demographic data from Susan Harwood Grant trainees.
OSHA will begin demographic data collection, including race, ethnicity, and gender.
OSHA will use this demographic information when establishing future program priorities and initiatives.
In FY 2023, OSHA developed and implemented enhanced audience-tracking capabilities to the OSHA Information System Compliance Assistance module.
These modifications will better position the agency to understand the extent to which its outreach and compliance assistance activities are reaching vulnerable and underserved populations, and to identify opportunities for improvement.
In FY 2023, MSHA aimed to award 20 percent of the competitive funds to Minority Serving Institutions.
Prospective grantees for MSHA’s competitive grant program included nonprofit institutions that are not eligible to be identified as a Minority Serving Institution.
While MSHA only awarded one grant to Minority Serving Institutions, it also awarded a grant to the United Mine Workers of America to create a training program that focuses on minority communities by developing bilingual training materials.
Despite not meeting the specific goal, MSHA achieved its overall objective of awarding funds to underserved communities.
In FY 2022, MSHA worked to identify mines located in medically underserved populations as defined by the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), which include Health Professional Shortage Areas, Medically Underserved Areas, Medically Underserved Populations, Exceptional Medically Underserved Populations, and Governor’s-Designated Secretary-Certified Shortage Areas for Rural Health Clinics.
In FY 2023, MSHA completed its analysis of whether miners in underserved communities face any particular vulnerabilities.
MSHA used HRSA data and found that 13 percent of mines are located in a primary care shortage area, 7 percent are located in a dental health shortage area, and 41 percent are located in a mental health shortage area.
MSHA will develop an electronic tool on its website that utilizes coordinate/address data for Black Lung clinics, HRSA health centers, and Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration substance use facilities to aid miners in locating health resources.
Additionally, the tool will allow a miner to search for treatment resources by facility type, service setting, treatment approaches, language services, recovery support services, and payment options.
MSHA will foster communication with the mining community to improve knowledge of accessing primary care, dental, and mental health providers within close proximity to a mine location.
MSHA will actively engage with the mining community through alliance group partnerships to collaborate on the development of the tool, increase awareness of the tool, and conduct technical sessions demonstrating tool features.
If MSHA cannot attract diverse candidates and address diversity and inclusion in the workplace, then it will be challenged to attract the talent needed to increase enforcement effectiveness; modernize training and education programs; and strengthen mine safety and health standards.
MSHA has had large full-time employee lapses in recent years as hiring has occurred at a slower rate than planned.
MSHA launched an apprenticeship program to hire new inspectors, creating opportunities for a more diverse workforce that represents miners and mining communities.
The volume of workplace retaliation complaints received under the WPP continued to increase.
The program received 13,432 new complaints in FY 2022 and 15,758 in FY 2023.
In addition, the number of new complaints filed that were docketed for investigation also increased from 2,756 in FY 2022 to 3,269 in FY 2023.
To address the increase in cases, OSHA overhauled its Whistleblower Investigatory Process to streamline investigations without compromising case quality.
In FY 2023, MSHA completed 100 percent of investigations of miner complaints related to requests for temporary reinstatements within 20 days of receipt.
As part of several new safety and health initiatives, MSHA will continue to educate miners about their rights and the Mine Act’s protections against retaliation, discrimination, and interference.
OSHA was established by the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 with the mission to ensure employers provide America’s workers safe and healthful working conditions.
OSHA ensures the safety and health of America’s workers by setting and enforcing workplace safety and health standards; delivering effective enforcement; providing training, outreach, and education; and encouraging continual improvement in workplace safety and health.
Through these efforts, OSHA aims to reduce the number of worker illnesses, injuries, and fatalities and contribute to DOL’s broader goals.
OSHA implements strategies along a “safety curve” that reflects employers’ commitment to providing workers a safe and healthful workplace OSHA uses the range of mechanisms provided under the Act including criminal and civil penalties, inspections, compliance assistance, consultation, and recognition programs to move employers up the curve from a lower to a higher commitment to safety.
OSHA has traditionally implemented a full range of programs and activities targeting each part of the safety curve.
For example, enforcement interventions that are proactive in preventing injuries include increased use of OSHA’s imminent danger authority, comprehensive settlements that require safety and health management systems with real worker participation, and strategic engagement with worker stakeholders to better understand and address the health and safety challenges in their workplaces.
While enforcement and standards setting continue to be the leading tools across Administrations, for enforcement activities to have a scalable effect that reaches all workers, especially vulnerable ones, it must be thought of in the context of a larger system that leverages enforcement to gain wider behavioral change.
OSHA’s compliance assistance and outreach, On-Site Consultation Program, and other OSHA cooperative programs, including recognition programs such as the Safety and Health Achievement Recognition Program and VPP, are proactive and collaborative in nature and assist employers in amplifying their commitment to improve workplace safety.
These and other OSHA recognition programs showcase employers with a greater commitment to occupational safety and health and demonstrate the feasibility of developing and maintaining an exemplary safety and health management system (SHMS).
In FY 2023, OSHA began a project to modernize VPP to assist more employers in reaching exemplary SHMS.
The project, which is expected to continue through FY 2024, initiated a contract to analyze other successful SHMS and to hold listening sessions in high volume regions during safety and health conferences.
In FY 2024, the Electrical Transmission and Distribution Partnership will enter its 20th year with its renewal.
This Partnership has resulted in several best practices in the industry and has reduced fatalities in the industry over its term.
The National Association of Tower Erectors Partnership will be renewed for the first time in FY 2024 and will continue to address severe injuries and fatalities in the communications tower erection industry through development of best practices and training.
OSHA intends to use all established emphasis programs, agency priorities, and enforcement policies in FY 2024 and FY 2025 to protect America’s workers.
Often workers in OSHA’s targeted industries and workplaces, those with the highest illness and injury rates, belong to ethnic or racial minorities groups, are non-English speakers, are first-generation immigrants, belong to economically disadvantaged populations, or exhibit mental or physical disabilities.
Therefore, protecting these workers also advances racial and economic equity and supports underserved communities.
In FY 2024, OSHA’s enforcement of the new National Emphasis Program Warehousing and Distribution Center Operations (Warehouse NEP) will begin.
In addition, OSHA is expanding the goal of abating powered industrial vehicle hazards in warehousing.
Regarding heat-related illnesses, OSHA wil conduct and assess a Heat NEP Pilot for H-2A Visa applicants Targeting Agricultural Industries.
For respirable crystalline silica hazards, OSHA wil perform a focused subset of inspections at facilities where employees are exposed to engineered stone particulates, often containing high concentrations of respirable crystalline silica.
In the healthcare industry, OSHA continues to probe methods and practices to ensure employees are removed from hazards, such as ergonomic and workplace violence.
OSHA’s reframing the enforcement portion of the OSHA Weighting System (OWS) in FY 2023 to the new OSHA Enforcement Impact Index (EII), is another strategy OSHA uses to account for and leverage its resources beyond the simple metric of number of inspections.
The EII is a monitoring tool that provides better information on managing and prioritizing OSHA enforcement resources, as well as an aid for managers to make resource allocation decisions.
The EII categorizes and calculates an enforcement impact value in the form of points to prioritize inspections that have the greatest impact on reducing workplace fatalities, injuries, and illnesses.
The formula is driven by factors that target emphasis program hazards and address agency priorities, industries, or goals.
Safety training is a critical piece of OSHA’s effort to prevent workplace fatalities, injuries, and illnesses.
OSHA conducts safety training programs at the OTI and administers the OTI Education Centers Program and Outreach Training Program.
OSHA also provides training through its compliance assistance efforts in support of agency regulatory, enforcement, and outreach initiatives (e.g., National Stand Down to Prevent Falls in Construction, Heat Illness Prevention, and the Safe + Sound Campaign).
In FY 2023, OSHA provided training for 1,619,892 individuals through a mix of traditional in-person training and virtual training.
Virtual training increased access to training for many workers and OSHA personnel and enabled events that were planned and implemented at an area or regional office level to be accessible to a national audience.
In FY 2023, OSHA focused on inspections conducted through emphasis programs.
Specifically, the agency focused its emphasis on reducing or eliminating employee exposure to fall, struck-by, caught-in, and electrical hazards in all workplaces.
This is compared to prior years when the emphasis was solely on the total number of inspections for hazards that are among the leading causes of death in the workplace.
In FY 2024 and FY 2025, OSHA will maintain focus on emphasis programs (EPs) targeting safety hazards while researching a new method of EP rotations to allow field resource concentration on safety EPs.
OSHA also administers and enforces 25 whistleblower protection statutes that protect workers who experience retaliation for reporting violations of the law.
Principally, this includes Section 11(c) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, which prohibits employers from retaliating against employees who bring workplace safety and health hazards to the attention of the employer or the agency.
The additional 24 whistleblower protection provisions protect workers in a variety of industries who speak out against unsafe and/or unlawful behavior, including violations of transportation, environmental protection, consumer protection, health insurance reform, or fraud and financial reform laws.
In FY 2023, OSHA met its target for the average age of pending Whistleblower cases.
In addition, OSHA met its target of 8 days, with a result of 5 days, for the average time to complete the new complaint screening process.
OSHA lowered its inventory of pending investigations from 2,355 cases at the end of FY 2022 to 2,009 cases at the end of FY 2023.
OSHA implemented its Whistleblower Outreach Plan for FY 2023 by concentrating its efforts on reaching migrant and other traditionally underserved workers, especially those who do not speak English.
OSHA coordinated with worker advocacy groups to identify and meet the needs of these categories of vulnerable workers and developed a tracking mechanism to capture all compliance assistance activity regarding these vulnerable populations.
In addition, OSHA started a pilot which provides a simplified procedure to address complaints that are not covered by OSHA administered whistleblower statutes, untimely filed, or alleged safety or compliance concerns but not retaliation.
Moreover, the agency updated its webpage to improve navigation for its users.
These initiatives will assist the agency in tackling the still-large inventory of pending cases and backlog of over-aged cases while promoting greater customer service in FY 2024 and FY 2025.
MSHA Performance Goal 2.1 – Prevent fatalities, disease, and injury from mining, and secure safe and healthful working conditions for America’s miners.
MSHA protects the safety and health of the nation’s miners through enforcement of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 (Mine Act), as amended by the Mine Improvement and New Emergency Response Act of 2006.
MSHA’s mission is to prevent death, disease, and injury from mining and to promote safe and healthful workplaces for the nation’s miners.
This mission is carried out through the promulgation and enforcement of mandatory safety and health standards; mandated inspections, which require four complete inspections annually at active underground mines and two complete inspections annually at active surface mines; miner training; and technical compliance assistance activities.
To prevent miner injuries, occupational illness, and fatalities, operators must have in place effective safety and health programs that are constantly evaluated to identify and eliminate mine hazards and provide training for all mining personnel.
MSHA has undertaken several measures to prevent mining deaths including: increased monitoring and strategic enforcement through impact inspections at mines with identified problem areas; a Pattern of Violations program; special initiatives such as focusing on inexperienced miners and miners working alone; outreach efforts such as “Miner Health Matters” through which MSHA is conducting enforcement and outreach efforts to ensure miners working in potentially dangerous mining environments take proper precautions to limit exposures to silica and other dangerous toxins; outreach campaign on “Stand Down to Save Lives”; Enhanced Enforcement Program on contract/customer truck drivers and managers/supervisors performing mining tasks; and emphasis on fall protection to protect miners working from heights.
MSHA prioritizes efforts to reduce workplace hazards that represent a primary cause of occupational illnesses, fatalities, and injuries.
Accidents involving surface mobile equipment are among the leading causes of mining fatalities.
MSHA is working on a final rule for a Safety Program for Surface Mobile Equipment which will reduce powered haulage accidents and injuries.
The written safety program's final rule includes actions mine operators will take to identify hazards and risks to protect miners’ safety and reduce accidents, injuries, and fatalities related to surface mobile equipment at surface mines and surface work areas of underground mines.
Under this proposal, mine operators would have flexibility to develop and implement a written safety program that would work best for their mining conditions and operations.
In FY 2023, accidents caused by powered haulage equipment, which is a category of moving machines used to transport miners or haul materials in mines, contributed to 24 percent of fatalities and 9 percent of total injuries.
MSHA continued to promote best practices to prevent injuries and fatalities associated with powered haulage accidents.
The Powered Haulage Initiative website includes pages highlighting large equipment blind spots, seat belt usage, and conveyor safety.
Inspectors at all field offices continued to focus on conveyor safety during mine visits, discussing best practices and distributing hardhat stickers and brochures.
MSHA focused on fatalities involving contractors and provided compliance assistance to address causes of these deaths.
In FY 2023, MSHA also awarded $1,000,000 in grant funding through its Brookwood-Sago grant program to support education and training opportunities for miners that focused on safety and health topics, including powered haulage safety.
During the “Stand Down to Save Lives”, MSHA leadership and enforcement and compliance assistance staff visited mines across the country to encourage mine operators to focus on adequate training, workplace examinations, and other important safety and health requirements designed to protect miners and prevent fatalities, accidents, and injuries.
MSHA staff visited 1,902 mines and spoke to 30,152 miners and 5,262 supervisors, for a total of 35,414 people in the mining industry throughout the country.
In FY 2024 and FY 2025, MSHA will continue enforcement efforts and compliance assistance to reduce overexposures to silica dust in the mining industry.
As part of the Silica Enforcement Initiative, MSHA will continue to increase inspections at mines with a history of repeated silica overexposure; increase sampling in targeted conditions; analyze sampling data; develop health alerts; provide guidance for training plans; and establish a team of experts to address critical health issues.
MSHA will conduct spot inspections where citations are not totally abated within the set abatement timeframe and additional action will be considered as appropriate, to ensure miners are being protected.
MSHA will also continue its Miners Health Matters campaign, with a focus on making sure that miners and operators are aware of the adverse health effects of silica and other contaminants and best practices for reducing miners’ exposure.
In FY 2024 and FY 2025, MSHA will track and analyze the number of coal miners participating in the 30 CFR, Part 90 program, which was designed to protect miners with evidence of pneumoconiosis.
MSHA will provide guidance for training plans to focus on exposure risks and informing miners of their Part 90 rights that allow them to continue working in healthier parts of the mine.
MSHA continues to advance the Administration’s priorities by focusing on diversity, racial and gender equity, and bilingual needs in underserved communities to build a more modern, inclusive workforce.
MSHA provides miners with information that can empower them to improve working conditions through the free Miner Safety and Health Application (app).
The app provides users with information regarding safety, health, and miners’ rights.
As of the end of FY 2023, the app has over 67,000 downloads.
To uphold equity and provide support for Limited English Proficiency (LEP) miners, the application is available in both English and Spanish.
All workers have the right to be paid properly and treated equitably.
WHD, OFCCP, and OLMS promote fair pay, worker rights, and equal opportunity, and serve as the voice of America’s workforce.
These agencies enforce laws and provide compliance assistance that address worker pay and leave, equal rights, and labor-management transparency.
Together, these agencies protect tens of millions of employees in millions of workplaces across the country.
Findings for this objective were grouped into two themes: Strategic Enforcement and Performance and Outreach to Vulnerable Workers.
Evidence of progress included strengthened outreach efforts focused on essential workers, expanding partnerships with stakeholders with a focus on access and equity, and process improvements to achieve ambitious hiring goals.
Challenges were identified in training and resources needed to target enforcement and outreach efforts to underserved communities.
In FY 2021, 83 percent of agency directed investigations were tied to an initiative.
For FY 2022, WHD changed the measure to include complaint investigations to reflect its renewed focus on developing strategic partnerships that will result in complaints aligned with agency priorities.
As such, WHD adjusted the target downward to 65 percent to encompass both agency initiated and complaint cases.
Including complaints in the measure recognizes the potential for both types of cases to deter violations and support broader industry efforts.
The FY 2022 result for this new measure, percent of compliance actions associated to a strategic initiative, was 73 percent.
In FY 2023 the result for this measure was 72 percent, exceeding the target of 67 percent.
Variations in results during this initial implementation phase may be partly explained by the shifting balance of complaint and agency-initiated cases associated with initiatives.
In FY 2019, WHD created a severity index capturing key dimensions of high impact cases under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA).
The corresponding performance measure (percent of FLSA compliance actions with a severity score of 30 or more) builds on the previous performance measure—which treated all types of violations equally—by incentivizing and recognizing the development of higher impact cases.
These higher impact cases increase opportunities for the types of press releases that, evidence has shown, achieve deterrent effects.
The index is comprised of multiple data points covering the egregiousness, culpability, and magnitude of violations in a given case.
In FY 2021, 18 percent of all investigations met the severity index definition of a high impact case, and, by FY 2022, the result was 26 percent.
The return to full investigations following the pandemic has sustained this upward trend.
In FY 2023, the result for this measure was 30 percent, exceeding the target of 25 percent.
OFCCP protects workers by ensuring those who do business with the federal government, contractors and subcontractors, are accountable for fulfilling their equal employment opportunity obligations.
As part of its enforcement efforts, OFCCP conducts compliance evaluations of federal contractors to identify and remedy systemic discrimination and promote greater federal contractor compliance.
In FY 2023, OFCCP completed 898 supply and service (S&S) compliance evaluations covering 922,567 workers and 175 construction compliance evaluations covering 16,310 workers.
The agency found discrimination in the employment practices, including hiring and compensation practices, of 4 percent of the federal contractors that it evaluated.
These discrimination findings resulted in OFCCP obtaining $40 million in monetary recoveries for 16,005 workers.
OFCCP also found non-discrimination violations, which resulted in changes to policies and practices related to disability in 6 percent of all evaluations; related to protected veteran status in 8 percent of all evaluations; and related to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, or discussing or disclosing compensation in 14 percent of all evaluations.
OFCCP continued to balance conducting efficient compliance evaluations with identifying and remedying employment discrimination in FY 2023.
OFCCP established timeliness goals to encourage the closure of evaluations unlikely to result in discrimination findings sooner and focus the agency’s resources on remedies for workers.
Compliance evaluations often consist of potential discrimination indicators that resolve only after a further in-depth investigation, causing delays in case closures.
OFCCP recognized the need to implement new tools and processes to identify, prioritize, and resolve cases more efficiently.
In FY 2023, OFCCP received over 2,900 complaints from workers and perfected 95 percent of the nearly 3,000 closed complaints within the standard timeframe, exceeding the target of 90 percent.
In FY 2024, the agency will continue its efforts to promote greater awareness among individual workers, worker organizations, and other stakeholders of OFCCP’s complaints process.
OFCCP will also implement a pre-complaint process and deploy the complaint module in its Compliance Management System (CMS).
OLMS has instituted a risk-based audit targeting model to more effectively identify unions where criminal activity may be present by identifying anomalies in union financial reports and using other targeting strategies.
OLMS uses this model to strategically utilize its enforcement resources when there is strong suspicion of illegal activity in a particular union or local, thereby avoiding auditing the majority of unions that are in compliance with the law, and efficiently utilizing government resources.
The effectiveness of this methodology is measured by the percent of audits resulting in the opening of a “fallout” criminal case.
In FY 2023, OLMS achieved a rate of 18.3 percent, above the 17.5 percent target.
OLMS’s focus on this measure has allowed the targeting skills to peak and improved techniques are now engrained throughout the agency.
OLMS is retiring the fallout goal and implementing a new Compliance Audit Program (CAP) goal that focuses on resolving violations through voluntary compliance.
OLMS seeks to increase disclosure of employer efforts to persuade workers on how to exercise their rights to organize and collectively bargain.
OLMS also seeks to increase disclosure of expenditures of employers who surveil employees in connection with a labor dispute.
Disclosure of employer activities that constitute “unfair labor practices” is also a priority.
In FY 2023, OLMS promulgated a final rule that revises an employer reporting form, LM-10, to clarify that filers must identify the group of employees subjected to the persuasion, surveillance or interference reported.
This revision ensures that filers fully explain the circumstances of all covered payments, as required by the statute.
This clarification will also enable better National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) cross-matching by employees and the public viewing completed LM-10 forms on the OLMS website.
When filers identify the unit of employees subjected to their persuader activity, representation and Unfair Labor Practice cases before the NLRB that have similar information documented can be matched more easily by employees, allowing them to know whether they were subjected to persuader activities more readily.
In addition to promulgating this rule, OLMS is sending letters to employers informing them of their filing requirements when circumstances warrant.
OLMS also conducted a national compliance assistance seminar on employer and labor relations consultant reporting and held a roundtable discussion with industry leaders on labor-management cooperation, showcasing how labor-management partnerships bring workers and employers together to solve workplace issues, boost productivity, and increase job satisfaction.
OLMS also published a Summer 2023 edition of “Organizing at WORK” Worker Organizing Research and Knowledge Center newsletter, devoted to labor-management partnerships.
In FY 2022, WHD established a new performance measure, percent of compliance actions in industries with a high proportion of workers in underserved communities, which also supports the DOL Agency Performance Goal: An Economy for All Workers.
The FY 2022 result for this measure was 39 percent, six percentage points above the target of 33 percent.
In FY 2023, the methodology was refined to incorporate occupational data, which strengthened the measure’s focus on industries employing low-wage workers from underserved communities.
In FY 2023, WHD met the target of 78 percent.
WHD worked to integrate the themes, information, and lessons learned from the Essential Workers Essential Protections campaign into how the agency plans and conducts outreach overall.
In FY 2023, WHD conducted approximately 4,700 outreach events and activities reaching community based organizations, worker centers, unions, industry associations, consulates, faith-based organizations, and worker advocacy groups.
In FY 2023, 79 percent of outreach events designed to reach a larger audience were carried out as part of strategic initiatives.
In FY 2023, OFCCP hosted 300 education and outreach events focused on workers’ rights, approximately 58 percent of all outreach events hosted by the agency, exceeding the target of 50 percent.
Nearly 35,000 workers attended these events.
The agency also held listening sessions with a range of stakeholders, including contractors and worker advocates.
In FY 2022, OFCCP and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission launched the Hiring Initiative to Reimagine Equity, a multi-year collaborative effort that engages a broad array of stakeholders to expand access to good jobs for workers from underrepresented communities and help address key hiring and recruiting challenges.
The agencies held public roundtables to explore the barriers in hiring and identify best practices.
The public roundtables focused on hiring barriers for workers with gaps in employment, skills-based hiring, and equity in artificial intelligence.
The agency recovered an additional $22.7 million in salary adjustments for 2,144 affected class members, bringing the total FY 2023 monetary recoveries to $40 million for 16,005 victims of discrimination.
The monetary recoveries that OFCCP secures for victims of discrimination vary based on the type of discrimination and number of affected class members identified through compliance evaluations or complaint investigations.
In FY 2023, the agency settled more aged cases with discrimination findings than in FY 2022, which resulted in nearly double the financial recoveries (from $20.4 million in FY 2022 to $40 million in FY 2023).
The discrimination rate also increased in FY 2023, moving from three percent in FY 2022 to four percent in FY 2023.
OLMS’ investments in expanding the number of forms available electronically, outreach to facilitate electronic filing of union financial reports, and a rule that required electronic filing of the Form LM-3 and LM-4 reports for fiscal years beginning on or after January 1, 2017, led to great progress in transparency.
OLMS made electronic filing mandatory for additional forms in FY 2021 which is reflected in OLMS’ e-filing rate of 97.4 percent in FY 2021, 97.9 percent in FY 2022, and 99.6 percent in FY 2023, up from 58 percent in FY 2017.
This measure has been met with overwhelming success and there is very little room for improvement.
OLMS is retiring this goal but still intends to finalize the electronic filing requirement of the remaining forms that are filed less frequently.
WHD Performance Goal 2.2 – Enforce labor standards and ensure workers in the U.S. are paid the wages they have earned.
WHD is responsible for administering and enforcing laws that establish the minimum standards for wages and working conditions.
WHD enforce and administers the minimum wage, overtime pay, and child labor provisions of the FLSA; the prevailing wage requirements and wage determination provisions of the Davis-Bacon Act and Related Acts, Service Contract Act, Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act, Walsh-Healey Act, and Copeland Act; the wages and working conditions under the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act; the Family and Medical Leave Act; the Employee Polygraph Protection Act; the garnishment provisions of the Consumer Credit Protection Act; and the Labor Value Content requirements of the United States-Mexico-Canada Implementation Act.
WHD also enforces the field sanitation and temporary labor camp standards in agriculture and certain employment standards and worker protections of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
Collectively, these labor standards cover most private, state, and local government employment.
They protect over 165 million of America’s workers in more than 11 million establishments throughout the U.S. and its territories.
WHD carries out its mission to ensure the most vulnerable, marginalized, and underserved workers can fully exercise their workplace rights.
To overcome the challenges posed by the agency’s size relative to the universe of regulated employers, WHD uses strategic initiatives to maximize the impact of its enforcement activities.
The agency’s core values emphasize allocating resources in priority industries employing low-wage workers who are most vulnerable to labor violations.
These workers include individuals from historically marginalized communities and workers overrepresented in certain low-wage jobs—particularly Black workers, women, and immigrants.
These workers also include labor trafficking victims, workers with disabilities who are paid sub-minimum wages under Section 14(c) of the FLSA, and children working in dangerous or exploitative conditions.
WHD uses strategic initiatives to achieve cross-cutting goals in industries that employ workers vulnerable to labor violations.
These goals include advancing equity, identifying and addressing systemic and egregious violations of child labor, addressing the misclassification of workers as independent contractors, protecting workers from retaliation and exploitation, recovering wages for all workers, and cultivating strong stakeholder relationships focused on improving compliance.
Since 2019, WHD investigations have found an 88 percent increase in children being employed in violation of the child labor provisions of the FLSA.
In FY 2023, WHD found that 955 of the employers it investigated had violated child labor laws impacting nearly 5,800 children.
WHD reviews child labor compliance as part of every FLSA investigation, investigates child labor complaints, and conducts agency-initiated child labor investigations.
On February 27, 2023, the Department of Labor announced that it was launching a National Strategic Enforcement Initiative on Child Labor (Strategic Initiative) using data-driven strategies to initiate investigations that are likely to uncover children employed in violation of the child labor provisions of the FLSA, 29 U.S.C. 212(c), and use all of its available enforcement tools, including child labor civil monetary penalty assessments and injunctions stopping the movement of goods made with child labor (hot goods actions), to hold employers accountable for those violations and to deter future violations.
WHD uses a balance of performance measures designed to drive evidencebased strategies in achieving these goals.
The targets promote continuous improvement and, in some cases, stretch goals.
WHD will maintain its commitment to conducting the majority of compliance actions and outreach through strategic initiatives.
Both complaint and agency-initiated compliance actions have the potential for impact, and as such, can advance WHD efforts to improve industry compliance.
WHD defines “impact” in several ways, including cases that: deter violations beyond the investigated employer; address violations that are egregious, willful, and/or persistent; and reach the greatest number of vulnerable workers and workers from underserved communities.
WHD will continue prioritizing outreach events and stakeholder relationships that reach essential workers and underserved communities.
Linking outreach to strategic initiatives has increased the focus on strategic partnerships and their role in improving compliance.
Developing relationships with stakeholders provides critical information for planning and conducting strategic initiatives.
In FY 2023, WHD continued to measure the percent of FLSA compliance actions with a severity score of 30 or more.
The case severity index captures the magnitude and egregiousness of violation findings and indicators of employer culpability.
The measure aims to increase the proportion of high impact cases with significant deterrent effects.
Performance targets for this measure prioritize developing impact cases as a larger share of overall compliance actions.
Increased investments in technology and the WHD workforce provides the needed capacity to develop significant cases, including those involving liquidated damages, civil monetary penalties, and litigation.
WHD has historically focused enforcement on industries that employ some of the lowest paid workers with the highest rates of wage violations.
WHD analysis determined that these same industries employed high percentages of workers of color.
Strong enforcement strategies in these industries are an important tool to advance racial equity and combat poverty.
WHD is working to augment these industry-based, worker-focused strategies by systematically leveraging state and local enforcement power.
WHD is carrying out a systematic analysis of labor standards and worker protection laws at the state and local levels, including the scope of worker protections, the enforcement capacity of state and local partners, and the remedies available.
This analysis will guide development of strategic partnerships and collaborative enforcement strategies to strengthen protection and enforcement in all regions and offices.
Ensuring workers receive the wages they are due is especially important for workers from underserved communities.
Most back wages due to workers are paid directly by the employers to those workers.
However, workers who cannot be located and are owed back wages may be among the most vulnerable workers.
In FY 2022, WHD launched a public service campaign to raise the visibility of the online tool, Workers Owed Wages, which allows workers to search for unclaimed wages.
WHD will continue developing and expanding practices for finding workers and ensuring they receive their back wages.
OFCCP Performance Goal 2.2 – Promote equitable and diverse workplaces for America’s federal contractor employees.
OFCCP is charged with protecting America's workers by enforcing equal employment opportunity obligations of employers that do business with the federal government.
To advance equal employment opportunity, OFCCP conducts enforcement activities, and provides outreach and education, and compliance assistance.
The federal government’s historic investments in the nation’s infrastructure, manufacturing, and technology will increase the number of contractors and projects under OFCCP’s jurisdiction, and OFCCP will play a vital role in ensuring that these investments create good jobs that provide equal opportunity to all.
The agency is strengthening compliance resources, tools, national training, and education and outreach activities.
In FY 2023, OFCCP continued its commitment to tackling long-standing employment practices that create barriers to opportunity and perpetuate inequality in our social and economic systems for underrepresented workers, including workers of color, women, Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer (LGBTQ+) individuals, workers with disabilities, and veterans.
By conducting compliance evaluations of contractors, and addressing complaints, OFCCP works to address systemic barriers to employment opportunity in hiring, compensation, and promotion.
In FY 2023, OFCCP continued its collaboration with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission to expand access to good jobs for workers from underrepresented communities by releasing summary documents of the four HIRE public roundtables held with stakeholders in FY 2022, highlighting promising practices for increasing job opportunities.
In FY 2024, agency compliance evaluations will focus on low-wage industries and industries that received infrastructure funding in FY 2023.
A Supply and Service scheduling list targeting these industries was released in September 2023 and will be worked on throughout FY 2024.
In addition, OFCCP will continue to push for better jobs for women and minorities in the construction industry through Megaprojects that were designated in FY 2023.
OFCCP prioritizes the timely completion of compliance evaluations and has implemented several strategies to close cases more quickly, such as weekly reports, monthly enforcement meetings to discuss cases post desk audit, and the use of a specific approach to more efficiently identify and prioritize cases involving systemic barriers to equal opportunity.
However, cases that involve discrimination are complex and involve multiple parties to reach a resolution.
OFCCP found discrimination in 5 percent of the 898 supply and service compliance evaluations completed in FY 2023, an increase from 3 percent found in FY 2022.
OFCCP began conducting full construction compliance evaluations in FY 2022 Q2 and continued to baseline this measure throughout FY 2023 as there were no closed non-enforcement discrimination cases.
OFCCP rigorously investigates complaints alleging employment discrimination at federal contractor workplaces.
In FY 2023, the agency continued efforts to promote greater awareness among individual workers, worker organizations, and other stakeholders of OFCCP’s complaint process.
FY 2024, OFCCP will implement a pre-complaint process for complaints and will deploy the complaint module in its CMS.
Enabling complaint data directly uploaded, tracked, and reported through CMS in real time will increase efficiency across the agency.
OFCCP will continue to provide language access, plain language resources, and complaint forms with culturally competent translations.
Additionally, OFCCP will address timelines of complaint processing by combining the two existing measures (complaint perfection, investigation) into one measure for better tracking.
In FY 2023, OFCCP continued to build on its commitment to reinvigorate systemic enforcement in the construction industry.
OFCCP conducted full compliance evaluations of federal construction contractors and federally assisted construction contractors and subcontractors, performing desk audits prior to going onsite, and increasing construction worker outreach and contractor compliance assistance.
OFCCP also launched an updated version of the Mega Construction Project Program, to foster equal opportunity on large federal construction projects.
The eligibility for Megaproject designation included a price tag of $35 million or more, multi-year duration, and geographic locations closer to where DOL is leading or is involved with workforce development or other technical assistance programs to accelerate and build capacity.
In FY 2024, OFCCP will expand the Megaproject Program by designating additional BIL and CHIPS Act-funded projects as Megaprojects.
This program allows OFCCP to coordinate with trade organizations, training organizations, pre-apprenticeship and apprenticeship programs, and other stakeholders to increase opportunities for underserved communities on designated Megaprojects.
This program is one of the agency’s most impactful tools to expand access to good jobs and a core component of DOL’s Good Jobs Initiative.
Notes: As separately measuring timeliness of complaint investigations did not yield enough data points for meaningful analysis, OFCCP will be reinstating the Percent of Complaints Processed Within Standard Timeframe measure, which includes investigated complaints along with perfected complaints.
OLMS administers the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959, as amended, and related laws.
These laws primarily establish safeguards for union democracy and union financial integrity and require public disclosure reporting by unions, union officers, union employees, employers, labor relations consultants, and surety companies.
OLMS enforcement activities help protect unions and their members from criminal activities while advancing democratic governing principles.
This mission strengthens unions and builds public confidence in them.
A strong, wellrespected labor movement lifts all workers and is a force for creating equity among diverse communities.
Timely resolution of election complaints accelerates the restoration of a democratic voice and a democratically operated union.
OLMS continues to fine-tune methods for further reducing its elapsed days (the number of days between a union member filing a complaint and its resolution), including the use of a team-based approach for handling election cases when resources permit and early engagement with the Office of the Solicitor (SOL) in cases that may result in litigation.
In FY 2023, however, the average number of days to resolve union officer election complaints rose to 73.7 days, up from 68.8 days in FY 2018.
One factor in this increase was the case volume.
In FY 2023, OLMS completed 126 union democracy investigations which was 45 percent higher than projected.
The complexity of a significant number of the 126 investigations also increased.
Fifteen of the investigations involved national/international elections, where OLMS had planned for six, and 22 were intermediate bodies where OLMS had planned for two.
OLMS will maintain the goal of 65 days in FY 2024 and FY 2025.
OLMS will continue to work closely with SOL as well as increase Division of Enforcement staff to provide more initial guidance to field staff and reduce the case resolution time.
Performance targets help OLMS strike a balance between the changes OLMS can make to its processes and outside factors that can affect the resolution of these types of cases, such as cooperation from the unions being investigated or a high volume of cases.
For more than ten years, OLMS has measured the “fallout rate”, the percentage of audits of labor unions that reveal evidence that the labor union has been the victim of fraud or embezzlement.
OLMS’ focus on this measure has enabled staff targeting skills to peak and their improved techniques are now engrained throughout OLMS.
As a result, OLMS is retiring its fallout goal and starting a new CAP goal.
OLMS plans to increase the percentage of violations resolved through voluntary compliance during CAP.
This will increase interactions with the unions, improve customer relations, and reduce administrative time from unnecessarily opening and tracking violations under other programs.
OLMS has established an FY 2024 target of 73 percent of violations resolved through voluntary compliance.
OLMS seeks to increase disclosure of employer efforts to persuade workers on how to exercise their rights to organize and collectively bargain.
OLMS also seeks to increase disclosure of expenditures by employers who surveil and gather information about employees in connection with a labor dispute, as well as expenditures to cause employees to persuade other employees about their labor rights.
Disclosure of employer activities that constitute “unfair labor practices” is also a priority.
In FY 2024 and FY 2025, OLMS will conduct targeted compliance assistance and investigations to better ensure compliance with these reporting obligations.
OLMS’ efforts to empower workers and their unions require that OLMS operations and the data it collects be accurately maintained and presented in its full context.
OLMS continued to improve its web site, conduct outreach to stakeholders, engage with the public on matters linking the labor movement to social and economic advancement, and coordinate with other federal agencies.
In addition, OLMS created a Labor-Management Partnership Coordinator position to promote the public’s understanding of the benefits to workers and employers of labor-management cooperation through collective bargaining.
Improve the security of retirement, health, and other workplace-related benefits for America’s workers and their families.
Workers must be confident in their retirement and health benefit plans.
EBSA’s mission is to ensure the security of the retirement, health, and other workplace related benefits of America’s workers and their families.
The agency’s enforcement program uses a wide variety of approaches to accomplish its mission, such as voluntary compliance programs, civil and criminal litigation, regulations and guidance, and research-based analysis.
The economic research program informs EBSA’s regulatory and enforcement work and provides important information about benefit plans to the public and policymakers.
EBSA is responsible for protecting more than 153 million of America’s workers, retirees, and their families, who are covered by approximately 765,000 private retirement plans, 2.8 million health plans, and 619,000 welfare benefit plans.
Together, these plans hold estimated assets of $12.8 trillion.
Findings for this objective were grouped into two themes: Strategic Enforcement and Advancing Equity and Enforcement Capacity.
EBSA saw progress in new major case metrics as it shifted emphasis to priority investigations.
EBSA identified challenges in meeting performance targets and equity efforts.
EBSA continued to carefully monitor civil and criminal case inventories and report on any problems with meeting its timeliness measures.
EBSA’s goals were to encourage timely investigations within current constraints and ensure that valuable cases were not inappropriately closed early to avoid missing timeliness targets.
In FY 2023, the agency’s timeliness measure results were close to or above target and similar to FY 2022.
In both years, EBSA fell shy of the 30-month target of 86 percent with 80 percent of cases being referred for litigation or closed within 30 months of case opening (excluding all cases designated as major cases).
For the 18-month target of 76 percent, EBSA met the goal in FY 2022 with a result of 76 percent and exceeded the goal in FY 2023, with 78 percent of cases being referred or closed within 18 months of case opening (excluding all cases designated as major cases).
Similarly, for the 18-month criminal goal of 87 percent, EBSA exceeded it at 98 percent in FY 2022 and 99 percent in 2023.
EBSA’s Case Development Report provides investigators with summaries of current targeting projects as well as tools and techniques to identify cases for investigation.
In FY 2023, EBSA obtained 352 significant non-monetary corrections as compared to 402 non-monetary corrections in FY 2022.
In recent years, EBSA has expanded its use of internal and external data sources to more effectively allocate resources.
EBSA will also continue to focus on statistical sampling and data analysis, development and improvement of data analysis tools, and associated training programs.
As provided for in SECURE 2.0, EBSA will continue to work with the Department of the Treasury, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, and other interested parties to implement components of the law, which covers a wide range of retirement-focused issues during 2024 calendar year.
The agency developed a list of regulatory priorities and a strategy for the 2023 calendar year.
Providing quality customer service is a primary goal of EBSA’s participant assistance program.
Benefits Advisors closed 197,173 inquiries and recovered $444.1 million on behalf of 41,250 participants through informal dispute resolution and by connecting people with their pension and health benefits.
EBSA measures the quality of these interactions through various tools, including a customer satisfaction survey.
Overall customer satisfaction scores in FY 2023 were 78 percent, compared to 75 percent in FY 2022.
The agency uses an independent polling organization to provide an objective check on the quality of EBSA’s interactions with the public.
EBSA continued to develop the foundation for a robust call monitoring program that directly evaluates the quality and accuracy of the participant assistance program.
EBSA finalized an evaluation instrument to review incoming calls of Benefits Advisors’ interactions with the inquirers for technical accuracy, effective and plain language communication, accuracy of legal research, and appropriate documentation of the conversation in the EBSA Management System database.
In FY 2023, the program was fully implemented, and 17,532 calls were reviewed.
In FY 2023, EBSA conducted 2,152 outreach events, reaching 55,854 individuals.
In addition to those efforts, EBSA reached hundreds of thousands of people through radio, TV, and other interviews.
At one of the largest regional media events, a Benefits Advisor (BA) appeared as a guest on a television program called "OC Health & Education,” which is sponsored by the non-profit Orange County Autism Foundation.
The BA was interviewed in Vietnamese and English to discuss EBSA's mission, the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA), and laws.
The broadcast, which focused on issues of community interest such as healthcare concerns and workplace benefits, was aired to an approximate audience of 250,000.
In support of President Biden’s Executive Order 13985, EBSA allocated significant resources to reaching underserved populations.
A cross regional group of Benefits Advisors worked to develop additional best outreach practices, establish new contacts to better reach underserved populations, and plan and conduct outreach events to meet EBSA’s new outreach targets to underserved populations.
EBSA reached 33,036 individuals at 907 events targeted toward underserved communities.
In FY 2023, EBSA also continued to assist employers (particularly small employers), plan sponsors, and their service providers in understanding and complying with their obligations under ERISA and related regulations and procedures.
In FY 2023, 10,399 individuals attended the 356 compliance events EBSA conducted in FY 2023 (against a target of 272).
7 national webcasts partnering with the underserved (target 5).
Additionally, EBSA conducted hundreds of participant assistance activities to educate affected workers about options to protect their retirement and health benefits when facing job loss.
In FY 2023, EBSA's total audience at participant assistance events was 37,054 individuals, of which 19,154 were attendees at a Dislocated Worker event.
103 Retirement Savings and Health events in non-English (target 23).
EBSA increasingly devoted resources to insolvent or fraudulent multiple employer welfare arrangements (MEWAs).
Troubled MEWAs saddle employees with unpaid claims and health benefits.
EBSA is committed to monitoring MEWA solvency through internal tracking and working with state partners to target problematic MEWAs early.
In FY 2023, EBSA reviewed the work of Certified Public Accountant firms that audited $203.5 billion in plan assets impacting 3.92 million participants.
EBSA continues its activities to establish a methodology to measure its equity efforts and its impacts on outcomes for the communities they serve.
EBSA Performance Goal 2.3 – Improve the security of retirement, health, and other workplace-related benefits for America’s workers and their families.
To accomplish its mission, EBSA uses a comprehensive, integrated approach that includes programs for enforcement, compliance assistance, interpretive guidance, regulations, and research.
EBSA’s enforcement program detects and corrects violations, which results in monetary recoveries for employee benefit plans, participants, and beneficiaries or other corrective remedies, including significant reforms for large plans or common service providers.
In FY 2023, the agency recovered over $1.4 billion in direct payment to plans, participants, and beneficiaries.
Several of EBSA’s existing national enforcement projects directly influence underserved communities.
These projects include Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act (MHPAEA) enforcement and the Protecting Benefits Distribution project, which covers the Terminated Vested Participant Program (TVPP), abandoned plans, and financially distressed sponsors.
These programs have a built-in focus on underserved individuals and communities, including vulnerable elderly populations and individuals struggling with mental health and substance use issues.
For example, under the TVPP project in FY 2023, EBSA targeted defined benefit plans in industries with high percentages of foreign-born workers to determine if they have disproportionate incidents of missing participants.
While EBSA has improved outreach to underserved communities through multiple efforts, there is an opportunity to improve data to capture the impact of enforcement on those communities and ensure adequate targeting.
In FY 2023, EBSA concentrated a significant portion of its enforcement resources on the Major Case Enforcement Priority, which focuses on cases likely to have the greatest impact.
EBSA used metrics to evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of investigative time and based its enforcement measure targets on careful consideration of historical data, due to the volatility of Major Case results from year to year.
Just over half of EBSA’s enforcement recoveries came from a single initiative, the TVPP, though recoveries declined overall.
TVPP cases obtained unusually large recoveries for participants and beneficiaries while expending minimal investigative resources.
However, this program’s outsized results skew the enforcement program’s totals.
These recoveries will continue to decline over the next few years as plan fiduciaries and sponsors improve their recordkeeping and notification practices with respect to “missing” terminated vested participants and as EBSA increasingly directs its limited enforcement resources to other violation categories.
Even with this change in emphasis, however, the agency continues to recover tens of thousands of dollars per investigator per day on the Major Case Program, an extraordinary return on taxpayer investment in ERISA enforcement.
Considering these factors, in FY 2023, EBSA adjusted its monetary recovery performance measures to reflect the decision to deemphasize – but not eliminate – TVPP investigations and to shift emphasis toward health investigations and, in particular, MHPAEA and other matters related to the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (CAA).
The revised metrics focus separately on results based on the amount of staff days devoted to each area so that, regardless of policy and legislative choices beyond EBSA’s control, it will be able to focus on efficiencies and results within each area.
In FY 2023, EBSA used the new enforcement tools added in ERISA Section 712(a)(8) by the CAA and requested comparative analyses for 17 unique non-quantitative treatment limitations (NQTLs).
These requests were in addition to the continuing investigations on over 200 previously requested comparative analyses from prior fiscal years.
EBSA currently has 96 open NQTL investigations.
As a direct result of EBSA’s increased NQTL enforcement work, plans and issuers have made corrections that impact over 39,000 employee benefit plans and over 4 million participants.
EBSA’s NQTL enforcement program has paid special attention to NQTL issues with wide impact, such as inadequate networks that are barriers to finding care, and illegal exclusions of key mental health or substance use disorder (MH/SUD) treatments, such as medication-assisted treatment for opioid use disorder and applied behavioral analysis for autism spectrum disorder.
EBSA often works directly with service providers to remove an impermissible NQTL and expand MH/SUD coverage, affecting hundreds of plans at once.
EBSA has recognized the need to place greater resources into ensuring health plans comply with MHPAEA, the No Surprises Act, the Public Law 116-260 transparency provisions, and other ERISA group health plan provisions.
With supplemental funding provided under the CAA (which sunsets in FY 2024), EBSA will continue to employ resources to audit plans and issuers for NQTLs that fail to comply with MHPAEA.
Given the high level of non-compliance identified during initial enforcement efforts, EBSA anticipates additional funding will be required to continue its MHPAEA enforcement presence and investigative efforts.
ILAB safeguards dignity at work, both at home and abroad – by strengthening global labor standards; enforcing labor commitments among trading partners; promoting racial and gender equity; and combating international child labor, forced labor, and human trafficking.
ILAB accomplishes this goal through trade enforcement, policy engagement, technical assistance, and research and reporting.
ILAB’s approach is validated by independent research from the United States International Trade Commission (2016) and the Inter-American Development Bank (2014) suggesting that including labor obligations in trade agreements leads to better labor laws and enforcement efforts in trade partner countries.
ILAB’s efforts position the United States as a leader on international labor rights by demonstrating the U.S. commitment to work with governments, workers, unions, employers and business organizations, civil society organizations, and other actors to achieve its mission.
Taken together, these activities support U.S. Government efforts to advance equity on all fronts, particularly in countries where vulnerable and marginalized populations are most susceptible to exploitative labor conditions.
By addressing exploitative labor conditions and advancing equity in key countries, ILAB supports efforts to combat poverty and structural racism in underserved and marginalized communities.
Findings for this objective are grouped into three themes: Equity; Implementing the President’s Trade Agenda; and Policy Documents and Published Reports.
Evidence of progress includes the United States – Mexico – Canada Agreement (USMCA) implementation, publication of international policy documents reflecting U.S. labor interests and economic research products and progress combatting child labor and forced labor.
Challenges were identified in the USMCA funding.
ILAB’s supplemental appropriation for technical assistance will expire on December 31, 2023.
ILAB has prioritized small businesses for contracts.
For the beneficiaries of cooperative agreements and cost increases, ILAB has targeted the most vulnerable populations including Indigenous populations, domestic workers, migrant workers, and populations who historically have been subjected to violence, abuse, and discrimination.
In FY 2022, ILAB measured its focus on equity by tracking the percent of newly awarded cooperative agreements, cost increases4F5, and professional service contracts that incorporate an equity lens.
In FY 2023, the result for this measure was 69 percent, exceeding the target by one percentage point.
In cooperation with the United States Trade Representative, ILAB continued to have success implementing the labor provisions of the USMCA in FY 2023.
DOL received 564 hotline tips, of which 36 resulted in investigations.
Additionally, eight Rapid Response Labor Mechanism petitions resulted in remedial action, and one petition went to a panel for decision.
ILAB will fully obligate USMCA technical assistance funding by December 31, 2023, when the funding expires.
This will impact ILAB’s technical assistance levels in support of implementation of USMCA labor provisions and Mexico’s labor law reform.
In FY 2023, ILAB’s result of 87 percent exceeded its target of 82 percent for the percent of high-engagement trading partner countries or multilateral institutions that implement actions to improve protection of labor rights, including through law or enforcement.
Of the 33 high-engagement trade partner countries that took action in FY 2023, 26 countries supported the elimination of child labor and forced labor, 22 countries supported freedom of association and collective bargaining, 25 countries supported the improvement of acceptable conditions of work, and 18 countries supported the elimination of discrimination in employment.
In FY 2023, ILAB exceeded its technical assistance target by supporting and overseeing 83 active technical assistance interventions in 52 countries and conducted oversight for 100 percent of these projects.
In FY 2023, ILAB exceeded its target for the number of trade partner countries in which labor rights, including child labor and forced labor, are systematically monitored and analyzed with a result of 154 countries against a target of 147.
For FY 2023, ILAB exceeded the number of economic research products (target 25; result 34).
The Trade and Development Act Report included more than 2,000 suggested actions for countries to take to eliminate child labor, of which almost 1,400 focus on the need to strengthen laws and enforcement.
ILAB also launched a new interactive web format for Comply Chain to equip businesses of all sizes to tackle child labor and forced labor in their supply chains.
It provides a practical, step-by-step guide on critical elements of an integrated worker-driven social compliance system and new visual guides on global legal compliance, responsible recruitment, auditing for child labor, and other business and human rights challenges.
In addition, ILAB enhanced its Sweat & Toil smartphone app to includes data visualizations that allow users to identify goods produced by child labor or forced labor by region or sector, explore regional trends, labor inspectorate capacity, and display the sectoral distribution of child labor in countries where this information is available.
ILAB also updated its Better Trade Tool to include enhanced search capabilities and updated U.S. import data from 2022, and a new global data dashboard that highlights the risk of child labor and forced labor in global supply chains.
Furthermore, ILAB contracted with ICF and Penn State to identify the most effective methods for promoting worker voice through policy interventions and technical assistance programs under the Multilateral Partnership for Organizing, Worker Empowerment, and Rights (M-POWER) initiative.
ILAB Performance Goal 2.4 – Strengthen labor rights, improve working conditions, promote racial and gender equity, and empower workers around the world.
ILAB safeguards dignity at work, both at home and abroad – by strengthening global labor standards, enforcing labor commitments among trading partners, promoting racial and gender equity, and combating international child labor, forced labor, and human trafficking.
When other countries do not comply with internationally recognized workers’ rights in violation of their trade-related labor commitments, they gain an unfair advantage that harms American workers and businesses.
ILAB uses the leverage, resources, and voice of the U.S. government to empower workers and strengthen labor rights globally and positions the United States as a leader on international labor rights.
In FY 2023, ILAB implemented the President’s Trade Agenda by monitoring and enforcing the labor provisions of the USMCA Free Trade Agreement in Mexico and labor obligations in other free trade agreements and preference programs.
ILAB expanded its efforts to combat the use of child labor and forced labor in global supply chains by implementing targeted studies to identify downstream goods produced with child labor and forced labor in key mining and agriculture supply chains and launching tracing pilots in cotton and garment supply chains.
ILAB leveraged labor attachés in key trade partner countries and other strategic locations to expand its monitoring and enforcement of labor commitments and promote workers’ rights.
ILAB worked with interagency partners to implement the Root Causes Strategy, Collaborative Migration Management Strategy, and the Central America Forward Initiative in Northern Central America.
ILAB continued efforts to strengthen worker voice around the world, and promoted worker protections, including occupational safety and health and social protections, and expanded the U.S. Government’s presence at international and intergovernmental organizations.
Finally, ILAB integrated equity, inclusion, and worker voice into policies, programming, research, technical assistance, and contracting.
In FY 2024 and FY 2025, ILAB will take further steps to integrate worker voice and equity and inclusion concerns into its technical assistance program design and implementation.
In FY 2023, ILAB continued to promote worker voice with international partners, provide targeted technical assistance in countries where governments and other actors have demonstrated the political will to improve labor rights, and elevate labor diplomacy.
ILAB played a leading role in regional and international organizations to promote equity and inclusion in employment, as well as promote core labor standards, including occupational safety and health.
ILAB continued strengthening worker voice through leadership of the M-POWER and working to establish an independent secretariat for M-POWER, ensuring its sustainability and international governance structure.
ILAB also developed new methods and tools to trace child labor and forced labor in global supply chains and build capacity of interagency partners to enhance the U.S. Government’s ability to prevent the importation of goods made with forced labor.
In FY 2024 and FY 2025, ILAB will continue to develop internal research capacity in the core issue of worker protection by exploring how trade impacts employment outcomes of historically marginalized groups, gender and racial equity, and labor market conditions in other countries.
Ensure timely and accurate income support when work is unavailable by strengthening benefits programs and program administration.
America’s economy must have a strong safety net to support unemployed, injured, and ill workers.
ETA’s Unemployment Insurance programs will focus on supporting unemployed workers and employers.
OWCP programs will focus on workers who were injured or became ill on the job.
These programs will leverage evidence-based strategies and strengthen the oversight of new and/or existing programs to accelerate delivery of benefits, reemployment, and return-to-work outcomes for workers.
The Department will also address inequity to underserved communities by identifying and mitigating delays and obstacles that impede claimants’ abilities to receive assistance.
The Department also plans to encourage and provide technical assistance support for state investment in modular solutions to improve information technology systems over the next several years.
Findings for this objective were grouped into two themes: Customer Experience and Equity; and Performance.
Evidence of progress included OWCP’s efforts around program performance, customer service, and equity.
Challenges were identified in managing high Unemployment Insurance claims workload in conjunction with the implementation of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act programs.
ETA: Managing High Claims Workload and Making Timely, Equitable, and Accurate Benefit Payments for the UI Regular and CARES Act Programs The residual impacts of record high levels of UI claims during the COVID-19 pandemic, in conjunction with the implementation and operation of the temporary CARES Act UI programs resulted in states’ UI agencies being unable to administer the programs to meet the acceptable levels of performance regarding customer service.
This resulted in greater incidences of improper payments and fraud; challenges in ensuring equitable access; and challenges in ensuring timely delivery of UI benefits to eligible claimants.
To address these shortcomings, the American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) allocated funding5F6 to the Department to “detect and prevent fraud, promote equitable access, and ensure the timely payment of benefits with respect to unemployment compensation (UC) programs.”
The Department is actively supporting projects to achieve these goals.
Additionally, to help states respond to the impacts of the pandemic, ETA’s Office of Unemployment Insurance has and continues to issue comprehensive operating guidance, to deliver technical assistance to states individually and through webinars, toolkits, and consultative engagements, and to provide additional funding opportunities and resources to states.
One specific example involves the Department’s deployment of multidisciplinary technical assistance teams (known as “Tiger Teams”) to 36 states to identify immediate needs and issues.
Teams focused on improvements in customer experiences and improved operational processes, while also making recommendations and proposing solutions to address fraud and support more equitable access for legitimate claimants.
The 36 states are leveraging ARPA grant funds to implement improvement projects based on many of the Tiger Team recommendations.
Another example of action taken included the Department leveraging the insights gained from these state engagements to produce two equity-focused technical assistance resources.
The first is the Equitable Access Toolkit.
This toolkit provides states with actionable solutions for common and emerging issues related to equitable access to UC programs and to develop initiatives and refine strategies towards the goal of promoting equitable access.
The second equity-focused technical assistance tool the Department produced, in coordination with the National Association of State Workforce Agencies, is a self-paced, online Fundamentals of Equitable Access in Unemployment Insurance training.
This training, intended primarily for state UI staff, describes what equitable access is within UC programs and discusses the role of equity in the integrity of all UC programs.
Further, it provides a basic walkthrough of the UI claimant journey to help the learner identify potential barriers and provide states’ staff with strategies to achieve equitable access.
The training is intended to be used as a resource for learners to better understand and identify equitable access barriers as well as promote equitable access to UC programs via actionable solutions to common barriers.
The Reemployment Services and Eligibility Assessments (RESEA) program produced a growing number of evaluation-related technical assistance events, resources, and products to help states build capacity to meet the evidence requirements in the program’s authorizing legislation.
Technical assistance resources included peer sharing events and a designated ‘evidence building week’ for states to hear the latest from RESEA researchers as well as discuss implementation experiences and lessons learned from launching RESEA evaluations.
Additional resources were developed to help states to conduct evaluations of RESEA program components or strategies, understand the common pitfalls of designing casual evaluations, encourage small states to undertake evaluations, utilize sample evaluation requests for proposals, and more7.
Almost all states reported having an evaluation underway as of spring/summer 2023, with a few anticipated to finish their studies over the next year.
With all the evidence building underway, it is anticipated that the evidence base will approximately double over the next five years.
In FY 2023, ETA awarded $329,062,499 in RESEA funding to 52 RESEA states and territories supporting evidence-based strategies and interventions to help UI claimants return to work.
The total will reach approximately $370 million with the inclusion of soon-to-be-awarded outcome payments.
In FY 2023, the Energy program continued its HISP Customer Experience (CX) efforts by submitting quarterly reports, conducting an annual assessment, and developing an Action Plan and Customer Journey Map.
Feedback collection efforts included a series of surveys.
During FY 2023, the program developed five new external surveys (three paper surveys, one event survey, and one web survey), revised the Energy Document Portal (EDP) survey, and translated the existing Resource Center survey into Spanish.
The Energy program’s feedback collection efforts resulted in approximately 3,300 responses from stakeholders.
The program also conducted one-on-one customer phone interviews and a series of customer focus groups.
Additionally, the program developed a new event outreach feedback collection and website survey that was implemented on the Division of Energy Employee Occupational Illness Compensation Spanish Language hub.
Three of the paper surveys included an optional equity assessment that was used to gather feedback to address potential program barriers to services within underserved communities.
These equity assessments were completed by approximately 1,665 stakeholders.
Scores on the equity assessments were generally positive, suggesting that customers felt comfortable talking with the Energy program about the issues they face and felt that they were treated fairly by program employees.
A small percentage of respondents identified that they experienced difficulties or challenges with the program because of their ability or disability status, racial or ethnic identity, age, sex/gender identity, sexual orientation, veteran status, religion, social class, geographic location (remote/ rural), or other.
The most common responses were from those who indicated that they experienced difficulties because of their age or disability status followed by geographic location.
In FY 2023, the Energy program improved claimant and medical provider experience in the following ways: Energy’s Outreach and Customer Experience Unit analyzed all survey results and provided recommendations for programmatic improvement to OWCP leadership throughout the fiscal year.
The program successfully implemented the following recommendations: the development of several claimant-friendly infographics; the revision of the claimant acknowledgement packet; website updates; the launch of a Spanish language hub on the program’s public facing website; the development of additional journey maps; an enhancement in EDP that allowed for larger file uploads; several webinars focused on topics requested by survey respondents; and changes to event formats to better serve Energy Program claimants.
The Energy program also conducted at least 20 percent of its outreach efforts towards identified underserved communities, including many rural communities.
The program held eight in-person outreach events that were within or near underserved communities, with three of these eight locations (Pahrump, Nevada; Shiprock, New Mexico; and Kayenta, Arizona) also being rural communities.
These events were attended by a total of 1,157 stakeholders.
In FY 2022, the Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA) and Longshore programs updated the OWCP Employees' Compensation Operations and Management Portal (ECOMP) to provide non-binary gender options for FECA program filing forms, to collect voluntary demographic information from claimants, and to allow claimants to complete a filing barrier customer service survey.
In FY 2023, the programs took action based on the survey results and increased outreach to large federal employee unions and local longshore-related unions, as well as updating the FECA and Longshore websites to more prominently display the link to ECOMP case access and claim filing.
The Energy and Black Lung programs coordinated an interagency, cross governmental working group co-lead by the Energy program and DOL’s MSHA, that served Native Nations and Tribes.
Additional partners include the Department of Justice; OWCP’s Black Lung program; National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health; Department of Health and Human Services’ Health Resources and Services Administration; Indian Health Services; Veterans Administration; Department of Defense; Equal Employment Opportunity Commission; Environmental Protection Agency; and more.
The working group shares best practices, and plans and coordinates outreach activities supporting Native American, Indigenous, tribal communities and/or those residing on Native American reservations with the goal of increasing transparency, translation, and readability of federa information.
The Black Lung program conducted census tract research to identify potentially underserved communities of coal miners and identified communities in Wyoming, Alabama, Indiana, and Illinois and held outreach and engagement events in these states.
It conducted initial CX surveys to determine key concerns claimants may have with the quality of program services, identify pain points and barriers, positive points, and promote the use of the Claimant Online Access Link Portal.
The program also began the process of updating its claim forms to improve overall usability by simplifying the formatting, language, and questions.
The Black Lung and Energy programs also began developing a new form for the voluntary collection of demographic data to better understand the stakeholder community.
Since the pandemic began in the U.S. in early 2020, UI claims rose exponentially, totaling 89.4 million initial claims from mid-March 2020 through the end of September 2021.
As a result, states experienced significant backlogs in adjudications and appeals, and reductions in core program performance.
Increasing the first payment timeliness rate and reducing the improper payment rate are focuses of a DOL Agency Priority Goal.
In FY 2023, states made major progress in improving program performance.
First payment timeliness significantly improved from 61.2 percent in FY 2022 to 69.1 percent in FY 2023, exceeding the target of 66.4 percent.
However, the FY 2023 result is still below the established Acceptable Level of Performance (ALP) of 87 percent.
The pre-pandemic peak for this measure was 85.8 percent in FY 2019.
The lower authority appeals promptness fell sharply from the pre-pandemic peak of 90.1 percent in FY 2019 to 33.4 percent in FY 2023 (although it is an increase from the FY 2022 result of 22.1 percent and is exceeded the FY 2023 target).
The UI improper payment rate improved to 16.47 percent in the twelve months ending June 30, 2023, exceeding the target of 17.50 percent.
For 2023, the Department reported a total of over $4.6 billion in estimated improper payments (which includes unknown payments) for the regular UI, extended benefits, Pandemic Emergency Unemployment Compensation, and Federal Pandemic Unemployment Compensation programs on paymentaccuracy.gov.
The FY 2023 result for detection of recoverable overpayments was 87.81 percent, significantly exceeding the FY 2023 target.
In FY 2023, the FECA program met its improper payment target rate of 3.25 percent.
If OWCP is unable to obtain timely and accurate benefit amounts from the Social Security Administration (SSA) (with and without federal earnings), then the Department will not be able to accurately and timely offset benefit payments for FECA claimants.
In FY 2023, the FECA program published Bulletin 23-01 which utilizes a matching report from Treasury’s Do Not Pay program based on social security number for claimants in receipt of SSA benefits and uses this report to identify cases in possible receipt of dual benefits, and then automates the requests for calculations (without Claims Examiner involvement).
The FECA program continued to assist agencies to improve the federal government’s performance in timely filing worker’s compensation and wageloss claims, as well as the return to work of injured employees, to record high levels.
The Energy program conducted more robust quality and accuracy reviews of the claim adjudication process by enhancing supervisory sampling and quality assurance reviews, both of which were tracked in the Accountability Review Tracking System (ARTS).
The Black Lung program’s focus on measures within the control of claims staff incentivized efficient claims processing.
OWCP enhanced performance by utilizing a data visualization dashboard for real time performance monitoring.
The Longshore program rolled out several outreach initiatives to inform stakeholders of the importance of timely filing and the consequences for failure to timely file the reports of injury.
In FY 2023, OWCP published a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking that focuses on the process used to assess civil penalties to entities that fail to report worker injuries accurately and timely.
The changes will help clarify the process, provide individualized failure notices, and allow additional opportunities to contest penalties.
The proposal also enhances procedures for contesting OWCP’s penalty determinations by protecting the rights of employers and insurance carriers to challenge agency actions before final penalties are set, ensuring transparency and fairness in the enforcement process.
In addition, the changes will establish clear guidelines for penalty assessments to improve OWCP’s ability to enforce penalties that can withstand legal challenges.
OWCP Performance Goal 3.1 – Increase the efficiency and accuracy with which OWCP provides workers’ compensation benefits for certain qualified workers who are injured or become ill on the job and improve return-to-work outcomes for injured workers.
The role of OWCP is to provide workers’ compensation benefits for workers injured or ill on the job.
OWCP implements four statutory federal workers’ compensation programs that provide monetary, medical, and return-to-work benefits for work-related injuries and illnesses including, but not limited to federal employees, coal mine workers, nuclear weapons workers, longshore and harbor workers, contractors serving overseas, and certain other designated employee groups.
The agency adjudicates claims, administers the benefit funds authorized for these purposes, and provides oversight of claims resolutions by responsible parties.
The FECA program continued to ensure that the workforce receives timely benefits through a modern and efficient workers' compensation system, and work with agencies across the federal government to meet their individualized performance targets.
In FY 2023, the rate of return-to-work outcomes was 79.02 percent for injured federal workers during the initial 45-day post-injury period for traumatic injuries, exceeding the target of 69.81 percent and significantly improving upon the government’s FY 2020 baseline performance.
In FY 2022, the Black Lung program began tracking a new performance measure, “Percent of Black Lung claims pending at the start of the fiscal year that are resolved by the end of the fiscal year,” to better manage the pending claims inventory.
In FY 2023, the program exceeded the target of 87 percent by issuing decisions on 92 percent of claims pending at the beginning of the fiscal year.
Additionally, the program built on performance over the past four years and in FY 2023, completed Proposed Decision and Orders following completion of all claim development for all Responsible Operator Merit Claims within 22 days, exceeding the target of 32 days.
In FY 2023, the Black Lung program made efforts to reduce improper payments by reviewing and analyzing medical bills, Do Not Pay matching, and routine audits, and will continue those efforts in FY 2024 and FY 2025.
The Energy program’s unit of quality assurance analysts continued the review of quality of individual cases throughout the year, formalized a process for reviewing quality reports quarterly, and implemented corrective actions where appropriate.
The quality assurance analysts also added a new category for review to assess letter decisions of acceptance.
In FY 2023, 96.01 precent of sampled Part B and Part E initial claims were rated as being accurate, exceeding the target of 90.50 percent.
The Longshore program continued to build upon successful past performance in FY 2023.
The Longshore program received 93.5 percent of First Reports of Injury for non-Defense Base Act cases within 20 days, exceeding the target of 92.5 percent.
In FY 2024 and FY 2025, the program will build on this success continuing outreach activities on the importance of timely filing and encouraging the use of electronic submissions.
OWCP commenced an agency-wide effort to increase claimants’ access to medical care by expanding the availability of medical providers enrolled with OWCP to provide them care.
In FY 2023, these efforts resulted in an 18 percent increase in the number of providers enrolled to treat OWCP claimants.
This was accomplished by engaging medical provider focus groups to discuss barriers in OWCP’s medical provider enrollment and billing and authorization process.
Pain points identified and addressed in this process included: reducing enrollment barriers, moving away from custom processes and toward industry standards, enhancing provider support, and simplifying the authorization process.
OWCP will build on this success in FY 2024 and FY 2025.
OWCP continues to support the Department’s efforts to improve its customers’ experience and enhance service delivery.
In FY 2024, the Energy program will continue to expand the EDP, adding the ability for claimants to complete, electronically sign, and submit the Claim for Additional Wage-Loss and/or Impairment Benefits (EN-10), Impairment Benefits Response Form (EN-11A), and Wage-Loss Benefits Response Form (EN-11B) that currently require wet signatures; and the Black Lung program will implement electronic signatures for the submission of Black Lung claim forms, which will allow claimants to submit claims through the Claimant Online Access Link Mine Electronic Document Submission Portal.
The Longshore and FECA programs will continue to utilize its customer service surveys in ECOMP, analyze the results, and take actions in response.
The programs will also evaluate additional point-in-time customer service surveys to expand the amount of direct and ongoing input it receives.
Additionally, OWCP finalized DEIA requirements in its solicitation for Medical Provider Network/Medical Bill Processing services.
These requirements will advance equity by ensuring that services provided by OWCP’s contractors promote a diverse pool of medical service providers; adopt equitable policies and practices when engaging with hiring and/or subcontracting for medical service providers; and identify and remove barriers that underserved communities and individuals may face in accessing medical services under OWCP programs.
OWCP will publish the solicitation for Medical Provider Network/Medical Bill Processing services, which will include these new DEIA requirements, in FY 2024.
In FY 2024, OWCP and DOL’s Office of the Chief Information Officer will continue to work with SSA on a completely automated data exchange process to minimize overpayments and the financial burden on claimants.
ETA Performance Goal 3.1 – Support states’ timely and accurate benefit payments for unemployed workers.
The federal-state UI program, authorized under the Federal Unemployment Tax Act and Title III of the Social Security Act, provides temporary, partial wage replacement for unemployed workers, providing them with income support when suitable work is unavailable.
To be eligible for benefits, unemployed workers must meet eligibility requirements established by state laws that conform to federal law, including that they are involuntarily unemployed, and are able to work, available for work, and actively seeking work.
The federal role is to set broad policy for the program; establish performance measures and standards; provide technical assistance and training to states; monitor state performance; promote conformity and compliance of state laws and operations with federal law; and fund the administration of state and federal UI programs.
In FY 2023, the residual impacts of the surge in claims experienced by states during the pandemic and the activities associated with winding down the temporary CARES Act programs continued to impact UI program performance.
ETA continued to support states as they began to make progress in improving program performance.
In FY 2023, first payment timeliness increased to 69.1 percent and exceeded the FY 2023 target of 66.4 percent.
Lower authority appeals promptness increased to 33.4 percent exceeding the FY 2023 target of 30.0 percent.
However, the results for both measures remain below the ALP for each measure that states are expected to meet.
The ALP for first payment timeliness is 87 percent and for lower authority appeals promptness is 60 percent.
Additionally, in FY 2023, states made significant progress reducing the UI improper payment rate to 16.47 percent (in the twelve months ending June 30, 2023).
While claims volume returned to pre-pandemic levels in FY 2023, states continued to address ongoing fallout of the unprecedented increase in claims activity experienced in the prior two years.
During the past two years, the Department has pursued its Tiger Team initiative.
In FY 2024, ETA will focus on supporting states with their implementation of many Tiger Team recommendations.
Also, in FY 2024, ETA targets for first payment timeliness and lower authority appeals promptness are 70.25 percent and 45.0 percent, respectively.
The target of 15.00 percent for improper payments is above the statutory goal of less than 10 percent7F8 but still below the program’s most recent performance level.
In the wake of the sophisticated and organized fraud attacks that plagued the UI system during the pandemic (and continue to do so), states have increased their anti-fraud activities.
ETA continues to work with the UI Integrity Center (a joint federal and state initiative focusing on the prevention, detection, and recovery of improper payments, fraud, and delinquent employer contributions) and to leverage resources provided under ARPA9 to provide technology, tools, training, technical assistance, and grants to states.
These activities focus on preventing and detecting fraud, promoting equitable access, and ensuring the timely payment of benefits.
The Department has also promoted increased functionality and state usage of the resources offered by the Department-funded UI Integrity Center (which is operated by the National Association of State Workforce Agencies), including the UI Integrity Data Hub.
States have significantly increased their participation and use of this tool.
In December 2020, ETA announced a new reemployment measure - Reemployment Rate in the 2nd Quarter after Program Exit Quarter for RESEA Participants (Unemployment Insurance).
During FY 2023, ETA developed and tested several regression-based models to identify appropriate performance targets.
The testing and development of these models were delayed because the required outcome data inherently lags a few quarters, and it was necessary to capture several quarters of data not influenced by the pandemic.
In FY 2024, ETA will select the final model and implement the new measure to be tracked and monitored in FY 2025.
While states mobilized quickly to implement new temporary pandemic-related UI programs, several major challenges were identified in the UI system as a result of the system’s experience during the pandemic.
After years of low administrative funding and reductions in staff, at the height of the pandemic, states were poorly positioned to address the economic emergency that struck the globe and to provide quality services to the extraordinary numbers of claimants filing for unemployment compensation.
In addition, states struggled to program their UI systems and implement the new temporary UI programs.
These challenges compounded the hardships to hard-working eligible Americans that depended on the UI system to provide financial support in their time of need.
Despite the challenges facing states, over the course of the pandemic, the UI system provided support to over 55 million workers, adding over $850 billion into states’ economies.
In FY 2023, ETA awarded $329,062,499 in RESEA funding to 52 RESEA states and territories supporting evidence-based strategies and interventions to help UI claimants return to work.
The total will reach approximately $370 million with the inclusion of soon-to-be-awarded outcome payments.
In FY 2024, ETA will continue to provide funding to states for the RESEA program operations, including outcome-based payments, develop a UI-based RESEA performance measure, and enhance its capacity to support the program.
Provide timely, accurate, and relevant information on labor market activity, working conditions, price changes, and productivity in the U.S. economy.
BLS supports public and private decision making by publishing measures of labor market activity, working conditions, price changes, and productivity in the U.S. economy.
Hiring and maintaining a professional, highly-skilled workforce and being good stewards of the taxpayers’ money.
Findings for this objective were grouped into three themes: Building Our Team; Ensuring Equity Through Accessibility; and BLS Products.
Evidence of progress included outreach to underserved communities with respect to limited English proficiency workers, efforts to improve workforce talent and diversity, and program performance.
Challenges were identified with securing the necessary funding to continue the development of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth new cohort to its full capacity.
In FY 2023, BLS continued to actively participate in recruitment activities such as outreach to targeted college campuses, speaker engagements, classroom visits, and career fair opportunities.
Also, BLS continued to identify and disseminate job opportunities to a diverse list of organizations.
Other activities included supporting a hybrid work environment for the BLS National Office, fostering an innovation culture, supporting training and development programs, providing speed mentoring to staff, and sharing information on free training and other career development opportunities.
In FY 2023, BLS ensured that its data were available on its website.
The BLS public website was available for data dissemination 99.90 percent of the time.
BLS also strives to ensure that customers are satisfied with their ability to access material on the website.
However, tracking of the BLS customer satisfaction measure was on hold in FY 2023.
In FY 2024, BLS anticipates selecting a replacement for this measure, establishing a baseline result, and setting future targets accordingly.
In FY 2023, in support of the Department’s priorities, BLS identified vital documents for translation efforts in FY 2024, including 15 occupational profiles that may provide LEP populations with an entry point into the American workforce and an article on resume writing.
BLS also developed an outreach and engagement strategy to better serve LEP workers, which included detailing its audience segmentation strategy and the outreach vehicles it intends to use to promote the translated materials.
Additionally, BLS engaged in several activities to support the Department’s DEIA Strategic Plan including maximizing recruitment efforts, increasing leadership and training opportunities, and institutionalizing DEIA in performance plans.
On average, BLS publishes over 2 million series, indexes, and other data products across its programs annually.
In FY 2023, BLS data series, along with other information on the website, were viewed on the BLS website over 17 million times on average per month.
BLS produces various estimates and indexes, including the Consumer Price Index (CPI), which is the nation’s principal gauge of inflation, and the Employment Situation, which includes Current Employment Statistics, a survey that measures employment, hours, and earnings by industry and geography from the payroll records of employers.
In FY 2023, BLS substantially achieved its objective of producing timely, accurate, and relevant data for its Principal Federal Economic Indicators (PFEIs), with an improvement over FY 2022 to the result for the Percentage of relevance targets achieved for the PFEIs.
BLS regularly evaluates and adjusts its outyear targets accordingly in response to changing conditions.
In FY 2023, BLS worked with additional states to develop Demonstration Projects that use Wage records and UI claims files, and other administrative records that include demographic information, to identify available data sources that can be matched with existing employment statistics to produce greater demographic detail.
By linking BLS data with state administrative records, states produced additional labor market information with expanded demographics that highlight equity issues.
BLS worked with Michigan, Oregon, and Washington to showcase their products at national and regional forums and encourage other states to submit proposals and to participate in the LMI modernization effort.
In FY 2024, BLS will continue to work with state partners to build the state LMI office capacity, with a focus on the Southeast region states to explore strategies for improving conditions for workers in the Southeast.
BLS Performance Goal 4.1 – Provide timely, accurate, and relevant information on labor market activity, working conditions, price changes, and productivity in the U.S. economy.
BLS is the principal federal statistical agency responsible for measuring labor market activity, working conditions, price changes, and productivity in the economy.
Its mission is to collect, analyze, and disseminate some of the nation’s most sensitive and important economic data to support public and private decision-making.
BLS executes its mission with independence from partisan interests while protecting the confidentiality of data providers and strives to meet the needs of a diverse set of customers for accurate, objective, relevant, timely, and accessible information and analysis.
BLS serves the public, the U.S. Congress, DOL and other federal agencies, state and local governments, and business and labor.
Policies and decisions based on BLS data affect virtually all Americans, and the wide range of BLS data products is necessary to fulfill the diverse needs of a broad customer base.
BLS is committed to maintaining the highest level of scientific integrity in producing official statistics.
BLS complies with the Statistical Policy Directives and the Standards and Information Quality Guidelines from OMB, as well as the National Research Council’s Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency.
Together, these form the foundation for achieving and maintaining scientific integrity within and among the principal statistical agencies.
BLS conforms to the conceptual framework of the Interagency Council on Statistical Policy’s quality dimensions.
BLS also measures the timeliness, accuracy, and relevance of its PFEIs and accessibility of and customer satisfaction with its statistical products.
These criteria are common among statistical agencies because they represent critical aspects of a statistical program’s performance.
Using these common concepts as a basis for measuring and reporting on statistical agency outcomes helps inform decision-makers more consistently about the performance of statistical agencies.
BLS is committed to supporting the President’s Management Agenda of strengthening and empowering the federal workforce, delivering excellent, equitable, and secure federal services and customer experience.
BLS data support the President’s priority of providing evidence and supporting evaluation activities, consistent with the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act.
As part of the Evidence Act, the Commissioner of BLS is designated as the Statistical Official for DOL to advise the entire Department on statistical policy, techniques, and procedures.
Furthermore, by producing gold-standard statistics and analyses, BLS supports the Administration’s vision for DOL to empower workers and build a modern, inclusive workforce and the DOL mission “To foster, promote, and develop the welfare of the wage earners, job seekers, and retirees of the United States; improve working conditions; advance opportunities for profitable employment; and assure work-related benefits and rights.”
BLS also publishes data on demographic groups in the U.S. economy, including information on employment, wages, workplace safety, and consumption patterns, which can inform efforts to advance equity.
BLS was successful in achieving its objective of producing timely, accurate, and relevant data for its PFEIs in FY 2023.
BLS also achieved its commitment to ensure that BLS data are available on the website.
BLS tracked customer satisfaction through the Verint Experience Index until May 2022.
In FY 2023, BLS explored options for a replacement for this measure.
In FY 2024, BLS will continue evaluating options, select a replacement, and resume tracking customer satisfaction with a new measure.
BLS continued releasing objective statistics and analyses that are accurate and released on time and updated the information it collects and studies to remain relevant in describing the dynamic U.S. economy.
BLS continued to re-engineer its data sources and collection methods to balance the production of high-quality products while lessening respondent burden and survey cost.
Also, consistent with the Administration’s initiative to advance equity, BLS highlighted and directed stakeholders to publicly available BLS data sets that describe various demographic groups in the U.S. economy.
In FY 2024 and FY 2025, BLS will continue to expand in-person interactions associated with collecting data from businesses and households, while also offering alternative response modes.
In tandem with in-person data collection, BLS will continue to rely on collection via the telephone, email, internet, video collection, as well as expanded use of corporate, administrative, and other large data sets from non-traditional sources that could supplement directly collected data.
These data collection alternatives provide greater opportunities to reach people and businesses in underrepresented communities.
In FY 2023, BLS published, for the first time, labor force estimates for detailed Asian groups as part of a strategic priority of the White House Initiative on Asian Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Pacific Islanders.
BLS provides monthly and quarterly labor force estimates for Asian ethnic groups, including Asian Indians, Chinese, Filipinos, Japanese, Koreans, Vietnamese, and Other Asians, which allow data users to see labor market differences among the detailed groups.
Also, in FY 2023, BLS published new experimental data building on efforts to better capture the transformation of the retail trade sector based on recommendations from the Committee on National Statistics.
These data will help BLS stakeholders better understand the implications of emerging economic trends on employment and productivity measurement.
Looking forward, BLS will continue to release new products in response to the needs of its stakeholders and data users.
In FY 2024, the Current Population Survey will publish data from the FY 2023 Contingent Worker Supplement that will include information on the number and demographic characteristics of workers in contingent jobs (that is, jobs that are structured to be temporary) and in alternative employment arrangements, such as independent contractors, on-call workers, temporary help agency workers, and platform workers.
Also, in FY 2024, the Consumer Expenditures Survey will implement the second phase of a streamlined questionnaire for collecting the Interview Survey data, as part of a multi-year effort to reduce measurement error and reduce respondent burden.
In addition, the Occupational Safety and Health Statistics program will publish, for the first-time, nation-wide occupational injury and illness case and demographic data for job transfer or restriction, providing stakeholders, such as employers and policymakers, expanded data to address workplace safety.
Drive innovation in administrative, management, and financial services.
Administration, management, and financial services are the backbone of the Department of Labor, providing the critical infrastructure required to support the Department’s core mission work.
Ensuring these services are operating efficiently allows for more resources to go toward the programs that impact America’s workers.
OASAM and OCFO are focusing on improving service delivery through modern, streamlined processes and IT infrastructure.
OASAM and OCFO are working together to implement programs which promote fiscal integrity and the effective and efficient use of resources, optimize DOL’s administrative services, and modernize information technology systems.
This work builds on the transition from multiple services providers to centralized functions for human resources, IT, procurement, and personnel security respectively.
Identifying and prioritizing the development of federal shared products, services, and standards that enable simple, seamless, and secure customer experiences across High Impact Service Providers.
Build capacity in federal financial management and through federal financial assistance to catalyze American industrial strategy, address climate-related risks, and deliver equitable results.
In FY 2023, the Office of Human Resources (OHR) worked to expediate and improve hiring at DOL by implementing new systems and improving current best practices.
For example, OHR procured USA Staffing, a new recruitment system, which has improved the hiring experience for new staff and upgraded workflows for its human resources specialists.
The office has also implemented new hiring authorities and improved its virtual onboarding program, which has an approval rate of over 90 percent.
In addition to other improvements, such as the extended use of external hiring programs (e.g., Student Enrichment Program), holding virtual job fairs, etc., OHR completed 2,746 hiring actions in FY 2023.
The Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) has continued to prioritize cybersecurity and has proactively identified improvements to DOL’s cybersecurity framework as critical to the Department.
The OCIO goal is to continue to integrate and standardize DOL’s IT infrastructure to provide a robust cybersecurity posture, consistent with Executive Order 14028, while increasing the reliability and functionality of DOL’s information systems and infrastructure that support mission critical services.
OCIO met its targets for all five Cybersecurity measures.
This includes reporting all verified cybersecurity incidents within two hours, sending all Open Plan of Action and Milestones (POA&Ms) reports timely, and meeting the planned finish date for all POA&Ms.
OCIO also met most of its targets for the enterprise service desk resolution time but missed some targets due to delays in ticket closures.
OCIO met its Infrastructure availability targets for the network (including both the Wide Area Network (WAN) and Local Area Network, Microsoft Office 365, the Unified Communications (UC) platform, and the Interactive Voice Response system as well as the target for timely software upgrade notifications.
In FY 2023, 99 percent of these assets had accurate assignment records which is a significant improvement from the 78.45 percent result in FY 2022.
OCFO works with agencies to reduce the amount of their cancelled appropriations.
Once cancelled, these funds are no longer available for obligation or expenditure and are returned to the U.S. Department of the Treasury.
In FY 2023, DOL agencies cancelled 1.93 percent of their discretionary appropriation, higher than the 1.80 percent target.
Since FY 2019, DOL has made significant strides in reducing agencies’ cancelled appropriations.
Going forward, OCFO will continue to work with agencies in maximizing their appropriations.
DOL is currently required to provide significant improper payments (IP) reporting on the UI and FECA programs.
Both programs met their targets in FY 2023.
OCFO has begun working with ETA and the Do Not Pay (DNP) Business Center (OMB/Treasury/FedReserve) to improve crosscollaboration, share best practices, and potentially integrate duplicative resources between the DNP and the UI Integrity Center in the future.
OCFO continues to work with FECA and DNP to build on the successful, first-in-Government data analytics cross-reference project which addresses improper dual benefits between OWCP, OPM, and SSA.
OASAM Performance Goal M.1 – Optimize the Department of Labor’s enterprise services.
OASAM works to enhance the customer experience of its human resources, information technology, procurement, and other primary customerfacing services by streamlining administrative services to improve the efficiency and quality of service delivery.
OASAM completed a transition of nearly all agencies’ functions for human resources, information technology, procurement, and personnel security to shared services models in FY 2020, consolidating staff and resources under one central authority respectively to increase efficiency and effectiveness.
OCIO is a customer service organization dedicated to providing IT solutions and leadership to advance DOL’s mission.
Through strategic planning, DOL is defining a vision of its future data and IT environment to facilitate the success of Departmental goals and agency mission needs.
This vision encompasses a mission-focused modern and unified information and IT environment incorporating Administration priorities for digital services, open data, world-class customer service, and enhanced alignment and strategic management of the DOL federal IT workforce.
DOL’s IT focus is to enable mission-critical capabilities through continued application modernization and the use of emerging technologies, addressing cyber threats, enhancing the infrastructure backbone, and managing budget and resource constraints.
OASAM’s Office of the Senior Procurement Executive (OSPE) provides value-oriented acquisition and contracting operational support to DOL agencies to achieve their mission and departmental needs through innovative solutions while providing the highest level of customer service through leadership, guidance, and oversight of all procurement policy and services.
OASAM engaged with its client agencies to adequately plan for administrative services in support of their mission priorities.
OASAM obtained feedback from its customers through a variety of sources, including a semi-annual Customer Satisfaction Survey, semi-annual feedback on OASAM leaders, and advisory/governance board feedback.
OASAM’s FY 2023 Customer Satisfaction Survey score was 4.35 out of 5, maintaining a result above 4, meaning that customers are satisfied with OASAM services.
OASAM will continue to take feedback from the survey and implement actions items to address customer concerns.
A top priority for OCIO is to ensure maximum network availability.
In FY 2023, OCIO maintained network availability at 99.96 percent and will continue at 99.90 percent or more in FY 2024 and FY 2025.
In addition, DOL performed more than 5,250 on-boardings and off-boardings of staff in FY 2023 in a manner that protects DOL network operations.
The office also provided greater economies of scale, flexibility, and improved allocation of IT resources across the enterprise.
The office will use its inventory of prioritized legacy information systems and applications to target additional funding mechanisms for modernization initiatives.
These modernizations will include enhanced cybersecurity consistent with Executive Order 14028, cloud implementation whenever feasible, and SSO capabilities.
SSO capability and will continue to increase applications with SSO capability in FY 2024 and FY 2025.
Maintaining a robust cybersecurity posture to protect the Department’s systems and applications continued to be a top priority.
In FY 2023, for the third consecutive year, OCIO closed all cybersecurity vulnerabilities by the date identified in each POA&M for the systems it manages.
In addition, DOL will refresh 25 percent of its laptops, tablets, and mobile devices each year going forward; all Windows-based end-user devices will be upgraded to Windows 11 in FY 2024.
OASAM manages procurement services for the entire Department, which enables the efficient and effective procurement of goods and services, resulting in reduced procurement time, reduced cost, best value, and improved quality of goods and services procured.
OSPE provides and promotes DOL-wide procurement vehicles and Best-in-Class contract solutions to leverage the government’s buying power as a single enterprise.
These vehicles reduce redundancy in contract actions for the same services and achieve cost savings with DOL buying power.
Previously, spending under both Best-in-Class and Common Spend Under Management were measured using a dollar amount target, however in FY 2022, the General Services Administration changed the measures to a percentage of eligible obligations.
In FY 2023, 14.32 percent of procurement obligations were Best-in-Class solutions while 57.72 percent of procurement obligations were Common Spend Under Management.
The FY 2024 targets were raised to 15.10% and 65% for Best-in-Class solutions and Common Spend Under Management respectively.
OSPE continued to use its proven Department-wide small business approach to meet and exceed its small business goals, which include contracts to small businesses, small-disadvantaged businesses, and small women-owned businesses.
OSPE has met or exceeded its overall prime small business goal for the last 14 years.
The percent of contracts awarded to small-disadvantaged businesses and small women-owned businesses continues to be a priority area.
In FY 2023, OSPE exceeded its target of 28.9 percent, for the percent of contracts awarded to small-disadvantaged businesses at 30.09 percent, and exceeded its goal of 5 percent, for contracts awarded to small women-owned businesses at 6.04 percent.
In FY 2024 and FY 2025, OSPE will continue its focus on small-disadvantaged, women-owned, and minority-owned businesses through vendor outreach sessions that assist entities interested in doing business with the government in becoming more procurement ready.
Additionally, OSPE will host industry days, along with other outreach to facilitate and foster connections between large businesses, HBCUs, Minority Serving Institutions, and small minority-owned businesses for mentoring and partnership opportunities.
Notes: The Small Business targets are set by the Small Business Administration annually; OMB had different category management measures in place for FY 2020 and FY 2021.
OCFO Performance Goal M.1 – Promote fiscal integrity and the effective and efficient use of resources through innovation.
OCFO provides financial management leadership, direction, and guidance to the Office of the Secretary of Labor and all DOL program agencies on matters arising from financial statutes, as appropriate.
OCFO oversees DOL-wide accounting, financial management, and financial system, and leads DOL’s annual audit of the Consolidated Financial Statements and efforts to address findings resulting from the audit.
Accurate and timely financial information demonstrates DOL’s accountability to stakeholders and facilitates data-driven operational, budget, and policy decisions.
OCFO oversees DOL’s internal controls by assisting program management in establishing and ensuring strong controls over all financial resources in DOL.
OCFO leads the Department through its annual audit in which DOL’s programs, accomplishments, challenges, and management’s accountability for the resources entrusted to DOL is summarized in the Agency Financial Report.
OCFO tracks the number of material weaknesses 17 identified through the annual audit after the conclusion of the fiscal year.
There was one material weakness identified during the FY 2023 audit and OCFO is working to address the finding.
Additionally, OCFO provides DOL’s managers and decision makers with the financial management tools to drive high performance and accountability and to responsibly manage financial resources.
A measure of spending efficiency is the “percent of discretionary appropriations cancelled after the five years period of obligation authority has expired” which tracks the amount of federal funds that are cancelled.
OCFO works with agencies to reduce the amount of their cancelled appropriations.
Once cancelled, these funds are no longer available for obligation or expenditure and are returned to the U.S. Department of Treasury (Treasury).
OCFO continued to process payments in a timely manner.
It is paramount that DOL must pay invoices on time; failing to do so is a waste of taxpayer dollars.
In FY 2024, OCFO will finalize integration of G-Invoicing with DOL’s New Core Financial Management System (NCFMS) and complete the G-Invoicing initiative across the Department.
Beyond that, DOL will continue working with Treasury and OMB to implement a government-wide Financial Management Quality Service Management Offices solution for DOL NextGen financial management and transaction processing.
Notes: The targets for the measure "number of material weaknesses eliminated" are based on previous year independent audit findings.
Decisions should be based on evidence – especially those that affect the employment, safety and health, and retirement and benefits security of America’s workers.
The Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act (Evidence Act) outlines major government-wide reforms for making data more accessible and useful for decision-making.
To meet this objective, DOL must first strengthen its internal capacity, both in ensuring transparency and availability of data, and by advancing the framework that supports the decision-making process.
DOL is taking significant steps to make evidence-based decision making a part of the culture by improving the integration of budget and performance with evaluation and risk management.
A strong culture of evidence-based decision making is creating improved policies and programs that support and protect America’s workers.
Findings for this objective were grouped into two themes: Improved Integration of Services and DOL’s Data Strategy.
Evidence of progress included the use of agency-specific management plans to align strategies and activities to Departmental priorities.
Challenges were identified in Departmentlevel integration of performance, budgeting, evaluation, and risk management.
OCFO and OASAM convened a workgroup (the Enterprise Risk Management Council) as part of a larger effort to better integrate enterprise risk management (ERM), performance management, budget, and evaluation into the strategic decision-making process.
The workgroup ensures that the Budget, Strategic Plan, Agency Management Plans (AMP), Risk Profile, and Evaluations all inform one another.
All four offices review AMPs, which map out an agency’s actions and priorities over the upcoming year.
In FY 2022, DOL continued to mature its Risk Management program by building ERM into the management disciplines at DOL.
Agencies within the Department have identified their top risks and have built mitigation plans to reduce threats to program objectives.
In FY 2023, 90 percent of agencies found that ERM practices better inform strategic and operational decision-making.
In FY 2022, OASP led efforts to publish DOL’s first Enterprise Data Strategy, to align to the statutory requirements in the Evidence Act.
In the FY 2023 AMPs, OASP worked with OASAM to include data projects in all management plans, linking them to the larger mission, emphasizing greater access to data through establishing restricted use programs, and leading the creation of data-as-a-service.
OASAM Performance Goal M.2 – Integrate budget and performance with evaluation and risk management to improve decision-making.
DOL is committed to improving decision-making by integrating the management disciplines of budget formulation and execution, performance management, evaluation, and risk management.
OASAM’s Departmental Budget Center (DBC) and the Performance Management Center (PMC) will build on past successes in integrating budget and performance disciplines.
PMC and DBC will also continue to coordinate with the Chief Evaluation Officer and the Chief Data Officer, as well as the Office of the Chief Financial Officer, who manages the ERM function.
Through integration of budget, evidence, and key risks into DOL internal management plans, DOL agencies will develop and execute strategies and activities to achieve their mission and management priorities.
PMC surveyed DOL agencies and asked whether they believe their AMP is effective for their agency’s strategic planning and budget execution.
In FY 2023, 67 percent of the survey respondents indicated that they believe the AMP is effective.
PMC sought to raise this result by working with agencies closely on AMP development and fostering an increased level of comfort around the annual performance planning process.
In addition to general effectiveness feedback, PMC also collected feedback on specific elements and requirements of AMPs.
PMC used the feedback to adjust the AMP requirements for FY 2024 AMP development.
For example, feedback indicated a need to streamline the guidance and attachments published for the AMP development process.
The FY 2024 guidance has been reorganized to assist agencies in tracking separate components and requirements with clear explanations of necessary items, addressing concerns about complexity and redundancy.
PMC will continue collecting agency feedback on the process and adjusting future planning requirements accordingly.
In FY 2024, PMC will revise this measure to a new measure which gauges stakeholder satisfaction with the AMP development process.
The new measure targets PMC’s effectiveness in providing guidance and managing the AMP development process versus the overall effectiveness of the Agency’s AMP documents.
DBC received a rating of 4.3 out of 5 for budget formulation and execution on the OASAM Customer Satisfaction Survey, meaning that customers are satisfied with these services.
The survey helped DBC identify strengths and areas of improvement within its work products and procedures.
As a result of agency feedback to the survey, DBC began an ongoing and iterative process to write budget formulation and execution guidance using plain language.
In addition, DBC continued to offer training sessions and office hours to better assist agencies with their understanding of budget guidance and its requirements.
In FY 2024 and FY 2025, DBC will continue to build upon agency feedback and incorporate structural improvements to the budget processes within DOL.
OCFO Performance Goal M.2 – Integrate risk-based decision-making to enhance the Department’s operations.
The ERM provides an enterprise-wide, strategically aligned portfolio view of organizational challenges and opportunities to more effectively prioritize and manage risks to mission delivery.
DOL integrates ERM into agency operations planning, performance management, and budget processes to make strategic, risk-based decisions to make the Department more resilient, effective, and efficient.
Involving risk-based decisionmaking in the strategic planning, organizational performance management, and budget processes enables the Department to better allocate scarce resources to address the highest priority risks, enhance performance, drive efficiencies, and promote cost savings.
OCFO, in coordination with OASAM, collaborated with agencies and the ERM Council (ERMC) to continually mature the Department’s ERM program.
The ERMC directed each component agency to identify and assess major risks to achieving their mission and goals.
The ERMC continued to integrate with major management structures to feed strategic decision making.
These include budget formulation and execution, development of agency learning agendas, and the development and execution of AMPs.
Additionally, the ERMC continues to direct agencies to develop risk appetite statements around their respective goals in the FY 2022-2026 DOL Strategic Plan to reinforce the connection between ERM, performance, and strategic planning.
ERM will continue to be integral in providing support to component agencies on the Organizational Health initiative.
OASP Performance Goal M.2 – Invest in strategic and evidence-based decision-making, policy and regulatory development.
OASP is the principal policy, regulatory, data governance, and evaluation office for the Department.
To that end, OASP plays a crucial role in helping design and execute evidence-based strategies across the Department.
Broadly, OASP continues to conduct new policy-relevant evaluations and research for agencies and Department leadership, building a base of evidence and data for further policy development and refinement and program administration.
OASP worked to incorporate evidence-based strategies into the policy and regulatory development process, including conducting rigorous economic analysis to inform regulations; engaging external researchers; and producing reports, among other activities.
The office also made investments in new infrastructure to increase agencies’ ability to store and leverage data as a strategic tool.
FY 2023 performance results centered on activities of the Chief Evaluation Office and the Office of Data Governance.
This work supported implementation of the Evidence Act and implementation of the first two findability, accessibility, interoperability, and reusability (FAIR) principles 18.
In FY 2023, the Chief Evaluation Office and Office of Data Governance within OASP led the development and release of several strategic planning documents that will guide activities and capacity building over the next several years including but not limited to a multi-year Evaluation Plan, an Evidence Building Plan, an Evidence Capacity Assessment, and an Enterprise Data Strategy.
Broad planning for FY 2024 and FY 2025 continues this focus on evidence production and use to support Departmental decision-making.
Important parts of this planning are reflected in OASP’s FY 2024 performance measures.
The Department has bolstered data and evidence components in AMPs to significantly expand the ways in which these important topics are addressed and improved.
This will multiply the impact of existing and prospective efforts and reinforce the link between successful capacity building for data and evidence, and successful conduct of agency mission.
Many factors contributed to the Department’s success in carrying out its mission, but no factor contributes more than the dedication, perseverance, and ingenuity of the DOL workforce.
DOL is capitalizing on this moment to advance its future.
The Department is rebuilding the size of its workforce after several years of decline and developing the skills and capacity of its staff.
DOL’s staff is testing new ways of working, including increased workplace flexibilities and using modern technology to execute its mission.
DOL is doing all of this with the overarching goal of increasing DEIA throughout the Department.
As DOL harnesses the unmistakable benefits of a more diverse, equitable, inclusive, and accessible workplace, it is not only making DOL a model workplace but also setting a foundation to address inequity for our Nation’s workers.
Attract and hire the most qualified employees, who reflect the diversity of our country, in the right roles across the federal government.
Make every federal job a good job, where all employees are engaged, supported, heard, and empowered, with opportunities to learn, grow, join a union and have an effective voice in their workplaces through their union, and thrive throughout their careers.
Build the personnel system and support required to sustain the federal government as a model employer able to effectively deliver on a broad range of agency missions.
Findings for this objective shared a single theme: Cultivating a Diverse Workforce.
Evidence of progress included new partnerships with HBCUs, new courses to promote DEIA best practices, and the creation of platforms to share DEIA resources and information.
DOL has made DEIA one of its major focuses and has continued to push forward many initiatives to advance DEIA at DOL.
For example, OASAM led the creation of the Southeast Region Hiring Initiative (SE Hiring Initiative), facilitating Summer Summits at three HBCUs.
Summits promoted sustainable relationships between DOL and the schools and highlighted professional opportunities for HBCU students and graduates.
Also, OASAM partnered with Cornell University to launch five courses to provide DOL managers and supervisors with a heightened awareness around hiring best practices, which advance equal employment opportunity and DEIA in the workplace.
OASAM launched several initiatives that will have a long-lasting impact on the Department’s DEIA posture.
These include increased utilization of the Workforce Recruitment Program, integration of applicant lived experience into the hiring process, the promotion of essential language skills, the cultivation of career pipelines through entry-level hiring, and agency strategic recruitment and hiring plans.
Other initiatives include a Departmental student volunteer program, a new online system to highlight hiring authorities, and the launch of Equity@DOL, an executive-level body comprised of members of the DOL community whose experience and expertise will help ensure that a wide and inclusive range of perspectives inform the work of advancing DEIA principles within DOL.
OASAM will continue to leverage existing resources and continue to execute the Department’s DEIA Strategic Plan while collecting more data on the effectiveness of these efforts.
OASAM is rebuilding the Department’s workforce by providing leadership, guidance, and technical expertise to achieve a workforce that is reflective of the American public we serve and comprised of vetted candidates for suitable character and conduct.
OASAM led the development of the Department’s DEIA Strategic Plan, which outlines the values and vision for DOL’s workforce.
OASAM’s OHR is dedicated to providing best-in-class Human Resources services by working with DOL agencies as partners.
OHR is leading the Department’s efforts through strategic agency engagement and recruitment planning to rebuild its workforce and support the Administration’s plans to rebuild the American economy.
OHR is building long-term capacity to support the Department’s recruitment and hiring through the development of strategic partnerships that will enable DOL to better reach diverse and inclusive talent pools.
OASAM’s Security Center (SC) is dedicated to ensuring a safe and secure workplace, responsible for the protection of life and property of DOL owned/leased facilities and ensures that federal and contract employees are suitable and/or fit for employment with DOL.
The SC is also implementing initiatives directed by the Suitability Executive Agent (the Office of Personnel Management) and the Security Executive Agent (the Office of the Director for National Intelligence), on ensuring a Trusted Workforce.
The SC is also responsible for the development and maintenance of appropriate working relationships with federal, state, and local agencies that perform critical security, national security, emergency response, and law enforcement functions.
OASAM’s Civil Rights Center (CRC) is responsible for enforcing nondiscrimination, equal opportunity (EO) and equal employment opportunity (EEO) requirements for two primary populations: employees of, and applicants for employment with, DOL (through its Office of Internal Enforcement); and individuals served by the nation’s employment and workforce related service programs (through its Office of External Enforcement).
CRC contributes significantly to DEIA activities across the Department by influencing recruitment practices and retention efforts to ensure equal opportunity in DOL’s workforce.
Emphasis is particularly placed on anti-harassment prevention and response including training to establish a culture of accountability in the Department.
CRC also advances equity interests through its external enforcement and compliance programs, including through policy guidance and training designed to promote nondiscrimination and equal opportunity in DOL supported programs across the nation.
The OASAM Workplace Equality Compliance Office (WECO) manages the Reasonable Accommodation Resource Center (RARC) to support the Department’s compliance with its obligations to provide appropriate accommodations for employees and applicants with disabilities.
The reasonable accommodation process is a critical mechanism that the Department utilizes to improve the work experience for DOL personnel.
WECO will continue to strengthen the accommodation program so that DOL becomes a model workforce that leads in the employment of people with disabilities.
OHR improved hiring outcomes and reduced burden on hiring managers, particularly for mission critical positions.
Through strategic agency engagement and recruitment planning, OHR supported the Administration’s plans to rebuild the American economy and workforce.
A critical aspect of the recruitment process is to track hiring manager satisfaction scores.
These scores provide invaluable insights into the effectiveness of the hiring process.
When hiring managers are satisfied, it not only enhances their ability to select top talent, but also fosters a positive workplace environment.
DOL currently ranks in the top five federal agencies for hiring manager satisfaction, with an average of 83 percent in FY 2023.
This is particularly impressive given the sheer volume of DOL hiring activity over the past two years.
In FY 2024 and FY 2025, OHR will target a hiring manager satisfaction index score of 85 percent from all agencies, to continually improve hiring managers levels of support and services during the recruitment process.
Since FY 2020, OHR achieved a notable decrease in the average time to hire, reducing it by over 9 percent, with the timeline shrinking from 102 days in FY 2020 to 96 days by FY 2023.
Despite facing challenges such as implementing a new talent management platform (USA Staffing) and hiring manager review time exceeding targets, OHR held steady to the timeline of 96 days in FY 2023.
In FY 2024 and FY 2025, OHR will continue to target the OPM standard of 80 days to hire new employees, and 90 days for average days to hire SES employees from the closing date of the vacancy announcement.
Targeting the 80-day OPM hiring standard is important for many reasons.
First, it directly impacts DOL’s ability to attract top talent.
In today's competitive job market, candidates have options, and a lengthy hiring process can deter them from accepting a delayed offer, leading to missed opportunities.
Secondly, swift hiring ensures that critical positions are filled promptly, reducing the risk of unassigned workload, which compromises productivity.
Additionally, it can help save resources, as prolonged vacancies often necessitate costly and inefficient temporary solutions.
By continuing to improve and reduce the hiring process timelines, DOL highlights its commitment to efficiency but also enhances its reputation as an employer of choice.
OHR sought innovative ways to promote opportunities, receive DOL employees’ feedback, and make data-driven decisions and approaches to recruitment.
Data from the Federal Employment Viewpoint Survey has reflected an increase in employee engagement from 68 percent in FY 2019 to 75 percent in FY 2023.
In FY 2024 and FY 2025, OHR will target an Employee Engagement Index of 76%.
In FY 2023, OASAM advanced the Department's DEIA Strategic Plan by enhancing outreach, recruiting from underserved communities, offering paid internships, leveraging special hiring authorities, promoting Pathways Programs for college students and recent graduates, providing employee engagement and training opportunities, and conducting data analysis to track progress and identify gaps.
Supporting agencies in the development of their annual recruitment and hiring strategic plan to include identifying specific actions the agency will take to increase outreach and hiring efforts focused on underserved communities.
Utilizing the Pathways Programs to increase the number of college students and recent graduates recruited from underserved communities.
Using the results of the equity gap analysis to implement identified best practices and solutions to address potential equity gaps.
Deploying a strategy to increase participation in non-mandatory leadership and career development programs, such as implementing leadership development opportunities like the SES Candidate Development Program and Aspiring Executive Development Academy, identifying leadership course offerings for pipeline positions, identifying low- to no-cost training opportunities, and increasing mentor program participation.
Improving accessibility in hiring by evaluating information and communications technology used during recruitment and onboarding processes to identify barriers that may disparately impact underserved communities, particularly people with disabilities, and identifying areas where best practices for inclusion or accessibility are not being utilized.
Developing an agency-specific Language Access Plan and translating vital documents (i.e., applications, consent forms, and information on the right to file complaints of discrimination).
OASAM will develop a plan to identify, as applicable, whether bilingual requirements for outreach to and engagement with underserved communities and vulnerable workers need to be included in position descriptions.
Building on the DOL Organizational Health initiative.
OASAM uses performance results to assess programs and services, meet stakeholder needs, and establish priorities and implement these practices to monitor organizational effectiveness and the ability to adapt to change.
In FY 2023, SC continued to ensure a robust personnel security program by appropriately vetting prospective personnel.
SC also engaged in the implementation efforts for Trusted Workforce 2.0 (TW 2.0), an initiative to reform the Government’s personnel vetting process for applicants and incumbents to positions for national security, suitability, and fitness for employment.
This initiative will transition legacy reinvestigations to Continuous Vetting and Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Rap Back programs (DOL staff holding National Security Clearances were previously enrolled in FY 2022 as part of the iterative milestone TW 1.5).
SC will expand enrollments into the FBI’s Rap Back and continuous vetting programs to new hires, as well as non-sensitive public trust and low risk populations.
SC will continue to enhance its system to track vetting applicants and incorporate TW 2.0 requirements.
The SC utilized its personnel security program to ensure efficiency in the vetting process and afford transparency to client agencies.
The average number of days to submit a background security investigation request to the Department of Defense (DOD) decreased from 11 days in FY 2019 to 7 days in FY 2023.
The average number of days to adjudicate a background investigation for suitability increased from 6 days in FY 2019 to 32 days in FY 2023 but remained below its target of 90 days.
SC decreased the average number of days to adjudicate a background investigation for national security from 17 days in FY 2020 to 10 days in FY 2023.
To further promote inclusion within the Department, CRC provided training and technical assistance to employees, managers, and supervisors on antidiscrimination and antiharassment, with a particular emphasis on the proper tools to confront and resolve incidents of discrimination or harassing conduct before they violate the law, and to hold individuals accountable for their actions.
CRC continued to provide guidance and information about and facilitate the provision of reasonable accommodations for DOL employees and applicants for DOL employment with disabilities.
In FY 2023, CRC/RARC exceeded its target for a reasonable accommodation request to be successfully deployed by averaging 20 days to fulfill these requests, below the target of 35 days.
RARC plans to continue to meet the target of 35 days in FY 2024 and FY 2025.
In late FY 2023, the RARC was transferred organizationally to the OASAM WECO.
In FY 2024, the RARC within the OASAM WECO plans to support DOL as a model workplace by implementing revisions outlined in the Reasonable Accommodation Department of Labor Manual Series (DLMS).
WECO RARC is also working on a new reasonable accommodation case tracking system, which will further streamline the lifecycle of a reasonable accommodation request and allow for greater efficiency and transparency of case processing for all stakeholders.
Finally, WECO RARC will also work on developing and updating the reasonable accommodation program’s internal and external web presence providing information and resources for DOL employees and prospective applicants to utilize when requesting a reasonable accommodation at DOL.
CRC administers DOL’s EEO complaint program, including intake, counseling, investigation, adjudication, and compliance monitoring of EEO complaints; develops and submits civil rights-related program plans and accomplishment reports; and provides training and technical assistance to DOL managers, supervisors, and employees about internal EEO matters.
CRC also supports efforts designed to resolve workplace complaints and increase awareness of the EEO complaint program and the Department’s Harassing Conduct policy.
In terms of compliance with regulatory processing requirements, since FY 2018, CRC has exceeded the targets on its key performance indicators, completing 98 percent or more of all investigations, EEO counseling sessions, and Final Agency decisions within regulatory timeframes in any given year.
The deployment of the digital complaint tracking and reporting system (CTRS) has assisted CRC in ensuring continued success since FY 2018, despite the rapidly changing environment pre/post pandemic.
CRC will continue to refine CTRS to ensure it is maintained as an effective and efficient tool, so that resources are focused on substantive matters.
In FY 2024 and FY 2025, CRC plans to continue to meet its target of 95% for percent of EEO counseling sessions completed within regulatory timeframes, percent of formal EEO investigations issued within regulatory timeframes, and percent of formal EEO investigations issued within regulatory timeframes.
This page is intentionally left blank.
To continually improve the efficiency and effectiveness of its programs, DOL uses results-based, data-driven management techniques.
Each DOL agency prepares an Agency Management Plan that details the strategies and resources it will apply to reach goals and objectives at all levels of the organization.
Departmental leaders review performance against those plans each quarter to monitor progress and hold agencies accountable for implementing the plans, achieving milestones, and adjusting as needed.
This review process has focused Departmental leadership on strategic management of core functions using program performance data, risk assessments, evaluations, and budgets.
Identification and discussion of key measures; annual and seasonal targets; and how budgets, workload, and strategies affect results have helped clarify priorities and improve performance.
The CEO in OASP leads DOL’s evaluation agenda, working closely with agency staff to implement program evaluations to answer key questions.
The results from evaluations inform policy and improve DOL’s performance-based management initiatives in support of the GPRMA.
Further, as described in DOL’s Evidence-Building Plan for Fiscal Years 2022-2026, CEO coordinates key evidence-building activities (as per the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018, Public Law No. 115-435).
For more information, see http://www.dol.gov/asp/evaluation/.
Because this is primarily a planning document that uses historical information to inform future strategies and targets, it is organized around goals and measures selected to represent Departmental goals for the budget year (FY 2025).
Under GPRMA, performance goals, measures and targets are identified for reporting purposes in the Congressional Budget Justification (CBJ) issued during that fiscal year.
Therefore, DOL is obliged to report results for measures with PY 2022 or FY 2023 targets in its FY 2022 Annual Performance Report, which was published as part of the FY 2024 CBJ in March 2023 (www.dol.gov/dol/budget/).
The table below provides this information for performance measures that have since been revised, replaced, or discontinued.
Results are not provided for measures that were collecting baseline data.
THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR (Interior or the Department) conserves and manages the Nation’s natural resources and cultural heritage for the benefit and enjoyment of the American people.
The Department provides scientific and other information about natural resources and natural hazards to address societal challenges and create opportunities for the American people.
Interior honors the Nation’s trust responsibilities and special commitments to Tribes, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and our affiliated insular communities.
The Department manages the Nation’s public lands and minerals, including providing access to more than 480 million acres of public lands, 700 million acres of onshore subsurface minerals, and 2.5 billion acres of the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS).
Interior is the steward of 20 percent of the Nation’s lands, including national parks and seashores, national wildlife refuges, national landmarks, and other public lands; manages renewable and mineral resources that supply approximately 30 percent of the Nation’s energy; supplies and manages water in the 17 western states and supplies 15 percent of the Nation’s hydropower energy; and upholds Federal trust responsibilities to 574 federally recognized Tribes, with a service population of approximately 2.5 million American Indian and Alaska Natives.
Interior is responsible for migratory bird and wildlife conservation; historic preservation; endangered species conservation; conducting geological, hydrological, and biological science and providing actionable information to decision makers; surface-mined land protection and restoration; safety and environmental enforcement of such activities; and ensuring for the public a fair return on investment from Federal land and offshore management activities.
The Fiscal Years (FY) 2024–2025 Annual Performance Plan and FY 2023 Report (APP&R) is aligned with the Interior FY 2022–2026 Strategic Plan.
This APP&R highlights the strategies, performance goals, and performance measures the Department uses to assess and rate performance.
It provides to the public an overview of progress towards achieving strategic goals and objectives and goals and demonstrates Interior’s commitment to using performance evidence to better deliver on Interior’s mission.
This report demonstrates progress towards program outcomes and mission delivery.
It was prepared in compliance with the requirements of the Government Performance and Results Modernization Act (GPRAMA) of 2010, (P.L. 111-352).
Manage our land, water, and resources for the benefit of all Americans, both today and tomorrow.
The U.S. Department of the Interior protects and manages the Nation’s natural resources and cultural heritage; provides scientific and other information about those resources; and honors its trust responsibilities or special commitments to American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and affiliated insular communities.
The success of the Department in achieving its mission outcomes is predicated on several guiding principles that reflect tenets of the Biden-Harris Administration and Secretary Haaland.
We use science and evidence-based information to guide our decisions.
We balance our decisions to best meet the needs of today and tomorrow.
We value diversity and inclusion in our activities, operations, and services.
Y We manage and achieve through meaningful collaboration, engagement, and partnerships.
The Department plays a central role in how the United States stewards its public lands, increases environmental protections, pursues environmental justice, and honors our governmentto-government relationship with Tribes.
The priorities of the Biden-Harris Administration and Secretary Deb Haaland require bold action desperately needed to ensure all communities— including communities of color and urban, rural, and Native communities—benefit from an aggressive and whole-of-government response.
Water is a precious and vital resource that plays an essential, and often sacred, role in nourishing families, supporting agriculture, preserving the environment, and sustaining wildlife.
Unfortunately, drought conditions in U.S. western regions are steadily worsening, leading to historically low water allocations.
Particularly impacted are areas like the Klamath River Basin and the Colorado River Basin.
Acknowledging the urgency of this crisis, the Department is taking a leading role in the Biden-Harris Administration’s comprehensive strategy for drought mitigation.
This entails collaborating with Federal partners, providing aid to affected communities, and striving towards sustainable solutions to climate change in the long term.
To underscore the importance of addressing drought, the Interior established a new Agency Priority Goal (APG) focused on enhancing water conservation capacity to help achieve a more sustainable water supply and to mitigate impacts of drought in the Western United States.
Communities of color, rural and Indigenous communities, low-income families, and people in the U.S. Territories have long suffered disproportionate and cumulative harm from the climate crisis, from air and water pollution to environmental hazards left behind at toxic sites.
The Biden-Harris Administration has mobilized an all-of-government approach to advance environmental justice (EJ).
The Department has partnered with agencies across the Federal Government to develop programs, policies and activities that address long-standing environmental injustices.
New and reinvigorated efforts will better ensure that historically marginalized communities have greater input on and receive enhanced benefits from Federal policies and decisions.
In FY 2023 and 2024, Interior held several public listening sessions to gather input from Tribes and communities across the Nation on the Department’s approach.
An EJ strategic plan is under development which the Department hopes to issue in FY 2024.
In response to the climate and biodiversity crises, environmental injustices, and broad recognition that healthy ecosystems can strengthen the economy and create jobs, the Biden-Harris Administration issued a rally for all Americans to join to help conserve, protect, connect, and restore the lands and waters that sustain us.
The “America the Beautiful” initiative established a first-ever national conservation goal of conserving at least 30 percent of our lands and waters by 2030.
America the Beautiful is rooted in the desire to better support and honor the people and communities who serve as stewards of our lands, waters, and wildlife—from Tribes and Indigenous peoples, to fishermen, to farmers and ranchers, to local and state governments—and to ensure that all people of this Nation benefit from America’s rich and vibrant lands and waters.
In FY 2023, the Biden-Harris Administration joined the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation and public- and private-sector partners in announcing $141.3 million in grants through the America the Beautiful Challenge.
Additionally, the Department announced a restoration and resilience framework to guide strategic investments, catalyze coordination, drive meaningful outcomes, and advance climate resilience.
Climate change is a threat to the well-being of individuals, communities, the economy, and nature.
Renewable energy sources such as solar, wind (both onshore and offshore), geothermal, and wave and tidal energy are crucial to meeting current and future U.S. needs.
The Department of the Interior has been working in collaboration with other Federal agencies to increase the production of renewable energy on public lands and waters.
As part of this effort, there is a target to deploy 30 gigawatts of offshore wind power by 2030 and at least 25 gigawatts of onshore renewable energy by 2025.
Nature is essential to the health, well-being, and prosperity of every family and every community in America.
Nature connects us, supports economies, and keeps people healthy.
Interior is committed to supporting the outdoor recreation economy and the many benefits that hiking, hunting, fishing, boating, biking, and other activities offer to healthy communities, economies, and wildlife.
Unfortunately, not everyone has the same access to nature.
Bringing the outdoors, and the wonders of the natural world, closer to people is at the heart of Interior’s mission.
To help address inequitable access to nature and its benefits, Interior is working to create more protected loaned land and waterways and safe outdoor opportunities in nature-deprived communities, many of which are low-income and communities of color.
In FY 2023, Interior bolstered the efforts of 27 urban national wildlife refuges by providing training, coaching, mentoring, and youth internships to engage in co-designing conservation with underrepresented communities.
The Department will distribute $21.9 million in funding through the Outdoor Recreation Legacy Partnership (ORLP) program for the redevelopment or creation of new local parks in Anchorage, Alaska; Moorhead, Minnesota; Greensboro, North Carolina; Buffalo, New York; and Norfolk, Virginia.
The Department also announced a funding opportunity for more than $224 million in grant funding for local communities across the United States for the creation of new parks and trails, or substantial renovations to existing parks through the ORLP program.
Through the Great American Outdoors Act, Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, and Inflation Reduction Act, Interior is investing in numerous initiatives that benefit the environment and communities that we serve.
These investments focus on legacy pollution, supporting tribal communities, addressing drought, managing wildland fire, ecosystem restoration, and scientific innovation.
Honoring the government-to-government relationship between Tribes and the Federal Government and upholding trust and treaty responsibilities are paramount to Interior’s mission.
Secretary Haaland is taking a leading role to improve relationships, while acknowledging the past and working toward a better future for Indian Country.
Interior is focused on improving tribal consultations to ensure a meaningful dialogue and exchange, addressing the crisis of missing and murdered Indigenous peoples, and recognizing the troubled legacy of federal Indian boarding school policies with the goals of addressing their intergenerational impact and to shedding light on the traumas of the past.
The Secretary chairs the White House Council on Native American Affairs to ensure collaborative inter-agency work across the Executive Branch, regular and meaningful tribal-federal engagement, and to foster an all-of-government approach in meeting treaty and trust obligations to Tribes.
The climate crisis is transforming where and how we live and presents growing challenges to human health and quality of life, the economy, and the natural systems that support us.
As the climate crisis disproportionately affects underserved communities, the Department of the Interior is supporting the Administration’s commitment to tackle the climate crisis and put environmental justice at the center of its mission.
In doing so, Interior is working to build a modern, climateresilient infrastructure and clean energy future that create millions of good-paying union jobs, while protecting the communities, natural, and cultural resources on which we rely.
The Interior Climate Action Plan demonstrates Interior’s commitment to use science as the foundation for decisions, recognizing that Interior’s approach to climate adaptation should evolve as science informs an understanding of climate change risks, impacts, and vulnerabilities.
In 2023, Interior released 6 climate policies in the form of Department Manual chapters covering climate change, applying climate change science, adaptive management, and landscape-level management, as well as nature-based solutions and Indigenous Knowledge.
Through its Tribal Climate Resilience Program, Interior announced the availability of $120 million in funding through President Biden’s Investing in America agenda to help Tribal communities plan for the most severe climate-related environmental threats to their homelands.
In developing strategic goals and strategic objectives for the FY 2022–2026 Strategic Plan, Interior focused not only on legislative requirements that govern what we do, but on synergies within and across the Department to maximize the benefits delivered to the American people.
Strategies and performance goals provide selectivity and focus to monitor strategic objective progress, keep the end goal in sight and better aim efforts on what Interior can change and improve.
The Department is also taking steps to build evidence where there are gaps in knowledge about program outcomes, incorporate known science into management decisions, and fully use the breadth of data within the Department to support planning and decisions.
Interior is working towards regular use of rigorous program evaluation to increase the Department’s knowledge of what works and why and ensure that more data is transparent and open to the public.
Enterprise risk management (ERM) is an effective departmentwide approach to addressing the full spectrum of the organization’s significant risks by understanding the combined impact of risks as an interrelated portfolio, rather than addressing risks only within silos.
ERM provides an enterprise-wide, strategically aligned portfolio view of organizational challenges that provides better insight about how to prioritize and manage risks to mission delivery most effectively.
While agencies cannot mitigate all risks related to achieving strategic objectives and performance goals, they should identify, measure, and assess challenges related to mission delivery, to the extent possible.
Safeguarding Interior’s ability to meet its strategic goals and objectives requires identifying risks that could adversely impact the programs, operations, and activities that support those goals and threaten accomplishment of the objectives.
Interior’s Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) program works with bureaus, offices, and program managers to identify risks that could derail Interior efforts.
The Department’s ERM approach helps identify risks and develop effective risk treatment strategies.
These risk treatment strategies reduce the likelihood of critical risks happening and/or reduce the severity of their impacts.
Interior’s ERM program and Departmentwide ERM community of practice has been and continues to foster a risk-aware culture that is proactively managing risk, promoting successful delivery of programs and services, and safeguarding public trust in our stewardship over taxpayer resources.
To promote efficient and effective program operations, the Department has developed program and project management standards and principles in alignment with the Program Management Improvement Accountability Act of 2016.
Standardizing and improving project, program, product, and portfolio management across the Department is necessary to better ensure the delivery of intended services, products, capabilities, and outcomes to beneficiaries and community partners.
The Department is working across bureaus and offices to embed project, program, product, and portfolio management tools and best practices into the design and daily operations of our work.
The Department’s Chief Data Officer (CDO) works to improve and ease the use of data to inform decisions.
The CDO leverages the work of a data governance board to align the use and management of data to achieve the goals and outcomes in the FY 2022–2026 Strategic Plan in partnership with bureaus and offices.
The Department is making its data assets more available, increasing data literacy across the workforce, and highlighting data used to measure strategic outcomes.
Leading the missions of the Department are the Secretary of the Interior, the Deputy Secretary, and six Assistant Secretaries.
Supporting them and implementing program responsibilities and operational activities are Interior’s bureaus and offices.
Each Departmental organization has specialized responsibilities and the expertise to identify, enable, and pursue the goals and objectives set forth in this plan.
The Office of Inspector General’s (OIG) Statement Summarizing the Major Management and Performance Challenges Facing the U.S. Department of the Interior, Fiscal Year 2023 identifies the Department’s major management challenges and findings.
The OIG’s risk-based, tiered approach to providing independent oversight is instrumental to achieving improved outcomes for the Department’s programs and operations.
Interior manages significant funding using contracts, grants, and cooperative agreements.
According to USAspending.gov, the Department awarded $7.8 billion in contracts and approximately $10.8 billion in financial assistance totaling $18.6 billion in FY 2023 (through August 30, 2023).
The FY 2023 OIG work identified substantial risks regarding contract oversight, pre-award processes, and post-award monitoring.
Grant and contracting improvements support outcomes across all strategic goals.
Of the 71 recommendations made in OIG oversight of these functions at Interior, 34 are closed.
The Great American Outdoors Act National Parks and Public Land Legacy Restoration Fund (GAOA LRF) directs up to $8.1 billion over five years to address the Department’s priority deferred maintenance and repair (DM&R) activities.
The GAOA LRF funding represents the largest investment in public lands infrastructure in the nation’s history, and although significant, it is outpaced by routine maintenance and repair needs for the Department’s vast infrastructure portfolio.
As of September 2023, the Department’s total DM&R backlog for the four GAOA LRF bureaus was estimated at approximately $32.4 billion.
Interior is addressing challenges to ensuring that it can promptly deploy funding, prioritize projects, maintain staffing, and resource capacity, and establish sufficient oversight to reduce the DM&R backlog, which impacts performance outcomes across all strategic goals.
Of the 15 OIG recommendations made to improve DM&R functions, 2 are closed.
DM&R performance information is included under Strategic Objective 4.4.
As the steward for America’s public lands, the Department manages critical infrastructure that it describes as essential to protect natural resources, support American jobs, and provide water to the Western United States.
The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act/Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) enacted in 2021 addresses aging infrastructure among other Administration priorities.
The Department also received funds from the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA), which is focused on similar programs including water infrastructure and drought mitigation.
Since the passage of the BIL in November 2021, the Department reported that it has invested more than $7.3 billion in over 1,300 projects Nationwide; hired more than 450 staff across bureaus and offices to implement new programming; and hosted meetings to hear directly from States, Tribes, and local communities to determine where funding is needed most.
Additionally, in FY 2023, Interior’s bureaus and offices submitted spending plans to Congress that covered the major programs.
These plans included information on the program at issue and on the funding allocation, prior accomplishments, planned efforts, and milestones.
Cybersecurity continues to be a high-risk area for Federal agencies, including Interior.
The Department relies on complex, interconnected information systems to carry out its daily operations and spent about $1.8 billion in FY 2023 on its portfolio of IT assets, according to the Federal IT Portfolio Dashboard.
OIG audits have described ongoing challenges in implementing an enterprise cybersecurity program that balances compliance, cost, and risk while enabling bureaus to meet their diverse missions.
Additionally, the FY 2022 annual independent Federal Information Security Modernization Act audit issued by the OIG identified necessary improvements and made 24 recommendations intended to strengthen the Department’s information security program as well as those of the bureaus and offices.
Of the 27 recommendations OIG made to the Department and its bureaus and offices, 7 are closed.
The Department is addressing outcomes related to this management challenge in strategic goal 4.
Interior relies on a wide variety of data to perform its mission, and the quality and accuracy of this data substantially affects how the Department accomplishes its mission.
In its FY 2022–2026 Strategic Plan, the Interior acknowledged the importance of reliable data and reliable information to the development and improvement of sound programs and equitable program delivery.
The OIG continues to identify data reliability issues across a variety of Departmental programs.
For example, OIG has identified data concerns related to COVID–19 spending, NPS facilities, the mineral leasing program, royalty reporting, a previous Freedom of Information Act review process, and the compensatory mitigation program.
Without complete, timely, and accurate data, Interior will continue to face challenges in fostering accountability and accomplishing its mission efficiently.
Of the 45 recommendations the OIG made, 18 are closed.
The Department is addressing outcomes related to this management challenge in strategic goal 4.
As the manager of one-fifth of the Nation’s landmass and 2.5 billion acres off its shores, the Department is the steward of Federal energy resources that provide 30 percent of the United States’ domestically produced energy—including oil, gas, coal, hydropower, and renewable energy.
The Department continues to face challenges in managing complex energy operations, including collecting revenues; overseeing leasing; and ensuring that development is safe, efficient, and sustainable.
Of the 26 recommendations the OIG made to Interior and its bureaus and offices, 19 are closed.
The Department is addressing outcomes related to this management challenge in strategic goal 3.
As the country’s largest wholesale water supplier, the USBR maintains 489 dams and operates 338 reservoirs with a total storage capacity of 140 million acre-feet.
It provides 140,000 western farmers—1 out of every 5—with irrigation water for 10 million farmland acres that produce 60 percent of the Nation’s vegetables and one quarter of its fresh fruit and nut crops.
As the second largest producer of hydropower in the United States, the USBR operates 53 hydroelectric powerplants that annually produced, on average, 40 billion kilowatt-hours for the last 10 years.
In addition to the BIL funding received, the USBR received an additional $4 billion in funding through the Inflation Reduction Act for drought mitigation in the West, with priority given to Colorado River Basin activities, including compensation for reduction in water diversions and funding for system conservation projects and ecosystem restoration to address drought.
There are no open recommendations.
The Department is addressing outcomes related to this management challenge in strategic goals 2, 3, and 4.
Interior’s FY 2022–2026 Strategic Plan sets forth its policy to fulfill its legal obligations to identify, protect, and conserve Tribal trust resources; carry out its trust relationship with Tribal Nations; and engage in robust, interactive, pre-decisional, informative, and transparent consultation on a Government-to-Government basis through all bureaus and offices on plans or actions that affect Tribal interests.
The Department’s Indian Affairs—including the BIA, BIE, BTFA, and Office of the Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs—is responsible for carrying out Interior’s trust responsibilities, which include enhancing quality of life and promoting economic opportunity.
It also has the obligation to uphold Tribal sovereignty and provide quality education opportunities in accordance with Tribes’ needs for cultural and economic wellbeing.
In addition, OIG has reported on health and safety issues at Indian schools and detention facilities.
For example, in a recent management advisory, we reported on significant and longstanding health and safety issues—including structural issues, water and sewer deficiencies and lack of functional air conditioning—at specific detention facilities.
Many of these issues were the same that we identified in 2015 during site visits for our prior evaluation of BIA-funded and/or -operated detention programs.
Of the 95 OIG recommendations made to the Interior, 22 are closed.
The Department is addressing outcomes related to this management challenge in strategic goal 1.
Continuing trends in the size and severity of wildfires, and the increasing length of fire season continue to pose challenges for maintaining and recruiting a firefighting workforce, managing ecosystems to reduce fuels, and responding to wildfires.
A recent GAO report identified seven barriers to recruitment and retention: (1) low pay, (2) career advancement challenges, (3) poor work-life balance, (4) mental health challenges, (5) remote or expensive duty stations, (6) limited workforce diversity, and (7) hiring process challenges.
Interior is working closely with the Office of Personnel Management and OMB to promote and expand existing and emerging hiring authorities and build its capacity for next generation hiring.
Additionally, Interior will complement these pay reforms with longer term actions to restore wildfire resilience, rehabilitate burned areas, and increase workforce capacity and capability to manage wildfires affecting national parks, wildlife refuges and preserves, other public lands, and Indian trust lands under the Department’s stewardship.
The Department is investing to enhance health services, increase workforce capacity, convert more firefighters to permanent positions, improve government housing, and is working with the US Forest Service to enhance firefighters’ mental health and well-being.
Outcomes related to wildland fire improvements are found in strategic goals 2 and 4.
Interior’s law enforcement responsibilities include Indian Country communities as well as resource protection, public lands visitor safety, special event and crowd management in areas that require multiple agencies to coordinate.
Among executive branch departments, the Department has the fourth largest law enforcement component, totaling approximately 3,400 law enforcement officers across the Department.
Since July 2021, Interior’s Law Enforcement Task Force has focused on strengthening trust in the Department’s law enforcement programs; ensuring implementation of appropriate policy and oversight; and ensuring supportive resources are available for officer mental health, wellness, and safety.
In October 2022, the Department announced new policies establishing clear guidelines on use-of-force standards, required law enforcement officers to use body-worn cameras, and restricted the use of no-knock warrants.
Additionally, in 2023, the Department established a new policy requiring the expedited public release of body-worn camera footage and became the first federal agency to do so following an officer involved shooting.
Of the 24 recommendations the OIG made to the Department and its bureaus and offices, 5 are closed.
The Department has prioritized outcomes related to public trust in strategic goal 4.
The NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) has released the final update to its 2023 Billion-Dollar Weather and Climate Disaster report, confirming a historic year in the number of costly disasters and extremes throughout much of the country.
There were 28 weather and climate disasters in 2023, surpassing the previous record of 22 in 2020, tallying a price tag of at least $92.9 billion.
Interior continues to face challenges in effectively and efficiently implementing policies to match the pace of the evolving climate crisis and the impact on its mission, programs, operations, and personnel.
In October 2022, the Department reported on its Climate Action Plan and provided its assessment of its own progress toward addressing the challenges that climate change poses to its mission, programs, operations, and personnel.
In it, Interior reported that it had not developed a method for assessing fiscal risk exposure due to climate change; however, it stated that some bureaus are taking proactive measures to reduce that exposure.
For example, according to the Department, the NPS developed a facility investment strategy that specifically directs project proponents to consider and include climate adaptation.
In our recent evaluation report highlighted in the callout box on the right, we found that the performance measures and metrics listed in the plan were not finalized.
In November 2022, Indian Affairs announced a commitment to provide $115 million in BIL and IRA funds to assist 11 Tribes in planning and relocating communities affected by climaterelated environmental threats.
Additionally, in May 2023, Interior awarded $12 million in IRA funds to U.S territories to address climate change planning, mitigation, adaptation, and resilience.
Of the 15 OIG recommendations made to Interior, 4 are closed.
The Department is addressing outcomes related to this management challenge in strategic goals 1, 2, 3, and 4.
The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) provides Congress, the heads of executive agencies, and the public with timely, fact-based, non-partisan information that can be used to improve government and save taxpayers billions of dollars.
GAO’s work is done at the request of congressional committees or subcommittees or is statutorily required by public laws or committee reports, per congressional protocols.
GAO maintains a High-Risk List, updated at the start of each new Congress, of programs and operations that are vulnerable to waste, fraud, abuse, or mismanagement, or in need of transformation.
The Department is actively working to address the recommendations in the six identified high risk areas and make improvements to better achieve the Interior mission.
Interior’s FY 2022–2026 Strategic Plan identifies strategic goals and strategic objectives that align with the priorities of the Biden-Harris Administration and Secretary Haaland to tackle the climate crisis; promote diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility; advance environmental justice; support tribal and Native communities; and support a strong outdoor recreation economy.
The priorities are cross-cutting and support Interior’s achievement of the outcomes in the plan.
Interior published the FY 2022–2026 Strategic Plan in 2022.
The strategic plan outlines the vision, strategic goals, and strategic objectives of the Department to reflect current priorities.
Many performance goals established in this plan focus on the outcomes that go beyond traditional reporting to better demonstrate the impact of Interior’s work.
Annually, the Department reflects on these measures in the Annual Performance Plan and Report where we detail the measures and the progress being made towards established targets.
The following pages detail the strategic goals, objectives, measures, and the targets that Interior sought to achieve in FY 2023.
Of the 65 measures with established targets, 39 met or exceeded their targets and 26 did not meet their targets.
This was slightly lower than the rate of target achievement in FY 2022.
There are many reasons why performance measures do not meet the targets each year, including staffing and hiring issues, level of demand versus resources, challenges in planning and implementation, constructing and contracting issues, and other delays.
Interior was able to achieve 60% of targets through efforts to increase coordination between Tribes and the Department, establish program and project management standards, and expand availability of grants and funding that support Interior’s outcomes.
The performance results of FY 2023 will inform future planning to ensure that Interior can continue to make better progress on the goals and objectives to deliver results for the American people.
Agency Priority Goals (APGs) are two-year goals with milestones that the Department updates quarterly on www.performance.gov.
APGs support measurable improvements in near-term outcomes and advance progress toward the longer-term, outcome-focused strategic goals and strategic objectives.
APGs reflect the top implementation-focused, performance improvement priorities of the Biden-Harris Administration and Interior leadership.
By September 30, 2025, the coordination of IA1, SOL2, and BLM3 activities will reduce the average time of processing land into trust applications from 779 days to 650 days to better meet the principles and guidelines established in the Indian Reorganization Act and reaffirmed in the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act.
This Agency Priority Goal is continued for the FY 2024-2025 cycle.
The target has changed from 365 days to a more realistic but ambitious milestone of 650 days by FY 2025.
This incremental goal will be a significant milestone towards reaching a 365-day goal.
By September 30, 2025, the Department of the Interior will complete the environmental and technical reviews of construction and operations plans for commercial offshore wind projects capable of generating at least 60% of the capacity needed to meet the national goal of deploying 30 gigawatts (GW) of offshore wind capacity by 2030.
This Agency Priority Goal is continued for the FY 2024–2025 cycle.
In the new cycle, number of GW has been changed to cumulative percent of national offshore wind goal capacity met.
By September 30, 2025, the Department of the Interior will implement programs that increase water conservation and improve water efficiency to conserve 1,500,000-acre feet of water across the 17 western United States.
This will include water conservation in multiple basins, addressing the critically low water levels to ensure continued water delivery to U.S. agriculture, communities, and generation of clean hydropower energy.
The 2022–2023 Water Conservation Goal captured data from a single grant program with modest water savings.
The revised goal for 24–25 is broader in scope and ambition.
By September 30, 2025, Interior will assist states in reclaiming 1,150 abandoned coal mine land problems; and support the plugging of 7,900 identified orphaned oil and gas wells on state, private, tribal, and federal lands.
By reducing legacy pollution with BIL investments, Interior is helping to improve community health and safety, create good paying jobs, and address the climate crisis, all of which is transforming a legacy of pollution into a legacy of environmental stewardship.
The FY 2022–2023 APG cycle concluded on September 30, 2023.
The three goals were: Improve Tribal Land into Trust Processing, Offshore Wind, and Water Conservations and Supply Enhancement.
Advancements were made in all three goals.
By September 30, 2023, the coordination of Indian Affairs, the Office of the Solicitor, and the Bureau of Land Management activities will reduce the average time of processing Land into Trust applications from 985 days to 365 days to better meet the principles and guidelines established in the Indian Reorganization Act and reaffirmed in the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act.
There have been significant advances in the reduction of time required to process Land into Trust applications.
The goal of 365 days is aspirational, and the BIA will continue to strive to reach such an achievement.
By the close of FY 2023, BIA had reduced their average processing time by 206 days, from 985 to 779 days.
Several accomplishments have contributed to this improved efficiency.
Solicitor review timeframes have experienced significant reductions.
The SOL are currently averaging 54 days from request to receipt of Title Opinions (i.e., legal opinion attesting to the validity of the title deed to a piece of property).
National averages previously exceeded 100 days.
The target for issuing a Legal Land Description Review (i.e., verification that the land description is accurate, correctly describes the subject property, and that is consistent throughout the acquisition documents) was identified as 30 days.
Currently the GIS strike team is averaging 16 days to issue reviews.
This Agency Priority Goal is continued for the FY 2024–2025 cycle.
The target has changed from 365 days to a more realistic but ambitious milestone of 650 days by FY 2025.
This incremental goal will be a significant milestone towards reaching a 365-day goal.
By September 30, 2023, the Department of the Interior will complete plan reviews and environmental analyses for projects capable of cumulatively generating 14.8 gigawatts (GW) of commercial offshore wind energy capacity and hold 5 renewable energy lease sales to support the national goal of deploying 30 GWs of offshore wind capacity by 2030.
BOEM did not reach its targets due to changes to the projected review schedules of several projects, resulting in the estimated date for the projects’ Record of Decision falling outside of FY 2023.
The primary reason for this delay was later-than-expected submissions of required information by developers; challenges in obtaining information (seasonal surveys, cost, etc.), or changes in business strategies.
Although there were delays in achieving this milestone, Interior is working to make progress on 30 GWs of offshore wind capacity by 2030.
This Agency Priority Goal is continued for the FY 2024–2025 cycle.
In the new cycle, number of GW has been changed to cumulative percent of national offshore wind goal capacity met.
Increase water conservation capacity to help achieve a more sustainable water supply and to address impacts of drought in the western United States.
By September 30, 2023, the Bureau of Reclamation will facilitate water conservation capacity of 55,236 acre-feet to help reduce the impact of drought.
USBR surpassed their targets for both years in water savings.
Projects that contribute toward this goal have multiple public benefits in addition to water savings, such as: mitigation of water conflicts in high- risk areas and water delivery that facilitates future on-farm improvements.
This Agency Priority Goal has expanded in scope and ambition for the FY 2024–2025 cycle.
The Water Conservation Goal has broadened to address impacts of drought that increase water conservation and improve water efficiency to conserve 1,500,000-acre feet of water across 17 Western States.
The FY 2024–2025 Performance Plan and 2023 Report is the Department’s performance plan for the next two fiscal years and report of the previous fiscal year.
The plan translates the priorities, goals, and objectives of the Biden-Harris Administration and Secretary Haaland from the FY 2022–2026 Strategic Plan into performance goals and measures that can be assessed on an annual basis.
The document is organized by the strategic goals and strategic objectives in the Strategic Plan.
1. Identification and description of the strategic objective.
Progress Summary – Highlights of accomplishments that support progress on the strategic objective.
Strategic Actions Planned – Broad strategies the Department will implement to achieve the strategic objective in the upcoming fiscal years.
Performance goals – Customer-focused outcome goals that identify how the public benefits from Interior efforts.
Performance Measures – Measurements of progress toward the performance goa with annual targets for the next two fiscal years.
Performance measure targets are set based on requested funding levels in the budget justifications, anticipation of successful execution of strategic actions, and treatment of any enterprise risks to the strategic goals, strategic objectives, or performance goals.
Baseline – As new measures are being developed, initial data is gathered to better target the measure’s attainment in the future.
This is often noted with ‘Baseline’ in a cell.
Occasionally this takes more than one year.
N/A – Some targets are not available due to the need to baseline, or the timing of data collection.
This will be noted with an N/A in a cell and may have an associated footnote explaining further.
The report includes numbering throughout which help you identify the portion of the Strategic Plan it ties to.
Performance measure number will be the last digit in the sequence.
ONE OF THE PRIMARY GOALS of the Department is to champion equity and justice for Tribes, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and insular communities.
The scope of the Department’s responsibilities includes fulfilling fiduciary trust responsibilities, supporting tribal self-governance and self-determination, and strengthening the government-to-government relationship between the Federal Government and tribal nations.
Interior hosts consultations with Tribal Nations to honor our nation-to-nation relationship, engage directly with tribal leaders as we work to address health, economic, racial justice, and climate crises, and commit ourselves to a process that addresses tribal needs and ensures we respect and take input to heart.
Additionally, the Department provides educational services to approximately 45,000 students in 23 states through 169 elementary, secondary schools and 14 dormitories, and supports 33 tribal colleges, universities, technical colleges, and post-secondary schools.
Moreover, the Department also offers technical assistance through partnerships with Native Hawaiian and insular communities to efficiently and effectively secure and manage federal funds through planning and program activities.
As the primary federal department responsible for maintaining the trust and treaty obligations between the U.S. Government and tribal nations, the Department is actively working to enhance government-to-government relationships with Tribes.
The Department of the Interior is committed to supporting tribal governments rights to sovereignty, self-determination, and self-governance.
To achieve these goals, the Department is focused on providing Tribes with the necessary resources to exercise their sovereignty, improving the management of fiduciary and trust responsibilities regarding land and water rights, fostering better consultation with Native communities, and enhancing intergovernmental coordination to streamline federal response efforts.
Progress for this objective is deemed acceptable, thanks to significant progress being made with the Secretary’s Tribal Advisory Committee (STAC) and The White House Council on Native American Affairs (WHCNAA), as well as ongoing efforts to promote regular and direct communication between Tribal leaders and Department officials.
However, there is a need for action to better define outcomes and improve coordination across various strategies.
These measures are expected to be included in the FY 2026 President’s Budget submission.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs’ Trust Asset and Accounting Management System (TAAMS), the official system for ownership and land management, expanded with the addition of new modules for leasing and rights of way (ROW).
Previously, the probate process for Indian Estates was bifurcated, with information gathering on deceased Indian beneficiaries of trust land handled by the BIA and estate adjudication managed by the Department’s Office of Hearings and Appeals.
The success of bringing together these two activities within TAAMS allowed the Indian Energy Service Center to facilitate a Rural Water ROW workgroup in FY 2023, resulting in a 30% increase in recorded ROWs in TAAMS for the Ft.
Berthold Indian Reservation, Rural Water Department.
For more details on the contributions of the BIA and the Office of Trust Services (OTS) to Indian Country, refer to the BIA OTS FY 2023 Accomplishment Report.
The Department has made significant progress in investing in infrastructure, communities, and people, further strengthening the governmentto-government relationship between the Department and Tribal nations nationwide.
Within Strategic Objective 1.1, Interior has placed a high priority on reducing the average processing time for Land into Trust to align with the principles and guidelines of the Indian Reorganization Act and Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act.
Although the target (measure 1.1.2.1) to reduce the average processing time to 365 days in FY 2023 was not met, a significant reduction of 310 days (from 1,089 in FY 2022 to 779 in FY 2023) was achieved.
Based on data from FY 2022–2023, the goal is the further reduce the processing time to 650 days in FY 2025.
In FY 2022, BLM Indian Lands Surveyor (BILS) provided training for BIA staff.
In FY 2023, the Division of Real Estate Services (DRES) assisted BILS in completing the curriculum for Pre-approved Agency or Tribal Officials/ Agents.
A key strategy for further efficiency, set to launch in FY 2025, is the implementation of automation within TAAMS, to reduce human error and improve status updates.
Interior continued its focus on the Federal Indian Boarding School Initiative, conducting 12 listening sessions across Indian Country as part of “The Road to Healing,” which contributed to Volume 2 of the Federal Indian Boarding School Initiative Investigative Report.
Furthermore, progress was made through the White House Council on Native American Affairs (WHNCAA), which is co-chaired by the Department and the Domestic Policy Council.
The WHNCAA has advanced efforts to establish a centralized clearinghouse for federal funding opportunities accessible to Tribal governments, enterprises, Native entrepreneurs, and Native Community Development Financial Institutions.
Additionally, the WHNCAA has developed a Best Practices Guide for Tribal and Native Hawaiian Sacred Sites for Federal Agencies and is collaborating with their Tribal treaty rights MOU Workgroup to implement training for all federal employees on Tribal Consultation related to Treaty rights and reserved rights.
The BLM conducted approximately 340 tribal consultations addressing various topics such as proposed rulemaking and land use planning.
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs held a consultation with Tribal leaders on the Indian Country Data Working Group’s (ICDWG) focus areas for enhancing federal data management for Indian Country.
During the consultation, Tribal leaders emphasized recognizing tribal data sovereignty as a primary concern.
Suggestions from Tribal leaders for promoting tribal data sovereignty include acceptance and use of tribal selfcertified data by the federal government, provision of resources and technical support to Tribes for their own data collection and management, protection of tribal data from Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests, and establishment of a tribal data advisory board.
The feedback from the tribal leaders has been communicated to the ICDWG, and a comprehensive consultation report is forthcoming to direct future activities and plans of the ICDWG.
Lead the WHCNAA Committee on Economic Development, Energy, and Infrastructure to gather crucial data for establishing the first-ever baseline funding requirements for Tribal governments by the federal government.
Upon publication and implementation of the final BIA rule on Mining of the Osage Mineral Estate for Oil and Gas (25 CFR Part 226), implement policies and procedures to further reinforce the Department’s trust responsibility with the Osage Nation and timely collect royalties, verify reporting, and ensure accurate disbursements are made to the Osage Nation.
The Department is dedicated to creating inclusive, safe, and healthy societies that respect the rights and cultures of all.
By upholding this commitment, the Department pledges improved safety and health conditions for American Indians and Alaska Natives and sustainable development in insular communities.
It is important that communities are inclusive and stable while providing safe conditions for disadvantaged and vulnerable groups and persons.
The Department’s policies and strategies will support Tribal, Native Hawaiian, and insular communities by prioritizing equitable law enforcement, judiciary systems, family and education services, trust services, and investments in health-related initiatives and infrastructure.
Progress for this objective is acceptable due to improvements in addressing the Missing and Murdered Indigenous Peoples Crisis, and meaningful advancements to improve health and safety outcomes in Indian Country.
The Department of the Interior has continued to support the impactful work of the Not Invisible Act Commission (NIAC) by conducting seven field hearings where nearly 600 individuals shared testimony, leading to the generation of over 300 recommendations to combat the crisis.
In November 2023, the findings and recommendations of the commission were released to the Interior, Justice, and Congress.
Both DOI and DOJ responded to the report in March 2024.
Furthermore, the Department also strengthened the Missing and Murdered Unit (MMU), which received 304 referrals in FY 2023.
Eighty-one of these were closed and 77 were closed/solved.
Tribal law enforcement achieved a clearance rate of 53.74% for criminal offenses, exceeding the target goal of 52.52%.
This achievement highlights the effectiveness of tribal law enforcement in ensuring effective policing within their respective communities.
Interior also implemented infrastructure improvements and housing programs to benefit communities across Indian Country in FY 2023.
The national goal of 3,603 road miles in acceptable condition was exceeded by 170 miles, with nine out of ten regions meeting their respective goals.
Additionally, Interior completed projects connecting 335 homes to potable water systems and is currently on track to upgrade community water systems, ensuring access for an additional 290 homes in Roosevelt, Sheridan, Daniels, and Valley counties as well as fully fund projects to complete sections of the Fort Peck Indian Reservation water system in Montana in FY 2025.
In FY 2023, the Missing and Murdered Unit (MMU) of the Office of Justice Services within the Bureau of Indian Affairs introduced a new cloud-based tool called the Solution Trust Accountability Tracker (STAT).
This innovative system is designed to organize and store information on missing person cases, murders, and human trafficking incidents involving Native Americans and Alaska Natives.
STAT utilizes a specialized intake form to gather and manage crucial details such as the type of incident, location, victim demographics, jurisdiction, and case status.
By utilizing STAT, MMU investigators can monitor patterns in unresolved cases over time and across different regions.
The tool also enables the sharing of this data with other BIA offices, Tribal Criminal Investigation programs, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Ultimately, MMU aims to leverage this information to aid in suspect identification and increase public awareness of the challenges faced by Indigenous communities.
Develop emergency action plans and early warning systems on all high and significant hazard dams that have the potential to impact more than 100,000 Tribal persons living downstream.
Prioritize and revitalize unsolved homicide investigations and missing person cases leading to higher nation-wide offense clearance rates over time.
Assess tribal court readiness at various locations throughout Indian Country related to the provisions of the Violence Against Women Act of 2022 and the Tribal Law & Order Act.
Improve coordination for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of BIA owned facilities, dams, irrigation systems and bridges using BIL funds.
Prioritize Tribal rural water contracts and identify available of funding sources to support construction of Tribal rural water systems.
Interior has a long-standing commitment to supporting enhanced quality of life and promoting economic opportunity for Tribal, Native Hawaiian, and insular communities.
However, Tribal, Native Hawaiian, and insular communities have historically been unable to fully benefit from economic growth and, in many cases, have been disproportionately excluded from economic opportunities.
The Department is investing in strategies to support these communities in developing and growing their local economies, leverage infrastructure investments and opportunities that facilitate job creation and stimulate economic activity, strengthen resilience and environmental justice, and improve financial literacy and the application of financial assistance.
Progress for this objective is acceptable due to improvement in the Buy Indian Act implementation and strong commitment to advance technical assistance and projects that supported economic development-related activities for U.S. territories.
In FY 2023, Office of Insular Affairs granted $2.4 million to the U.S. territories to supported economic development-related activities, with $480,000 allocated to support the training and licensing of commercial truck drivers in Guam.
The Department’s Office of Native Hawaiian Relations announced $1 million in funding for Native Hawaiian organizations through the HŌʻIHI Grant Program, made possible by the NATIVE Act.
The HŌʻIHI grant program remains committed to offering resources, technical assistance, and grants for Native Hawaiian Organizations as they work towards establishing sustainable tourism infrastructure, driving economic development, and generating employment opportunities in Hawai’i.
Issue Tribal Broadband Grants that would allow Tribes to focus on earlystage planning activities, such as feasibility studies, startup, and program management that are necessary for Tribes to be prepared for development with the USDA’s Rural Utilities Service and the FCC’s Universal Service Fund programs, or through other partnerships.
Enhance our understanding and targeting of actual deferred maintenance to effectively improve the condition of Public Safety and Justice facilities.
Support insular communities with grant funding to bolster investments in public infrastructure.
Additionally, provide technical assistance funding for economic development initiatives, such as workforce development and planning activities.
Improve financial literacy for beneficiaries by providing them with the necessary information to make well-informed decisions regarding their Indian Trust Funds.
The Bureau of Indian Education’s (BIE) mission is to provide students at BIE-funded schools with a culturally relevant, high-quality education that prepares students with the knowledge, skills, and behaviors needed to flourish in the opportunities of tomorrow, become healthy and successful individuals, and lead their communities and sovereign nations towards a thriving future that preserves their unique cultural identities.
Students have improved success when the Department devotes energies to continuously improve their experiences in and out of the classroom.
Through BIE, the Department is committed to enriching the lives of every student, paving the way for future achievements, and upholding their cultural traditions and Native languages.
Progress for this objective is acceptable due to implementation of a data-driven strategic plan, dedicating efforts to monitoring outcomes related to student achievement, and deploying actionable strategies to improve school facilities.
In FY 2023, the Department of the Interior transferred over $300,000 to the National Fund for Excellence in American Indian Education (the Fund).
This federally chartered nonprofit aims to enhance educational opportunities for American Indian students at Bureau of Indian Education-funded schools.
The Fund, revitalized by Secretary of the Interior, during the 2022 White House Tribal Nations Summit, will now be able to support projects that directly benefit students.
Additionally, the Department also introduced a new Behavioral Health and Wellness Program (BHWP) designed to offer culturally relevant, evidence-based, and trauma-informed behavioral health and wellness services to school staff, students, and families across all BIE-funded institutions, including Bureauoperated schools, tribally controlled schools, post-secondary institutions, and Tribal colleges and universities.
Fully deploy the Pathways Program to place students in full-time teaching positions.
Collaborate with Tribes to identify necessary resources for effective educational programs that empower sovereign nations and prepare all students for leadership.
Finalize the necessary infrastructure and secure the approvals necessary to deliver direct counseling and crisis support services through the Behavioral Health and Wellness Program (BHWP).
Establish a data collection and evaluation plan for continuous assessment of the BHWP to provide targeted behavioral health and wellness data to BIE.
Implement Wellness Wednesday, Talking Circle, Youth Mental Health First Aid (YMHFA), and other behavioral health focused training programs to ensure staff receive trauma-informed, Indigenous focused, and evidence-based supports.
Update the Culture and Drugs Don’t Mix (CDDM) curriculum and online training module to offer schools access to a trauma-informed and Indigenous-focused drug prevention program.
INTERIOR IS A STEWARD of more than 480 million acres of public lands, accounting for approximately 20 percent of the nation’s land mass, over 700 million acres of subsurface minerals, and over 2.5 billion acres of the Outer Continental Shelf.
Interior ensures that America’s natural heritage, the natural land and water resources of the United States, is managed for the benefit, use, and enjoyment of current and future generations.
In the face of climate change and other stressors, the Department uses the best available science, evidence-based natural resource management techniques, technology, engineering, and partnerships and alliances to guide stewardship of public lands and waters.
Interior is committed to addressing the environmental degradation of public lands and waters, which is exacerbated by the effects of climate change.
The greatest impact of this environmental decline is felt by communities of color, rural and Indigenous communities, lowincome families, people in the U.S. territories, and other vulnerable populations.
Our continued response to these crises is improving partnerships with neighboring landowners, land managers, and a diverse array of stakeholders to employ a holistic conservation approach.
Successful strategies to prioritize remediation of legacy pollution and expand collaborative conservations efforts to care for our nation’s lands and cultural resources have been instrumental in maintaining ecosystem health and benefits for local communities.
Using science as a guide, Interior will continue to engage with federal, state, local and Tribal entities to restore, protect, and preserve the places, stories, objects, and artifacts of our shared Nation.
Progress is acceptable due to notable BIL investments to reduce legacy pollution and additional attention brought about by designating Legacy Pollution as an (APG) for FY 2024 and 2025.
To achieve desired ecosystem benefits and proactively address current and historic environmental injustices, OSMRE distributed BIL funds for federal lands, states, and Tribes, including the Navajo Nation, to reclaim abandoned mine land (AML).
The Orphaned Wells Program Office (OWPO) provides funding to states, Tribes, and Federal agencies to plug, remediate, and restore orphaned oil and gas wells and well sites.
The OWPO released final state formula grant guidance in FY 2023 that requires state grant recipients to complete pre- and post-plugging methane measurements and screen for other environmental contaminants.
The OWPO, in partnership with state grant recipients, plugged over 6,000 wells, resulting in a reduction of approximately 12,000 metric tons of methane emissions, and restoration of 185 acres of habitat.
The FY 2023 Orphaned Wells Congressional Report estimates that the work of the OWPO supported 7,213 jobs and contributed $900 million to the economy.
Interior, through OSMRE, distributed nearly $721 million in grants to 22 states and the Navajo Nation to create good-paying jobs and catalyze economic opportunity by reclaiming coal AML problems.
States have reclaimed numerous sites with these funds, resulting in a reduction of safety hazards and enhanced environmental health for over 21,000 people.
Additionally, OSMRE announced the availability of an additional $725 million and approved 89 BIL funded Authorizations-to-Proceed (ATPs) in FY 2023, enabling States and Tribes to begin construction on specific reclamation projects.
In the federal space, Interior initiated abandoned mine inventories for physical hazards at four FWS National Wildlife Refuges (NWRs), established a performance agreement, closed a 30-feet deep shaft and audited11 San Diego NWR with bat-friendly gates, and plugged 155 orphan wells across 6 refuges.
The USGS collaborated with DOI Bureaus and federal, state, and Tribal agencies to build and begin to populate a nationwide database that will host abandoned mine land data.
BLM plugged 12 orphaned wells, oversaw the plugging of 1,501 wells by industry and funded over $16 million of AML inventory, investigation, and remediation projects.
In FY 2023, OSMRE initiated the Passive Treatment Protection Program (PTPP), which provided grant money to groups that operate, maintain, and rehabilitate passive water treatment systems on abandoned mine lands.
OSMRE formed a team of technical experts to develop and prepare guidance documents needed to implement the PTPP.
The PTPP technical team created a database of OSMRE-funded passive treatment systems, which contains information on funding level, system location, treatment method, and operational status.
In July 2023, the PTPP technical team completed site visits to West Virginia and Pennsylvania to observe the various types of passive treatment systems and to gain a better understanding of issues related to the operation, maintenance, and rehabilitation of these systems.
The evidence gathered will inform future program guidance and enable better estimates for future PTPP fund requests.
Interior made demonstrable strides in collaborative conservation, broader landscape protection and responsiveness to climate change.
In lieu of reportable measures associated with Performance Goal 2.1.1 (page 41), highlights are provided on significant achievements.
Interior supported the development and launch of Conservation.Gov, which includes the American and Conservation Stewardship Atlas, in coordination with the US Department of Agriculture, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the White House Council on Environmental Quality.
Other noteworthy successes are listed below and contained in the America the Beautiful 2023 Annual Report (doi.gov).
The BLM’s Conservation and Landscape Health Rule — also known as the Public Lands Rule — which will help facilitate efforts that support the resilience of public lands and conserve important wildlife habitat and intact landscapes.
Protections implemented for the entire Beaufort Sea Planning Area in Alaska to prevent future extractive development, and more than 13 million acres in the National Petroleum Reserve in Alaska due to their significant natural and cultural values.
In September 2023, the Secretary of the Interior established two new national wildlife refuges, building on decades-long locally led efforts to conserve habitat for species and maintain recreational access.
The Wyoming Toad Conservation Area in Wyoming and the Paint Rock River National Wildlife Refuge in Tennessee are the 569th and 570th units of the NWRS, managed by the FWS.
In FY 2023, through its Tribal Climate Resilience Program, Interior announced the availability of $120 million in funding through President Biden’s Investing in America agenda to help Tribal communities plan for the most severe climate-related environmental threats to their homelands.
Tribal communities can use this funding to safely relocate critical community infrastructure proactively.
This is one of the largest amounts of annual funding made available to Tribes and Tribal organizations in the history of the Tribal Climate Annual Awards Program in the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA).
Migrate BLM museum collections data to a platform to enhance online access by the public.
Develop a comprehensive inventory of orphaned oil and gas well sites to align and track program activities, conduct equity analysis, and improve budget and planning.
Continue development of the American Conservation and Stewardship Atlas to provide an integrated view of on-theground conservation, restoration, and stewardship activities.
Deploy an automated OSMRE Abandoned Mine Land Economic Revitalization (AMLER) project tracking system.
Contingent on Congressional appropriations, offer an expanded PTPP to reduce OSMRE’s maintenance backlog on existing passive treatment systems.
The Department is responsible for the protection of fish, wildlife, native plants, and the ecosystems that support them.
This trust responsibility transcends jurisdictional boundaries and includes oversight and actions that affect all 1,669 species listed under the Endangered Species Act and more than 1,000 migratory bird species that receive federal protection under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act.
Interior’s strategy includes managing invasive species, restoring lands and waters to a condition that is self-sustaining, and ensuring that habitats support healthy native wildlife populations.
Interior will combat domestic and international wildlife trafficking by improving enforcement of domestic laws, strengthening international cooperation and global enforcement.
Furthermore, Interior’s strategy for wildland fire management includes strengthening wildland fire preparedness, improving year-round response to wildfires (as fire seasons are prolonged due to climate change), and increasing fuels management and burned area rehabilitation efforts.
Interior determined progress for this objective is acceptable.
Progress on this objective has included BIL and IRA investments aimed at strengthening the resilience of critical ecosystems, notable efforts to acquire and use Indigenous Knowledges, implementation of effective co-stewardship, and Interior’s commitment to build evidence, including scientific research and experimentation to better understand how climate change is altering ecosystems.
BIL and IRA funding allowed for the development of the Departmentwide Restoration and Resilience Framework to strategically invest in restoration and resilience with additional focus on crossbureau conservation challenges.
BIL and IRA investments also supported a new Gravel to Gravel Keystone Initiative ($2 billion) to restore lands and waters and advance climate resilience.
Additionally, the Department Office of Wildland Fire approved over $28 million in BIL funding for 26 projects to support burned area rehabilitation by proactively developing native seeds and plant materials for all Wildland Fire Management bureaus.
Further investment of more than $16 million is planned over the next four years, with co-stewardship by Alaska Native Tribes, to enhance the resilience of ecosystems and salmon in Alaska’s Yukon, Kuskokwim, and Norton Sound regions.
Interior announced significant action to better facilitate species recovery by providing more flexibility for the introduction of threatened and endangered species to suitable habitats outside their historical ranges.
Finalized revisions to section 10(j) regulations under the Endangered Species Act (ESA) will help improve the conservation and recovery of imperiled ESA-listed species in the coming decades, as growing impacts from climate change and invasive species cause habitats within species historical ranges to shift or become unsuitable.
In support of expanding migration corridors, Interior announced nearly $4 million in grants along with $9.2 million in matching contributions for 13 projects in nine States that will help secure key migration paths and restore critical wildlife habitats.
Together, more than $13 million will be invested to protect pronghorn, elk, mule deer, and other iconic species across the American West.
In support of expanding migration corridors, Interior announced nearly $4 million in grants along with $9.2 million in matching contributions for 13 projects in nine States that will help secure key migration paths and restore critical wildlife habitats.
In support of native plant community rehabilitation and restoration, BLM advanced its public-private collaboration with hundreds of partners to protect native plants and develop native seed for restoration.
In FY 2023, BLM signed a formal agreement with the NPS and FWS to collaborate in Seeds of Success, a Justice 40-covered program that collects native seed across the United States for ecosystem restoration.
This agreement nearly doubled the native seed collecting teams from 36 in FY 2022 to 60, and supported teams from Justice 40 communities, including Tribal Nations and underserved populations.
The BLM continued work on its four newly developed AIM performance metrics, which quantify ecosystem health in rangelands, streams and rivers, and wetland and riparian areas.
4) an increase in the percentage of rivers and streams possessing clean water.
The BLM is currently finishing a report which provides additional documentation of its methodology and results for dissemination within BLM and the Department more broadly.
Ultimately, BLM plans to use these performance measures to guide BIL and IRA restoration investments to improve ecosystem resistance, resilience, and adaptability in the face of climate change.
In FY 2023, Interior funded Tribal efforts to advance co-stewardship, bringing Tribal partner voices, Indigenous Knowledge, and local expertise into the planning and decision-making process.
Through a public-private partnership, Native Americans in Philanthropy provided additional matching funding for the Tribes.
These investments serve as a catalyst and a model for additional public and private sector investments in Alaska and in the foundational planning, science, and restoration projects needed to respond to the salmon crisis and to heal the broader ecosystem through co-stewardship.
Several new steps are underway to restore wild and healthy populations of American bison and the prairie grassland ecosystem.
Through Secretary’s Order 3410 and an investment of over $25 million from the Inflation Reduction Act, the Department is empowering its bureaus and partners to use the best available science and Indigenous Knowledge to help restore bison across the country.
The funding will support tribally led efforts to strengthen bison conservation and restoration of grassland habitats.
The funding advances the Department’s new Grasslands Keystone Initiative, which is also part of the restoration and resilience framework.
The BLM removed 4,599 wild horses and burros from overpopulated rangelands and applied fertility control treatments to 398 of these animals before they were returned to the range.
Thirty-eight population surveys were conducted to support ongoing and future management actions and 7,619 additional animals were placed into private care through adoptions, sales, and transfers.
Despite this progress, anticipated targets were not reached due to budget shortfalls.
The Department’s invasive species efforts continue to be guided by the Interior Invasive Species Strategic Plan.
Goals include collaboration and education, prevention, early detection and rapid response, control and eradication, and data management.
In FY 2023, the Department continued to prioritize work under “3 in 3 for the WIN,” an effort to advance three signature invasive species initiatives in three years: (W) wildfire and invasive species; (I) islands and invasive species; and a (N) National Early Detection and Rapid Response Framework.
The purpose of these initiatives is to reduce environmental and economic harm and harm to human health caused by invasive species.
The Department leveraged investments from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law to fund activities supporting these initiatives.
Examples of FY 2023 activities include integrated wildland fire and invasive annual grass management in the sagebrush ecosystem to protect intact core areas; delivery of a regional biosecurity training in Guam for the U.S. territories to strengthen collaboration and prevention, detection, and response efforts; and establishment of a rapid response fund for Aquatic Invasive Species to expedite eradication of newly arriving invasive species.
Interior bureaus led extensive invasive species control and eradication activities in FY 2023.
The BLM’s Noxious Weeds and Invasive Plants Management Program applied treatments to control noxious weeds and invasive plants across 274,328 acres of BLM-managed public lands.
This work was supported by local partners, such as Cooperative Weed Management Areas, and by numerous BLM programs including range improvement, recreation site management, post-fire emergency stabilization and rehabilitation, fuels management, and fluid minerals development.
The BLM also drafted an Aquatic Restoration Categorical Exclusion Verification Report and Federal Register Notice and submitted the package for review to the Office of Environmental Policy and Compliance (OEPC).
In FY 2023, the NWRS treated invasive plants across 245,897 acres of FWS managed lands through their Refuge and dedicated Invasive Species Strike Team staff.
Over 79 unique populations of invasive animals were controlled as well.
The NWRS built two new strike team programs that are being implemented in the Alaska Region for island restoration efforts and in the Southeast Region for work in Southern Florida-Everglades.
In addition, the NWRS funded five large-scale eradication or maximum control projects located at Lake Mattamuskeet, Nihoa Island, Culebra NWR Complex, Palmyra Atoll, and James Campbell NWR; four of the projects were support through BIL investments.
Activities included removing invasive grasses, carp, mammals, and installing predator-proof fencing.
Implement funded assistance agreements to increase BLM’s capacity to design, implement, assess, and adaptively manage water, riparian and wetland, and aquatic restoration projects.
Increase capacity to acquire, protect, and manage federal reserved and state-based water rights and negotiate agreements to ensure water is available to sustain resistant and resilient aquatic resources and other beneficial uses on public lands.
Implement revised species maps for 70% of the federally listed species to focus conservation and management attention on the most critically imperiled species and habitats.
Conduct at least three evidence syntheses to improve the effectiveness of international wildlife conservation assistance provided by FWS International Conservation Affairs.
Initiate management for 7 additional invasive animal species (for a total of 189) on NPS lands, in alignment with maintained funding levels to meet programmatic and strategic goals.
Reestablish spring-run Chinook salmon through an open river that include fish passage at dams, water diversion protections, and sufficient flows to manage water temperatures and provide for habitat needs.
There is a long history of Americans and visitors to the United States finding adventure and enjoyment in outdoor recreation, learning from historic locations, and being in places where they can find a personal connection to nature and our heritage.
To protect our public lands and heritage into the future, Interior balances preservation and conservation to safeguard irreplaceable magnificent natural wonders and provide access to significant historical and cultural resources, including the recently added Emmett Till and Mamie Till-Mobley National Monument.
Visitors can enjoy educational and interpretive services through programs, visitor centers, exhibits, publications, and online learning resources that fosters an understanding of their value and leads to lifelong stewardship.
Interior engages both traditional and new audiences and prioritizes recreation access for urban and underserved communities to ensure public lands are available for visitors to reflect, take pride in and enjoy.
Interior rated this strategic objective as a focus area to advance because of the need for a more equitable engagement to preserve and enhance rural landscapes, urban parks and rivers, important ecosystems, cultural resources, and wildlife habitat and incorporate ensure inclusivity beyond day-today management policies into the delivery of Interior’s missions.
Assistance Program working to create and restore parks, conservation areas, and brownfields in 260 communities, and funding to increase access and connectivity in urbanized areas and provide a safe transportation network for non-motorized options.
President Biden’s Investing in America agenda leverages public and private investment to engage communities in every corner of the United States through meaningful education, employment, and training opportunities to create a path to good-paying jobs.
In FY 2023, Interior announced a $15 million commitment to the Indian Youth Service Corps (IYSC) and other programs supporting the next generation of conservation and climate stewards.
The grant funding is designed to help develop Tribal capacity in conservation, natural resource management, and climate resilience and provide Tribes and Tribal organizations with funding to enable them to invest in, train, and recruit a new generation of skilled Indigenous workers.
The IYSC established eight pilot projects, in partnership with Tribal Nations and qualified youth and conservation corps, designed to provide Indigenous youth with meaningful, tribally led public service opportunities to support the conservation and protection of natural and cultural resources through construction, restoration, or rehabilitation.
In FY 2023, Interior partnered with Conservation Legacy’s Ancestral Lands Conservation Corps, Native Lands Digital, U.S. Forest Service (USFS), and the Partnership for the National Trails System to launch the Native Lands National Trails Indigenous mapping and research project.
FWS and NPS are Interior’s two High Impact Service Providers that supported this strategic objective in FY 2023.
Fws.gov improvements focused on customer experience by strengthening search functionality, increasing loading speeds, and updating the design and organization of information and resources such as hours of operation and maps.
FWS also partnered with diverse organizations (e.g., Latino Outdoors, Mobilize Green) to deliver recreation and conservation programs designed to meet the needs of urban youth and families.
To make wildlife refuge experience and programming more inclusive, 10 urban national wildlife refuges launched community engagement fellowships, bringing in diverse fellows, often bilingual, to make visiting wildlife refuges more accessible to surrounding communities.
As a testament to NPS’s commitment to continued improvements in its digital space, NPS made changes to ensure that information about park access, fees, and entrance passes is up-to-date, accurate, reliable, and easily understood on NPS.Gov and the NPS app.
Furthermore, these sites now have functionality to share real-time road closure and incident alerts and established compatibility so that this data is also usable by external apps, maps, and websites.
To broaden the NPS experience to a wider audience, all NPS sites can now provide audio-described tours for blind or low vision visitors directly through the NPS app.
NPS also opened a customer feedback survey on Volunteer.gov to gather feedback and enable continuous data driven program and site improvements.
Expedite the development of BLM’s online permit applications system to streamline the process and help inform and educate the public.
Provide an enhanced, more sustainable recreational experience by delivering upto-date and engaging visitor information online and in person.
Conduct recreation facility condition assessments on approximately 20 percent of recreation sites.
Enhance online trip planning services and expand use of electronic recreation fee payment methods.
Establish at least three new partnerships, apprenticeships, and/or youth engagement programs to help communities working to create and restore outdoor spaces with the FWS National Wildlife Refuge System (NWRS).
Expand the Maintenance and Infrastructure Fellows Program to include at least one additional FWS programs in addition to NWRS.
Improve usability of virtual trip planning resources on fws.gov serving 11 million annual web visits and provide more services on recreation.gov serving 103 million annual web visits to enhance refuge visitation and user experience.
Offer electronic options for passes, fees and permits to improve efficiency and access to visitors to an additional 13 national wildlife refuges will be offered.
AS THE MANAGER of one-fifth of the nation’s land, mineral, and energy resources, as well as 2.5 billion acres of the OCS, the Department plays a crucial role in meeting America’s energy needs and guiding the nation towards a cleaner energy future.
Interior manages a comprehensive energy strategy that includes the exploration and development of oil, natural gas, geothermal, hydroelectric, solar, and wind power resources.
Projects on lands and waters managed by Interior are not only generating the energy needed to power our homes, vehicles, and businesses, but also creating jobs and providing an average annual revenue of over $10 billion that supports the economies of federal, state, local, and Tribal communities.
The Department facilitates the development and use of wind, solar, geothermal, and hydropower energy to help transition the Nation to a clean energy economy and strengthen energy security.
Our commitment to enabling viable and sustainable renewable energy production is central to our strategy for advancing renewable energy generation on public lands.
This includes prioritizing renewable connectivity, improving intraagency coordination for renewable permits, and maximizing timeliness and efficiency of renewable energy siting.
Progress for this objective requires attention to improve efficiency and prioritization for renewable energy development, including capacity-building and cooperation for renewable development on Tribal lands, regulatory improvements, and interagency cooperation.
The objective is bolstered by a strong commitment to develop offshore wind resources, streamline permitting procedures, and modernize regulations to improve transparency, efficiency, and flexibility for renewable energy development.
In FY 2023, the Department made significant progress in promoting clean energy, particularly through offshore wind projects.
The Department successfully approved four offshore wind projects, with BOEM approving construction and operation plans for two projects that are projected to produce nearly 6.5 gigawatts once constructed.
To support the emerging offshore wind industry, BSEE established a robust regulatory and enforcement program for the industry this year.
The Department also announced the finalization of three Wind Energy Areas (WEAs) offshore Delaware, Maryland, and Virginia, which were developed following extensive engagement and feedback from federal government partners, states, Tribes, residents, ocean users, and other members of the public.
Once fully developed, the final WEAs could support between four and eight gigawatts of energy production.
BOEM partnered with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA’s) National Centers for Coastal Ocean Science (NCCOS) to develop a comprehensive, ecosystem-based ocean planning model that assisted in the selection of the final WEAs and issued a Proposed Lease Sale notice for two of the three areas in FY 2024, with a sale scheduled for August 2024.
In FY 2023, the Biden-Harris Administration announced its approval of the Empire Wind offshore wind project, the sixth approval of a commercial-scale offshore wind energy project under President Biden’s leadership.
This announcement supports the Administration’s goal of deploying 30 gigawatts of offshore wind energy capacity by 2030.
The project will consist of two offshore wind facilities, known as Empire Wind 1 and Empire Wind 2, and will be located about 12 nautical miles (nm) south of Long Island, N.Y., and about 16.9 nm east of Long Branch, N.J. Together these projects would have up to 147 wind turbines with a total capacity of 2,076 megawatts of clean, renewable energy that BOEM estimates could power more than 700,000 homes each year.
The projects would support over 830 jobs each year during the construction phase and about 300 jobs annually during the operations phase.
As part of the Biden-Harris Administration’s goal of deploying 30 gigawatts of offshore wind energy capacity by 2030, BOEM collaborated with NOAA’s NCCOS to develop data models to analyze wind energy development in the Gulf of Mexico.
The models enabled analysis of the entire Gulf of Mexico ecosystem and identified precise locations to minimize potential conflicts with marine resources and ocean users.
Using evidence produced by the models, BOEM identified four WEAs in the Gulf of Mexico, and in August 2023 held the first-ever offshore wind energy auction for the Gulf of Mexico region.
The newly identified WEAs have combined potential to produce enough clean, renewable energy to power more than three million homes.
Complete reviews of construction and operations plans for offshore wind projects and prepare for additional lease sales to accelerate deployment of offshore wind by 2030.
Publish refinements to the offshore renewable energy regulations, as well as guidelines for their interpretation.
Collaborate with the Department of Energy (DOE) and other Federal agencies on ways to address transmission and grid connectivity and capacity issues affecting offshore wind development.
Collaborate with the NOAA, DOE, and the Department of Transportation, along with other Federal partners, to implement an “All-of-Government” approach for facilitating offshore wind development that ensures robust interagency coordination and cooperation.
Develop a science strategy for subsurface pore space research and assessments to support potential future offshore carbon sequestration efforts.
The Department supports balanced stewardship of natural resources to help meet the Nation’s energy needs and the Administration’s goal of a carbon pollutionfree power sector by 2035.
The Department is committed to promoting economic growth and safeguarding the environment for future generations.
We are working on understanding the Nation’s fundamental geologic framework to ensure a reliable and sustainable supply of the critical minerals, as well as advance implementation strategies to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and advance sustainable energy production.
Additionally, we are mindful of the need to balance resource protection with the economy’s demand for non-energy minerals such as metals, sand and gravel, and forest and rangeland products.
As the Nation transitions to a clean energy economy to address climate change, Interior is committed to overseeing conventional energy development on lands and waters proceeds in a safe and environmentally responsible manner.
Progress for this objective requires attention to improve efficiency and prioritization for renewable energy development, including capacity building and cooperation for renewable development on Tribal lands, regulatory improvements, and interagency cooperation.
The objective is bolstered by a strong commitment to develop offshore wind resources and implement strategies to streamline permitting processes, modernize regulations, and remove barriers that impede renewable energy development.
BIL funding for the Earth Mapping Resources Initiative (Earth MRI) to map critical minerals that are essential for everything from household appliances and electronics to clean energy technology like batteries and wind turbines.
Earth MRI conducted, along with NASA, several hyperspectral surveys over the semi-arid southwestern United States to support geologic mapping and legacy mine waste studies.
In FY 2024, the USGS will advance Earth MRI to accelerate mapping efforts and build toward an initial comprehensive national modern map of our domestic mineral resources.
The USGS also is assessing the potential for geothermal energy and geologic carbon storage, including through carbon mineralization.
The Department of the Interior led the Interagency Working Group on Mining Regulations, Laws, and Permitting, which issued its report, Recommendations to Improve Hardrock Mining on Public Lands, in September 2023.
The report included 65 recommendations to improve Federal mine permitting processes and engagement of local and Tribal communities.
Interior also recognizes the safety and environmental risks posed by thousands of mines on Department lands, particularly the over 50,000 abandoned hardrock mines on BLM lands.
These sites jeopardize public safety and environmental health, especially for nearby rural and Tribal communities and recreational visitors.
To address these challenges, the Administration is dedicated to remediating hazards, improving air and water quality, and generating jobs in rural areas with a $62.8 million budget for BLM’s Abandoned Mine Lands program, which aims to work alongside the National Abandoned Hardrock Mine Reclamation Program for site inventory and remediation.
To support the Administration’s onshore renewable energy development goals, BLM partnered with DOE’s National Renewable Energy Laboratory to bring the best available technological and environmental research into the planning, permitting, and monitoring of geothermal, wind, and solar developments on BLM-managed public lands.
The Secretary approved the 732-mile TransWest Express transmission line to carry 3,000 megawatts of new capacity from the Chokecherry and Sierra Madre Wind Energy Project, the largest onshore wind generation project operational in North America.
These efforts reflect Interior’s commitment to address the growing demand for effective and expeditious renewable energy development and transmission infrastructure on public lands.
Additionally, the BLM approved ten wind, solar, and geothermal projects and made progress on key transmission lines that will power millions of homes across the West.
As of June 2024, BLM is currently processing 67 utility-scale onshore clean energy projects, which have the combined potential to add over 31,000 megawatts of renewable energy to the western electric grid.
BLM is working to revise its 2012 the Western Solar Plan and further streamline the BLM’s framework for siting solar energy projects.
The plan was originally developed in collaboration with the Department of Energy, resulting in a Final Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement (PEIS) for solar energy development in Arizona, California, Colorado, Nevada, New Mexico, and Utah.
The new PEIS will provide landscape-level analysis to add support for utility-scale solar energy planning in Idaho, Montana, Oregon, Washington, and Wyoming.
Through this effort, BLM will further evaluate areas with high solar potential and low resource conflicts to guide responsible solar development and provide certainty to developers.
Identify additional areas that appear suitable for renewable energy development on the OCS, including offshore U.S. Territories.
Conduct eight renewable energy lease sales, including the first floating wind renewable energy lease sale on the Atlantic in the Gulf of Maine.
By September 30, 2025, issue an initial call for information and nominations for offshore wind call areas in at least one U.S. territory.
Publish the Renewable Energy Safety and Assurance Rule to improve efficiencies and facilitate safe and environmentally responsible offshore wind energy development.
Publish the final rule establishing processes in support of safe and environmentally responsible carbon sequestration activities on the OCS.
Establish a “Fitness to Operate” program for OCS operators to implement a proactive, risk-based approach to help ensure safety and environmental protection.
Managing America’s water and mineral resources has been a core Interior responsibility since its founding.
As climate change impacts our communities, economies and the environment, Interior is called upon to balance resource protection responsibilities with the economy’s need for water, energy, and minerals.
Interior is leveraging science, engineering, and technical assistance both in the U.S. and abroad to improve water delivery and drought mitigation and reduce water consumption to sustain American water supplies challenged by population increase and development.
The Department is also pursuing an all-of-government approach to advance sustainable, responsible, and efficient use of non-energy minerals including hard rock, sand and gravel, and forest and rangeland products to ensure that communities’ economic and environmental health is sustained.
Overall, progress for this objective is acceptable due to transformative BIL and IRA investments in water infrastructure, drought mitigation, and domestic water supply projects now underway, and evidence-based strategies to improve water delivery and reduce water consumption.
In FY 2023, Interior announced BIL and IRA funding for 245 projects, including water infrastructure, rural water, water storage and conveyance, and small storage projects.
In FY 2025, Interior will allocate BIL and IRA funding for traditional program areas for western water infrastructure and drought as well as new programs pertaining to large-scale recycling, aquatic ecosystems, and small storage.
In FY 2023, the Department announced the initiation of a formal process to develop new guidelines for protecting the stability and sustainability of the Colorado River, to replace the 2007 Interim Guidelines, which are set to expire in FY 2026.
The new guidelines will consider the current and projected hydrology of the Colorado River Basin which is facing a historic drought due to climate change.
The Biden-Harris Administration aims to collaborate with Mexico under the 1944 Water Treaty to sustain the Binational Cooperative Process.
Through investments in climate resilience and water infrastructure projects, including $8.3 billion over five years from BIL and more than $4 billion from IRA, the Administration is committed to enhancing the sustainability of the Colorado River system and addressing the impacts of the ongoing drought.
The Department of the Interior announced over $51 million in funding for 18 projects across eight states to restore and protect aquatic ecosystems.
The funding, part of President Biden's Investing in America Agenda, will support the study, design, and construction of ecosystem restoration projects that benefit water supplies, wildlife, and habitats.
The projects will improve water quality, mitigate the impacts of drought and floods, and contribute to climate resilience.
The funding comes from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and the Bureau of Reclamation’s WaterSMART program.
The announcement also includes $20 million for the Southern Nevada Water Authority to create a wetland and habitat in the Lake Mead National Recreation Area to protect the endangered razorback sucker.
The Department made significant strides in advancing drought modeling and forecasting, devising new techniques and computer software to solve practical problems in the study of water resources.
The U. S. Geological Survey (USGS) is exploring the usage of new data-driven methods (artificial intelligence and machine learning) to predict and deliver early warning of hydrological drought conditions at higher spatial and temporal resolution than previously available.
These data-driven drought prediction models for surface water and groundwater will provide useful information to the public on drought onset, duration, and severity, including their uncertainty.
The USGS continues to improve the spatial and temporal resolution of drought monitoring systems to deliver detailed and real-time information on drought conditions nationwide.
By incorporating new satellite technologies and ground-based sensors, the USGS now provides timely and comprehensive drought assessments to support emergency response efforts and efficient allocation of resources.
The USGS is leading a federal effort to evaluate mine waste as a resource for critical minerals.
The USGS advanced the National Mine Waste Inventory significantly, including (1) completion of the joint USGS/BLM USMIN database of historical mining locations in all 50 states and Puerto Rico and (2) BILfunded grants to State geological surveys to sample mine waste; and collaborated with BLM, BIA, NPS, OSMRE, USFS, and EPA to identify pilot sites to examine the potential to extract minerals from waste while supporting remediation, reclamation, and restoration.
Implement assistance agreements to increase BLM’s capacity to design, implementation, assess, and adaptively manage water, riparian and wetland, and aquatic restoration projects.
Increase capacity to acquire, protect, negotiate, and manage federal reserved and state-based water rights.
Develop supply chain forecasting methodology to routinely forecast supply chain vulnerabilities and the economic impacts of supply chain disruption events.
Publish version 1a of the National Integrated Water Availability Assessment report which will integrate models of water quantity, quality, and use to evaluate water availability from 2010–2020, future versions will include trends (v1b) and predictions of future water availability (v2 and beyond).
Continue the National Water Information System modernization to provide enhanced water data in easily accessible formats, and enable more informed predictions, assessments, and decisions.
Continue to integrate water quality into enterprise model capacity to better evaluate the possible effects of changing climate, land-use, management practices, and extreme events.
Continue the accelerated pace of geophysical surveys and geologic mapping through the Earth Mapping Resources Initiative to improve knowledge of the U.S. geologic framework and identify areas that have the potential to contain undiscovered critical mineral resources.
Continue working with the Colorado River Basin states and Tribes to develop to develop post-2026 guidelines for protecting the stability and sustainability of the Colorado River.
TRUST AND CONFIDENCE are cornerstones of the Department’s unique and expansive mission.
This mission includes a geographically distributed workforce, a vast set of management responsibilities, and diverse customers and partners with varying needs and responsibilities.
The American people have entrusted Interior with the sustained use of critical natural resources, the preservation of our most iconic places, and the science to ensure robust decision making.
All these responsibilities require assurance and fairness at the highest levels.
Data, science, and reliable information are key components of the Department’s mission and are central to both equitable program delivery and the development and iterative improvement of sound policies.
The Department’s goal to serve and honor the public trust includes improving discovery of information to ensure Interior data is findable, accessible, and easily reusable; improve interoperability and utility of information to ensure Interior data drives continuous improvement; and provide equitable access to data and information that is responsive to researchers, partners, and other end users.
In FY 2023, Interior rated this strategic objective as achieving acceptable progress due to solid implementation of FAIR38 data standards and improved access to the Department’s data and scientific information.
Additionally, BIL funding enabled the USGS to award competitive grants to 32 State geological surveys to preserve, modernize, and make publicly available geologic and geophysical data and assets.
However, improvement is needed to advance the Department’s equity data, which is expected to have a crosscutting impact across the Interior strategic plan.
The Department leveraged technology to significantly improve equitable access to the BLM’s General Land Office (GLO) records through enhanced virtual public rooms, expanding the breadth and scope of the Department’s land records available for public viewing.
Interior also made significant advancements in developing equitable Nature-based Solutions (NbS) capabilities, working through FWSled NbS workgroups to establish policies and resources that support a wide range of conservation and adaptation efforts, including natural climate solutions, coastal resiliency, and climate adaptation.
Additionally, Interior has partnered with the University of Arizona to develop a public facing Nature-based Solutions Roadmap.
This roadmap will provide the Department, and the public at large, with guidance, strategies, and planning resources to implement nature-based solutions.
The NbS resources will be available on the Conservation and Adaptation Resources Toolkit platform, significantly improving access to conservation, management, and restoration resources for atrisk communities.
Develop and implement web-based tools to improve support for America the Beautiful (AtB) decision support, and Landscape Conservation Design (LCD).
Complete cloud data migration for the FWS Service Catalogue to improve security, accessibility, and reliability for more than 570K public data records.
Department decision-makers and as the basis for other applications and research.
Develop an Office of Natural Resource Revenue Customer Relationship Management (CRM) module to enable industry and others to report and acquire oil and gas royalty revenue and production related data.
Expand the Reclamation GIS Data Manager Framework to meet growing needs for standardized, accurate, well-maintained, and easily accessible geospatial data.
Create an environmental justice data and science toolkit to better incorporate social science data and Indigenous Knowledge into Departmental decision-making.
Implement a geography-focused environmental justice impact analysis project to assess effectiveness and impact of Interior’s environmental justice management practices.
Complete 98% of the ShakeAlert Earthquake Early Warning (EEW) buildout to improve public access to monitoring and notifications for significant seismic information.
Meaningful engagement, especially for individuals from underrepresented groups and underserved communities, is essential to fulfilling our obligations and delivering Interior’s mission with trust and transparency.
By ensuring diverse participation in research, learning, employment and business opportunities, more Americans will have access to economic and developmental benefits from Interior operations, and the Department’s programs will benefit from diverse experience and expertise.
Strategies include increasing awareness for traditionally underserved populations, increasing collaboration and engagement with a wider variety of partners, identifying, and eliminating barriers to participation, and applying an environmental justice lens to land management actions and decisions.
The Interior’s commitment to promoting diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility (DEIA) and equal opportunity will influence not only what we do, but who we are and how we serve, reflected in all aspects of the Department’s work.
Progress for this objective is hampered by slower than expected headway in identifying and eliminating barriers to participation in the Department’s funding opportunities, and limited improvement towards the goal to ensure ‘Historically underserved communities equitably benefit from DOI decisions, investments, and opportunities’, which reflects both Department and Biden Administration equity priorities.
In FY 2023, Interior awarded eight IYSC grants, benefitting more than 20 Tribes and Tribal organizations.
With funding from the Inflation Reduction Act, Interior will expand the capacity of the Corps and similar projects serving underserved communities by 30 percent, reaching over 5,000 young people.
The expanded programs will work with federally recognized Tribes and Tribal organizations as well as programs serving the U.S. territories, the Native Hawaiian Community, and urban communities across the United States.
Interior’s Environmental Justice Steering Committee continued to update the Department’s existing 2016 Environmental Justice Strategic Plan, working across the Department to expand and strengthen the environmental justice capacity, update policy and regulations, institutionalize environmental justice throughout the Department, and improve accountability for practitioners and decision makers.
In FY 2023, Interior implemented environmental justice criteria within SES performance standards and will develop similar standards for GS employees in FY 2024.
Additional details on the Department’s efforts to improve engagement and meaningful involvement, training and technical assistance, and data and science support to advance EJ outcomes can be found in the forthcoming Department of the Interior Environmental Justice Scorecard.
Increase collaboration and engagement with a wider variety of partners by growing the number of USGS partnerships with minority serving institutions to 12 in the STEM Educational Partnership effort.
Reissue OSDBU small business vendor experience surveys to further improve the vendor journey map and support for smal business vendors.
Launch the Directorate Fellowship Program and Native Youth Climate Adaptation Leadership Congress to increase the use of special hiring authorities, diversify the workforce, and provide professional growth and advancement opportunities for youth.
Develop and implement tools to complement the upcoming launch of Conservation.gov that will assist the public to easily identify available conservation grant opportunities.
Conduct a Justice40 covered program pilot evaluation to assess barriers that prevent communities from effectively accessing funding.
Establish long-standing cooperative agreements and memorandums of understanding with Minority Serving Institutions and Tribal Colleges and Universities to advance and improve the BLM’s diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility outcomes.
Implement targeted recruitment to increase participation in the Department’s Conservation Corps by 10% over FY 2023 participation rates.
Interior employs over 70,000 people and a cadre of volunteers to perform a wide range of duties that span various disciplines and require varied skills.
Interior’s ability to maintain a highly effective organization that meets the needs of the American people is dependent upon attracting the best talent and ensuring that workers are fully engaged and committed to carrying out the Department’s mission.
This includes creating pipelines to attract, recruit and retain diverse talent; maintaining an inclusive and safe workplace culture which prioritizes employee health and safety; providing fair, equitable, and accessible opportunities for professional growth and advancement; and leveraging technology and innovation to drive efficiency and improve the applicant and employee experience.
In FY 2023, Interior accomplished significant improvements to support Secretary Haaland’s workforce priorities.
Working across the Department, Interior continued targeted outreach, and recruitment with strategic talent partners, and implemented activities and actions designed to yield greater diversity in vacancy selections, consistent with the availability of highly qualified and diverse candidates presented to hiring managers for consideration.
Despite these efforts, the Department’s minority representation is significantly unchanged and remains well below the Civilian Labor Force average.
In response to hiring and selection challenges, Interior issued a renewed call to enact measures in FY 2024 which will yield better workforce diversity outcomes and take immediate steps to ensure equity in processes, procedures, and decisions regarding candidate selections, further analyze barriers at the point candidate selection.
The Department prioritized retention of our minority employee populations, as well as efforts already successfully underway to improve outreach and recruitment for minority candidates.
To advance retention among the first responder workforce, the Department converted 500 employees from careerseasonal to permanent full-time status.
Additionally, Interior coordinated with the USDA Forest Service, the Office of Personnel Management, and the Office of Management and Budget to develop and propose permanent compensation improvements for wildland firefighters.
Interior continues to prioritize employee health and safety and made significant progress towards improving health, wellness, and retention outcomes for Interior’s first responders charged with safeguarding our communities, public lands, waters, and critical resources.
Evidence gathered through the Law Enforcement Task Force identified staffing as one of the primary contributors to health and wellness concerns across the law enforcement workforce.
The Department is taking steps to ensure appropriate staffing levels in all Departmental law enforcement and security programs to reduce stressors placed on officers due to excessive overtime, travel, and extended details.
The DJV met throughout the year to connect government agencies, universities, and non-profit partners on collective efforts, including advancing a pilot for a Student Internship Discovery Tool that uses artificial intelligence technology to connect students online with internship opportunities.
The DJV also progressed on planning efforts for a partners’ summit in 2024 and developed a recruitment toolkit for DJV members.
Working through the DJV, FWS partnered with the Hispanic Access Foundation (HAF) to recruit and administer the 2023 Directorate Fellows Program — FWS’ premier resource assistant program authorized by the Public Lands Corps Act (16 USC 37).
HAF's targeted recruitment efforts resulted in a diverse cohort of Fellows — 70% were women and 67% were students of color from underrepresented populations.
Working collaboratively with the Department of Agriculture, Interior began developing a joint behavioral health program for wildland firefighters to address unique experiences and mental health challenges experienced by permanent and temporary wildland fire personnel.
In April 2023, the departments hosted a three-day planning summit to spearhead the development of the program, producing a collaboratively defined vision, framework, and implementation plan.
The resulting efforts aim to better meet firefighters needs in a demanding work environment, by helping them manage critical incidents and preemptively cope with associated stress.
Bolstered by the BIL, Interior continued working to improve pay, staffing, and health and wellness as reflected in the Wildland Fire Management workforce priorities.
Implement a department-wide wellness program to leverage the connections within the Department’s first responder community and advance comprehensive wellness strategies across bureaus and offices.
Consolidate and summarize results measuring diversity in the workforce and promising practices that proved successful from FY 2023.
Identify strategies and actions for increasing diversity recruitment and hiring across Interior and implement quarterly status reviews to monitor progress towards diversity hiring outcomes.
Ensure the whole of the conservation sector considers ways to recruit and retain diverse talents, working with universities to better equip students with skills and experiences sought by the environmental and conservation field.
Implement resources, toolkits, and webinars to advance the use of annual learning plans to support and enhance career mobility and variety.
Revise and implement the Department’s reasonable accommodations policy to align with EO 14035 and EO 13164.
Complete initial assessment of employee needs and requests for reasonable accommodations to analyze equitable access to information technology and facilities and implement DEIA Council priority actions to advance accessibility.
Add peer-to-peer and microlearning to the professional development portfolio offered to Interior’s museum community.
Sustainably managed assets, responsible management of resources, and fair and equitable service delivery are essential to building confidence and satisfaction for the American public.
The Department will apply continuous learning and improvement principles, including robust maturity models, vigorous evidence building, and risk management to deliver on its strategic priorities and provide better services to our customers.
This includes leveraging infrastructure investments to benefit vulnerable communities, optimizing maintenance, repair, and construction for our highest-priority facilities, and prioritizing visitor and customer safety on Interior-managed properties.
Through a multipronged approach with an emphasis on efficiency, investment, and portfolio rightsizing, the Department will also reduce energy and greenhouse gas emissions from Interior vehicles and facilities and pursue proactive lifecycle management for the Department’s facility portfolio.
In FY 2023, Interior rated progress for this objective as acceptable, bolstered by strong performance in enhancing public safety, significant progress towards sustainability outcomes and new efforts to reduce the amount of plastic waste produced by the Department.
Interior leveraged BIL investments to begin construction on a new federally owned building for energy and mineral resources science on the Colorado School of Mines campus expected to be completed in 2027.
In FY 2023, the Department’s Office of Law Enforcement and Security received an $11M increase in its appropriations to transition to a unified Law Enforcement Records Management System (RMS).
This RMS will create the administrative record for the Department’s law enforcement programs and establish a baseline by which to measure progress in the effectiveness of delivering law enforcement services.
Effectively tracking incidents, crimes, and investigations on Department-managed lands coupled with tracking uses of force and internal affairs investigations of its officers, will build evidence to advance safe, transparent, accountable, and effective policing.
The Department’s Chief Sustainability Officer (CSO), working with the Office of Environmental Policy and Compliance, is leading the Department’s sustainability efforts.
In FY 2023, Interior established bureau-level step down targets for key sustainability program goals and implemented standards requiring each bureau to conduct a “sustainability organizational assessment” and provide target status and action plans to achieve zero emission vehicle fleet and supply equipment, energy and water use intensity, sustainable buildings, and waste management outcomes.
2023, the Department’s bureaus and offices have finalized sustainable procurement plans to phase out single-use plastics on public lands within the next decade and implemented accelerated actions to install water bottle filling stations on BLM, NPS and BIE properties.
Interior also accelerated actions towards achieving the Department’s 4-year goal to fully transition its light duty fleet acquisitions to zero-emission vehicles (ZEVs), placing orders for 185 ZEV across all bureaus and offices and prioritizing planning, design, or execution for nearly 100 ZEV charging ports.
The Great American Outdoors Act Legacy Restoration Fund (GAOA LRF) continues to see significant project progress and nationwide impact to reduce the Department’s Deferred Maintenance and Repair (DM&R) backlog.
Interior bureaus and offices completed construction on 59 of 276 DM&R projects with nearly half reaching administrative closeout, addressing $33 million in deferred maintenance across 40 assets.
In FY 2025 Interior proposes to allocate $1.6 billion to fund an additional 88 GAOA LRF projects within the BLM, FWS, NPS, and BIE.
Establish baseline data to track key performance indicators to advance the goal of Secretary Order 3407, Department-Wide Initiative to Reducing Plastic Pollution.
Finalize the Departmental Manual update requiring bureaus to conduct annual Sustainability Organizational Assessments.
Deploy enterprise-wide law enforcement records management system to create an administrative record for the Department’s law enforcement programs.
The GPRA Modernization Act of 2010 established the need for agencies to identify performance goals, report progress against targets, and conduct data-driven reviews.
These practices serve two key purposes within and outside of the organization: (1) to assess the organization’s health and impact; and (2) to inform decision making, resource allocation, and strategy.
The Department will complete annual portfolio reviews and provide quarterly priority goal reviews to continuously learn and improve as we advance our outcomes in the Department’s strategic plan.
Along with periodic reviews, Interior assesses the past year’s performance and sets targets for the next fiscal year.
Means used to verify and validate measured values: All performance data reported in the APP&R and on http://www.performance.gov/ by the Department is subject to the data verification and validation standards (see https://www.doi.gov/performance/datavalidation-and-verification).
Implementing organization heads or chief officials confirm in writing the validity of the data and present the data on a quarterly basis to the Deputy Secretary.
Sources for the data: Program managers provide performance data based on their observations that can include extrapolations of selected representative samples or history adjusted for estimates of changing conditions.
The data is tracked and maintained in separate systems.
Following review by the providing bureau or office, data is collected, reviewed, integrated, and maintained by the Department’s Office of Planning and Performance Management (PPP) in its APP&R available through the Department’s Budget and Performance Portal (www.doi.gov/performance), and www.performance.gov.
Level of accuracy required for the intended use of the data: Performance data reported in the APP&R and on http://www.performance.gov/ is used for management purposes, as a representative indicator of progress in relation to a target or goal established by the corresponding implementing organization.
Limitations to the data at the required level of accuracy: Performance data is subject to potential errors from the use of estimations and extrapolations (especially where direct measurement is impractical and/or too costly), individual observation, miscommunication, and/or failure to effectively employ the guidance described in the performance measure template or the “Indicator” description in http://www.performance.gov/.
However, based on multiple review levels and accuracy certifications, these limitations are not significant.
How the agency has compensated for such limitations if needed, to reach the required level of accuracy: The measurement procedures for each performance measure used in the APP&R are described and documented in data measurement templates posted on the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) MAX website, or described in the “Indicator” block for each APG on http://www.performance.gov/.
Along with the implementing organization’s official assurance of faithfully employing the data verification and validation standards, submitted data are reviewed within the context of the scope and nature of the activity, plans, and experience to help confirm accuracy.
Following review and verification by the submitting bureau or office, the data is reviewed again by PPP to determine if further consultation with the data provider is necessary to adjust or correct the reported data before publication.
Senior management and leadership consider this level of accuracy to be acceptable for their use of the data.
Experience in using the data, historical trend and programmatic context assessments, and bureau data quality certifications indicate that the limitations are considered minor and compensating measures are not considered necessary.
In addition to employing the Department’s data validation and verification standards, and internal reviews of submitted data, the best “test” of the data’s accuracy is in its use.
APG updates are reviewed during quarterly status reviews where senior officials report their data directly to the Deputy Secretary and are made publicly available through http://www.
Performance information is provided with historical, organizational, and supporting context to provide the reader with a fuller perspective of the data and is reviewed annually at the strategic objective level.