Mission: To foster, promote, and develop the welfare of the wage earners, job seekers, and retirees of the United States; improve working conditions; advance opportunities for profitable employment; and assure work-related benefits and rights.
Fostering partnerships between businesses, unions, and educational institutions to create a stronger, more robust workforce pipeline.
Strengthening pathways to high-paying skilled- trade jobs of the future across U.S. industries.
Implementing innovative strategies to enhance workforce development and boost economic growth.
Promoting skills training, Registered Apprenticeships (RA), and career education to meet modern workforce needs.
Cutting the bureaucratic red tape stifling innovation and job growth while protecting workers’ rights.
Supporting federal labor policies that empower and protect both workers and job creators.
Championing Made in America jobs and the industries that drive them.
Highlighting best practices from the communities getting it right by showcasing America at Work.
Protecting American taxpayers from fraud, waste, and abuse in DOL programs such as unemployment insurance and workers’ compensation.
Supporting American investors, industries, and manufacturers to enable the reindustrialization and reshoring of American manufacturing jobs.
The FY 2026-2030 Strategic Plan explains how DOL improves the lives of American workers through the management of its agencies and programs.
As required by the Government Performance and Results Act Modernization Act of 2010 (GPRAMA), it provides plans on DOL’s three strategic goals, 13 strategic objectives, and 22 performance goals.
Strategic Objective 1.1 – Strengthen the American workforce by expanding skilled trade jobs and propelling workers into secure, high-need jobs to support the next Golden Age.
ETA Performance Goal 1.1 - Prepare Americans for high-paying skilled trade jobs of the future.
In Program Year (PY) 2024, ETA continued its work providing high-quality job training, employment, labor market information, and income maintenance services.
The Work-Based Learning (WBL) outcome improved by 1.8 percentage points from the previous year’s result of 47.9 percent to 49.7 percent.
The credential attainment rate improved from 52.8 percent to 53.1 percent.
The percentage of program participants employed in the second quarter after exit slightly fell from 70.6 percent in PY 2023 to 69.4 percent in PY 2024, and below the PY 2024 target of 74.0 percent.
Performance improvement is attributable to increases in outcomes in various programs.
Since FY 2023, YouthBuild (YB) outcomes have steadily increased for credential attainment and median earnings.
The number of YB completers entering Registered Apprenticeships has nearly quintupled, from 19 in FY 2023 to 93 in FY 2025, demonstrating the impact of targeted technical assistance, with a particular focus on apprenticeship pathways in high-demand industries such as advanced manufacturing and healthcare.
Additionally, Reentry Employment Opportunities (REO) Adult and Youth programs also demonstrated improved employment rates in the second quarter after exit.
ETA managed five H-1B Skills Training funded grant programs that supported work-based learning opportunities, including Registered Apprenticeship, and promoted training that led to industry-recognized credentials and employment in middle- to high-skilled occupations.
These grants included the One Workforce grants, the Rural Healthcare grants, Building Pathways to Infrastructure Jobs grants, Nursing Expansion grants, and the Apprenticeships: Closing the Skills Gap grants.
Cumulatively, these grants had over 97,000 participants that began training and more than 42,000 individuals who had completed and earned industry-recognized credentials.
ETA will continue to strengthen work-based learning, credential quality, and employment outcomes, by focusing on preparing workers for high-paying skilled trade jobs in critical and emerging industries.
In FY 2026, ETA published guidance and will deliver technical assistance on maximizing innovation in Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) programs, which will offer options to the workforce system to innovate and modernize operations and program services.
Such options include using existing WIOA flexibilities, and encouraging increased waiver use to scale industry-driven strategies, enhance worker mobility, create opportunities to integrate systems and realign resources, optimize service delivery, improve accountability for participant outcomes, and remove barriers to innovation.
Additionally, ETA will continue to support employers with access to training reimbursements for upskilling incumbent and newly hired workers through the Industry-Driven Skills Training Fund grants.
These grants provide training in high-demand and emerging industries and occupations critical to driving American competitiveness.
Among these are shipbuilding and related occupations, including welding, marine electrical, manufacturing, and other skilled trades occupations, as well as occupations essential to the buildout of artificial intelligence (AI) infrastructure, advanced manufacturing, nuclear energy, domestic mineral production, and information technology including AI.
ETA will continue to provide technical assistance and oversight for Strengthening Community Colleges Training Grants as they build capacity for high-quality, short-term programs that meet the eligibility requirements for Workforce Pell Grants.
These program offerings will expand access to skilled training opportunities that meet the hiring requirements of employers and demonstrate industry value through strong post-completion employment outcomes, among other rigorous requirements.
In FY 2025, VETS continued its mission to prepare America's service members, veterans, and military spouses for meaningful careers, provide them with employment resources and expertise, protect their employment rights, and promote their employment opportunities.
The Transition Assistance Program (TAP) provides high-quality information, tools, and training to help transitioning service members (TSMs) and their spouses establish positive employment outcomes following their military careers, as evidenced by a 96 percent approval rating in a postcourse facilitator satisfaction survey.
As part of TAP, the Employment Navigator and Partnership Program (ENPP), which provides one-on-one career assistance to TSMs and their spouses, expanded to 50 sites in FY 2025, a 43 percent increase from the previous year.
The Jobs for Veterans State Grants (JVSG) is a formula grant that enables State Workforce Agencies to hire dedicated staff who work in American Job Centers (AJCs) to provide career services to veterans and eligible persons and assist employers in filling vacancies with job-seeking veterans.
Annually, JVSG helps place more veterans into employment than any other program within the U.S. government.
In PY 2024, JVSG-funded employees served approximately 129,000 veterans with median second quarter after exit earnings of $9,252.
The Homeless Veterans’ Reintegration Program (HVRP) is the only federal grant to focus exclusively on competitive employment for veterans experiencing or at risk of homelessness.
HVRP has strong partnerships between public, private, and nonprofit organizations.
In PY 2024, HVRP served over 15,800 participants and placed them into employment with median earnings of $8,710 in the second quarter after exit.
The Veteran Employment Outreach Program (VEOP) coordinates employment opportunities for veterans within the public and private sectors and in local communities, leveraging the workforce system and its network of over 2,200 AJCs nationwide.
In FY 2025, VEOP conducted over 1,200 outreach engagements.
The Honoring Investments in Recruiting and Employing Vets Medallion Program (HVMP) is the only federal-level veterans’ employment award that recognizes a company or organization’s commitment to veteran hiring, retention, and professional development.
In FY 2025, the Secretary of Labor awarded 888 employers the 2025 HIRE Vets Medallion Award, a 6 percent increase from FY 2024.
These programs will connect veterans, service members, and military spouses to private and public sector employers, labor unions, industry groups, and workforce development organizations to expand access to meaningful and long-term skilled trade and high-need employment opportunities.
In FY 2027, VETS plans to continue to provide a variety of learning opportunities for JVSG staff.
Quality training is essential to ensure the success of the JVSG program.
VETS also plans to offer guidance to HVRP grant recipients emphasizing the enrollment of participants who are actively seeking employment and are therefore more likely to see improved employment outcomes.
In FY 2025, ODEP continued its essential mission to improve employment opportunities for Americans with disabilities.
ODEP’s achievements cover a range of activities, including policy guidance, research, stakeholder engagement, technical assistance, and collaborations with state intermediaries.
ODEP also provided direct support to individuals with disabilities while generating evidence of best practices through grants and contracts.
In FY 2025, ODEP produced 37 policy outputs, which encompassed legislative and regulatory recommendations, formal policy guidance, and proposed policy directives.
These outputs underscore the effectiveness of ODEP's State Exchange on Employment and Disability (SEED) in equipping states and localities with policies that meet their unique needs.
Additionally, ODEP exceeded its goal by developing 132 implementation tools aimed at promoting the adoption of recommended practices.
Notable examples include the Veterans Accommodations Toolkit, created in collaboration with VETS, and the Employer Assistance and Resource Network’s resource on disability hiring initiatives for small businesses.
ODEP also created policy briefs through a SEED Mental Health Task Force to guide states in supporting employment for those with mental health conditions.
Stakeholder engagement remained a priority, with ODEP conducting 252 targeted technical assistance (TA) events.
ODEP's Job Accommodation Network (JAN) hosted key events, such as "Ask JAN! We Can Help," for New York City Public Schools, connecting educators with accommodation solutions.
Notably, ODEP achieved a 93 percent customer satisfaction rate from its technical assistance center.
ODEP collaborated with state intermediaries to address disability employment policy requests through peer exchanges and learning collaboratives.
Further, ODEP continued its efforts in developing evidence on effective disability employment practices through its Retaining Employment and Talent After Injury/Illness (RETAIN) initiative, Research Support Services for Employment of Young Adults on the Autism Spectrum project, and through other analyses, research, and evaluation.
In FY 2027, ODEP will continue to support the employment of people with disabilities in alignment with America’s Talent Strategy by developing and promoting policy options, producing research, and creating practical tools for use by employers, states, and direct service providers.
The agency will provide technical assistance and share strategies to help remove barriers to training and employment for America’s disabled workforce.
Opportunities Network and JAN, equipping partners with resources and guidance, and expanding outreach and collaboration to improve access to apprenticeships and other career pathways.
ODEP will also work closely with state and local policymakers through its SEED initiative and will convene national experts and legislators to review effective stay-at-work/return-to-work models and improve outcomes of individuals with recently acquired disabilities.
This initiative will build on lessons learned through ODEP’s RETAIN demonstration program.
In FY 2025, WB ensured full alignment with the President’s priorities by pivoting its focus to address issues related to workforce shortages, closing the skills gap, and facilitating the development of employment supports, particularly those related to caregiving, that reduce the cost of living and put American families first.
After a thorough evaluation and realignment of the Women in Apprenticeship and Nontraditional Occupations (WANTO) grant program, WB awarded $5,000,000 in funding to seven community-based organizations to support women entering apprenticeships and careers in high-demand industries like tech and advanced manufacturing.
These WANTO grants will help DOL achieve the President’s goal of reaching one million active apprentices.
WB also updated its National Database of Childcare Prices (NDCP).
Originally funded under the first Trump Administration, the NDCP is the most comprehensive federal source of childcare prices at the county level, which now includes childcare price data from 2008 to 2022.
WB published new interactive, downloadable county-level fact sheets with the NDCP data and updated interactive NDCP maps on its website.
Since its release in 2022, the NDCP has been cited in over 250 sources, including articles, press releases, blogs, and op-eds, and used by other stakeholders to promote access to affordable child care as a critical supportive service.
WB exceeded its target for the number of policy and research deliverables, producing 53 issue briefs, reports, and data analyses focused on highlighting key data trends and uplifting policies and initiatives that promote access and workforce participation of women.
The WB website had more than 834,000 pageviews, and more than 26,000 downloads of data and informational publications.
A primary driver of the WB website traffic is its Data and Statistics page, which provides straightforward data visualizations, usable by constituents and policymakers alike.
WB updated 75 data visualizations to assure stakeholders have up-to-date information on women, families, and the workforce.
WB created several background papers on new priority areas related to strengthening the American workforce and American families including exploring strategies to recruit discouraged workers, including women, into industries with a labor force shortage, researching child care and paid leave options for small businesses, and examining regulatory and tax policy interventions to increase childcare affordability.
The FY 2027 President’s Budget proposes to eliminate funding for WB.
As a result, the Secretary directed OFCCP to close the EO 11246 portion of all open compliance evaluations and complaint investigations and put on hold all activities relating to Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Section 503) and Vietnam Era Veterans’ Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974 (VEVRAA) pending further guidance.
On July 2, 2025, the abeyance was lifted and OFCCP began processing Section 503 and VEVRAA complaints again.
In FY 2025, OFCCP perfected and investigated complaints alleging employment discrimination against individuals with a disability and protected veterans at federal contractor workplaces.
During this period, OFCCP received 1,414 complaints from workers, and processed 55 percent of closed complaints within the standard timeframe.
Additionally, OFCCP processed 531 pre-complaint inquiries.
OFCCP prioritized the timely processing of complaints received and implemented several strategies to perfect and close complaints more quickly and efficiently.
However, OFCCP did not meet the target to process 90 percent of complaints within the standard timeframe.
Once the abeyance was lifted, all open complaints were transferred to the remaining investigators, along with complaints received during the abeyance period.
The FY 2027 President’s Budget proposes to shift OFCCP responsibilities for Section 503 and VEVRAA into a newly created Office of Civil Rights.
Within the new Office of Civil Rights, OFCCP will continue its complaint work under Sections 503 and VEVRAA to ensure that qualified protected veterans and individuals with disabilities receive the employment protections to which they are entitled.
OFCCP will also examine its statutory compliance functions to ensure that American employers have the resources and support they need to comply with their obligations while eliminating unnecessary regulatory barriers.
This includes examining additional deregulatory measures and new rulemakings within the scope of its VEVRAA and Section 503 functions.
As part of the Office of Civil Rights, OFCCP will optimize its focus on VEVRAA and Section 503 matters.
OFCCP wil examine its organizational structure to ensure proper allocation of resources and personnel to effectively execute its mission and meet the Section 503 and VEVRAA program area needs.
OFCCP will prioritize training to enable select staff to build on existing skills and develop new capabilities.
OFCCP will identify any skills gaps and implement necessary training for employees to deliver maximum results.
Strategic Objective 1.2 – Support apprenticeship as a pathway to employment that meets the needs of the American economy.
ETA Performance Goal 1.2 - Expand apprenticeship as a pathway to employment.
In FY 2025, ETA served 974,024 apprentices during the fiscal year and supported 702,466 active apprentices across 26,342 registered programs.
To strengthen standards and quality, ETA processed 177 bulletins, including new and revised National Program Standards and Guidelines, and approved 14 new apprenticeable occupations.
The Registered Apprenticeship Academy recorded more than 64,000 pageviews and delivered training materials, including five microlearning modules and multiple live training sessions.
ETA awarded $84 million in grants to advance Registered Apprenticeships in industries such as advanced manufacturing and technology and convened grantees to share best practices.
Collectively, these actions strengthened program quality and accessibility and supported the continued growth of RA programs.
In FY 2025, ETA concluded the final year of the $99 million Apprenticeships: Closing the Skills Gap grant program which funded 28 public–private apprenticeship partnerships and resulted in 42,939 participants entering RA programs.
The program also established more than 800 new RA programs and expanded more than 600 existing RA programs into sectors that have traditionally made limited use of apprenticeships, including advanced manufacturing, healthcare, and information technology.
ETA will protect and strengthen the National Apprenticeship System and expand high-quality RA programs to meet reindustrialization needs and prepare workers for in-demand skilled jobs.
ETA will prioritize multiple sectors, including AI, shipbuilding, nuclear energy, and advanced manufacturing by supporting RA models that equip apprentices with the skills employers require.
Additionally, ETA will work closely with the Office of Career, Technical, and Adult Education to strengthen pathways into Registered Apprenticeships, including through pre apprenticeships.
ETA will increase the number of active apprentices.
By September 30, 2027, DOL will oversee an apprenticeship system with 900,000 active apprentices, supporting the President’s goal of reaching or surpassing one million active apprentices, which is an FY 2026–2027 Agency Priority Goal (APG).
ETA will expand the National Apprenticeship System through existing cooperative agreements with Arkansas, Alabama, and Colorado to increase the number of active apprentices.
In Arkansas, the Department of Commerce’s Division of Workforce Connections will implement a $36 million American Manufacturing Apprenticeship Incentive Fund that provides performance-based incentives to employers nationwide to create and expand advanced manufacturing RA programs.
In Alabama, the Commission on Higher Education will use a $12.5 million agreement to develop competency-based RA frameworks that streamline registration, reduce employer costs, and target high-priority occupations.
In Colorado, comparable funding will support tools and resources to expand pre-apprenticeships and integrate youth-serving RA pathways with career and technical education and postsecondary systems.
Strategic Objective 2.1 – Partner with states to ensure lawful American workers receive timely and accurate unemployment benefits.
ETA Performance Goal 2.1 – Strengthen the Unemployment Insurance (UI) system.
In FY 2025, ETA worked to reduce fraud, waste and abuse across our nation’s unemployment system and ensure that unemployment benefits are only received by those who are eligible.
ETA sought to maximize efficiency in the unemployment system to simultaneously reduce costs and improve the experience for those eligible to receive benefits.
The first payment timeliness was 76.20 percent, above the FY 2025 target of 76.01 percent, and lower authority appeals promptness was 48.7 percent, above the target of 45.0 percent.
While these measures were an improvement from previous fiscal years, ETA has set more ambitious targets moving forward and refocused its strategies in mid-FY 2025 to ensure that states are held accountable for their UI performance.
In FY 2025, ETA re-focused activities under the American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA).
On May 22, 2025, all active ARPA grants were terminated because they no longer aligned with DOL’s priorities.
ETA conducted a comprehensive review of ARPA funding to ensure that funds are used in the most efficient and effective manner and align with agency and administration priorities.
ETA analyzed state-level data and developed the UI Action Plan, which activates all available resources to hold all states accountable and improve UI performance.
All 53 state work force agencies were categorized into tiers of engagement based on quantitative and qualitative performance data, with 14 states identified as requiring enhanced on-site engagement.
ETA piloted an on-site strike team in September 2025, where ETA subject matter experts successfully coordinated a targeted improper payment rate reduction effort; additional efforts are planned for the rest of FY 2026.
To reduce fraud, waste, and abuse, ETA will reinforce existing integrity requirements, strengthen efforts through new requirements, conduct monitoring to hold states accountable, address root cause issues by providing states system support and tools, and increase collaboration across government in accordance with Presidential EOs.
Also, ETA will address barriers to the timely payment of benefits to eligible workers, including partnering with states to identify policy, process, and IT changes that are responsive to workload fluctuations, and conducting monitoring to hold states accountable.
Additionally, ETA will support the reemployment of UI claimants by modernizing work search activities, continuing to promote the Reemployment Services and Eligibility Assessment (RESEA) program, and partnering with states to support strategies that are effective in connecting individuals receiving UI benefits to workforce needs.
Strategic Objective 2.2 – Deliver timely and accurate workers’ compensation benefits to eligible workers for qualified claims.
OWCP provides workers’ compensation benefits for workers injured or ill on the job.
The agency adjudicates claims, administers the benefit funds authorized for these purposes, and provides oversight of claims resolutions by responsible parties.
The Federal Employees’ Compensation Act (FECA) program continued to ensure that the workforce received timely benefits through a modern and efficient workers’ compensation system.
In FY 2025, the program processed 95.1 percent of wage-loss claims that did not require further development within 14 days, exceeding the target of 92.0 percent.
The Black Lung program exceeded the target of 89.0 percent for the measure, “Percent of Black Lung claims pending at the start of the fiscal year that are resolved by the end of the fiscal year,” by issuing decisions on 91.6 percent of claims pending at the beginning of the fiscal year by the end of the fiscal year.
In FY 2025, the Black Lung program maximized payment accuracy by utilizing the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s (Treasury) Do Not Pay to review and analyze pre-payment and post-payment matching, and implemented Treasury’s Do Not Pay Analytics initiative.
The Energy program continued to conduct quality assurance and supervisory sampling to review the quality of individual cases throughout the year and implemented corrective actions where appropriate.
The quality assurance analysts also conducted the annual Payment Processing Review.
In FY 2025, the program rated 96.82 percent of sampled Part B and Part E initial claims as being accurate, exceeding the target of 91.50 percent.
The Longshore program processed 96.0 percent of settlement applications within 18 days, exceeding the target of 90.0 percent.
The program conducted outreach activities on the importance of timely filing and encouraged the use of electronic submissions.
In FY 2025, the program worked diligently to comply with Presidential EOs.
14 Specifically, the Longshore program identified all beneficiaries receiving benefits via paper check, obtained information necessary to convert those beneficiaries to electronic payments, and developed information system requirements necessary to capture Social Security numbers, Employer and Tax Identification numbers, and payment justifications.
The program finalized the transition to full electronic payments in the first quarter of FY 2026.
OWCP will continue to adjudicate and accurately pay benefit claims, administer the benefit funds authorized for these purposes, and provide oversight of claims resolutions by responsible parties.
OWCP will continue to modernize its claims management and payment systems to meet future claims processing needs more efficiently and consistently across the various statutory programs.
OWCP will work to enhance and expand its bi-directional cross-agency data sharing agreements with federal agencies to better provide data to its government agency partners, allow them to strategically share data with the programs within OWCP, and maintain and safeguard the privacy of claimants and other protected stakeholders.
OWCP will implement a new online enrollment process for medical providers interested in serving OWCP claimants that incorporates data sharing with the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services to simplify the enrollment process for medical providers.
OWCP will continue to be a High-Impact Service Provider and submit quarterly reports, conduct an annual assessment, and develop an Action Plan and Customer Journey Map.
Additionally, OWCP will continue ongoing phone and mailed paper surveys to expand customer experience data collection.
Strategic Objective 2.3 – Utilize enforcement as necessary, and promote compliance with federal safety, health, labor, and employment protection standards to secure a safe and strong American workforce.
In FY 2025, OSHA continued to improve in three key strategic areas including enforcement, training, and whistleblower protection.
OSHA conducted 30,228 inspections (25,264 Safety Inspections and 5,024 Health Inspections).
In FY 2025, OSHA met its target of 35 percent of inspections conducted through emphasis programs specifically focused on reducing or eliminating employee exposure to fall, struck-by, caught-in, and electrical hazards in all workplaces.
Safety and health training is a critical part of OSHA’s effort to prevent workplace fatalities, injuries, and illnesses.
OSHA conducts training programs at the OSHA Training Institute (OTI) and administers the OTI Education Centers Program and the Outreach Training Program.
OSHA also provides training through its compliance assistance efforts in support of agency initiatives.
OSHA trained 1,647,900 people through its training programs (excluding Harwood Grant trainees) and an additional 265,175 through compliance assistance efforts for a total of 1,913,075 persons trained in FY 2025.
This is a seven percent increase from the 1,780,512 persons trained in FY 2024.
In FY 2025, OSHA improved progress in clearing out the backlog of whistleblower complaints and reducing the average age of pending whistleblower investigations.
In FY 2024, the average age of pending investigations was 187 days, which decreased to 151 days in FY 2025— 45 percent below the FY 2025 target of 275 days.
The average time to complete the screening process for new complaints was 5.6 days, surpassing the target of eight days by 30 percent.
OSHA achieved a 24 percent reduction in the backlog of whistleblower complaints in FY 2025, exceeding the annual target of 2.5 percent.
OSHA will work to support sustained growth in American domestic production and manufacturing.
OSHA envisions a future where collaboration between employers and the agency creates innovative, robust safety and health programs that aim to significantly reduce and prevent workplace injuries and illnesses.
In FY 2027, OSHA aims to enhance worker health and safety by expanding its compliance assistance programs and outreach efforts.
This initiative is part of a broader DOL campaign to encourage employers to adopt self-audi and other compliance strategies.
In addition, the agency also plans to emphasize worksite assistance activities during inspections, providing valuable compliance assistance and ensuring that every inspected worksite can benefit from OSHA’s expertise.
OSHA will focus enforcement efforts on the most hazardous workplaces.
OSHA will continue to provide penalty relief for small employers by reducing penalties and restructuring policies for small businesses.
The agency aims to incentivize employers to develop strong safety and health programs and expedite hazard abatement.
OSHA has set an APG to implement the Safety Champions Program to assist small businesses in improving their safety and health programs.
By September 30, 2027, OSHA will increase the number of Safety Champions Program participants by 10 percent above the number of participants in FY 2026.
In FY 2027, OSHA plans to continue outreach to the regulated community to increase the number of participants in this program.
The agency will also develop measures to track the number of Safety Champions that apply for Voluntary Protection Programs.
In FY 2025, MSHA continued to implement measures to address injuries and fatalities.
On July 24, 2025, MSHA launched the Compliance Assistance in Safety and Health (CASH) Program, designed to connect operators and miners with safety and health experts and information on MSHA requirements.
Emphasizing that protecting miners’ health is equally as important as protecting miners’ safety, the agency conducted 12 site visits on respirable crystalline silica sampling.
The visits were in preparation for MSHA’s final rule titled “Lowering Miners’ Exposure to Respirable Crystalline Silica and Improving Respiratory Protection” and educated miners about the importance of maintaining an awareness of and protecting their health.
Additionally, MSHA launched a new resource, the MSHA Information Hub, which is designed to connect users with the mostsearched topics on the MSHA website, all in one convenient location.
MSHA’s outreach focused on ensuring miners were aware of their rights and that the agency "had their back."
This includes the right to request MSHA inspections for dangerous conditions, exercise Part 90 rights, receive mandatory training, identify a miners' representative to accompany inspections, file hazardous conditions complaints, and submit discrimination and retaliation complaints within 30 days.
At the end of FY 2025, 72 participants were enrolled in the Part 90 program.
The 5-year rolling average of fatal injuries per 200,000 hours worked increased from 0.0125 in FY 2024 to 0.0127 in FY 2025.
The 5-year rolling average of all injuries per 200,000 hours worked decreased two percent from 1.87 in FY 2024 to 1.84 in FY 2025.
MSHA will devote its resources to fulfilling the agency’s statutory requirements, including conducting inspections at all active underground mines four times per year and all surface mines twice per year.
These inspections form the core of MSHA’s enforcement efforts, regularly providing a first-hand look at conditions in each of the nation’s mines to identify safety and health hazards and require corrective actions to ensure that miners can go home to their families and communities safe and healthy each day at the end of their shifts.
Other mandatory inspections and investigations include additional inspections for methane and other hazards, fatality and serious accident investigations, responding to hazardous condition complaints, and investigating miner discrimination and interference complaints.
MSHA will provide enhanced compliance assistance activities in all aspects related to the agency’s mission of protecting the health and safety of miners.
The CASH program is MSHA's proactive response to the anticipated surge in U.S. domestic mining productivity, driven by the national demand for critical minerals.
CASH will help new mine operators, miners with less than one year of experience, and newly hired experienced miners by making compliance simpler, clearer, and more accessible from the start.
MSHA will focus on mines associated with FAST-41 projects, those identified as covered under Title 41 of the Fixing America’s Surface Transportation (FAST) Act.
This effort directly supports Presidential EOs to increase American mineral production.
Through efficiency gains, expanded compliance assistance, and enforcement, WHD recovered more than $259 million in back wages for 176,957 employees nationwide in FY 2025.
WHD concluded 976 cases with child labor violations, including 250 investigations that found minors working in hazardous occupations.
WHD found 5,272 minors employed in violation of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), and 773 of them were employed in hazardous occupations.
As a result of these child labor violations, WHD assessed more than $37 million in civil money penalties.
These accomplishments are reflected in WHD’s achievement of FY 2025 targets for the FLSA and child labor severity indexes.
WHD delivered clear, accessible guidance to employers and workers through an improved compliance assistance hub, updated compliance videos on the FLSA, and created an online video series on the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA).
WHD enhanced and relaunched two programs to help employers stay informed and compliant, including the option to request an opinion letter and the Payroll Audit Independent Determination (PAID) program.
WHD will target an increase in the total number of concluded PAID cases from program launch year by 5 percent as an FY 2026-2027 APG.
In FY 2025, WHD issued guidance, including opinion letters, to provide clarity and reduce regulatory burden and uncertainty for American employers and workers.
WHD is also modernizing and streamlining the website to make it easier to navigate, reducing clutter and improving access to key digital resources.
Accomplishments in FY 2025, combined with efforts to optimize WHD resources, have positioned WHD for continued progress and success.
WHD will expand compliance resources for small businesses, strengthen enforcement in industries with persistent violations, invest in innovative tools to create efficiency and improve customer service for the American worker, and engage employers nationwide to build trust and awareness.
WHD will focus on enforcement that addresses egregious violations and resolves cases efficiently to ensure workers receive wages that are owed as quickly as possible.
WHD will use all enforcement and compliance assistance tools to respond to the needs of the labor force and American industry.
Strategies will be carried out through evidence-based initiatives that cover multiple sectors of the economy.
To advance this Administration’s goal of stopping the worst forms of child labor, WHD will prioritize enforcement that addresses violations related to 14- and 15-year-olds working in prohibited jobs, and any minors working in hazardous occupations.
At the same time, WHD will support positive and safe first work experiences through enhanced compliance assistance and education.
At the national and local level, WHD will educate and refer employers to the expanded PAID program.
WHD will pursue technology-based solutions to achieve significant operational efficiencies and deliver outstanding service to the public.
The Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) guarantees employees returning from military service or training the right to be re-employed in their job, or as similar a job as possible, with the same benefits.
It also protects these employees from discrimination and retaliation based on military service.
When VETS investigators find a violation of USERRA, it works diligently with both the claimant and the employer to resolve the case to the satisfaction of both parties.
In FY 2025, 99.9 percent of the 1,521 USERRA complaints investigated by VETS were completed within the statutory 90-day deadline, or an agreed upon extension, and over 95 percent of substantiated claims were resolved by VETS prior to closing.
Additionally, VETS field and national office Compliance staff provided technical assistance on USERRA to 2,065 members of the public, including professional associations, government agencies at all levels, service members, veterans, and employers.
As part of DOL’s mission to protect American workers, VETS is responsible for interpreting, administering, and enforcing USERRA.
In FY 2027, VETS goal is to preserve the employer-employee relationship to the extent possible.
In addition to its investigative and enforcement authority, VETS will continue to maintain a robust public outreach and education effort to ensure that employers and employees understand their rights and obligations under the USERRA statute.
VETS will focus efforts on protecting veterans’ preference in Federal hiring.
Finally, VETS will continue to expand its outreach and engagement efforts to further facilitate proactive resolution of potential USERRA issues.
Strategic Objective 2.4 – Ensure access to secure retirement, health and other work-related benefits for American workers and their families.
In FY 2025, EBSA protected more than 155 million Americans across approximately 4.2 million benefit plans.
EBSA safeguards plan assets, drives compliance, and deters misconduct to improve outcomes for workers and retirees.
In FY 2025, EBSA provided quality customer service through its participant assistance program.
Benefits Advisors closed 222,246 inquiries and recovered $468.7 million.
It closed 27,638 No Surprises Act complaints and recovered $67 million.
Additionally, it secured non-monetary results for more than 1.6 million participants.
EBSA measured the quality of these interactions using independent polling and customer satisfaction surveys and achieved an overall score of 73 percent.
The agency recovered $714.4 million for participants and beneficiaries through compliance assistance and enforcement actions.
EBSA also obtained 297 non-monetary corrections in civil cases.
The agency also recovered $39.1 million through its Voluntary Fiduciary Correction Program (VFCP) and $117.3 million through its Abandoned Plan Program.
Accounting firms auditing fewer than 100 employee benefit plans annually have historically struggled with audit quality.
In FY 2025, EBSA reviewed 271 such firms, which audited $202 billion in plan assets, impacting 4 million participants.
EBSA will continue to provide a multi-faceted employee benefits security program that safeguards America's workforce and their families.
The agency will identify and resolve violations, ensuring relief for affected parties through financial recoveries and corrective actions.
It will provide outreach and education that assists workers in protecting their pension and health benefits and improve compliance assistance tools like the VFCP and the Delinquent Filer Voluntary Compliance Program (DFVCP).
EBSA will conduct an integrated research program to improve oversight and promote cybersecurity.
It will provide advisory opinions and field assistance bulletins to improve the interpretability of the provisions of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) and related statutes.
EBSA will continue to pursue claims based on issues under Title I of ERISA.
Regarding compliance assistance, EBSA recently expanded and streamlined VFCP, which provides a mechanism for plan sponsors and fiduciaries to correct violations.
The agency will continue this support in FY 2026 by processing at least 1,000 VFCP applications.
Similarly, the agency’s DFVCP encourages voluntary compliance with the annual reporting requirements under ERISA.
EBSA will ensure participation of at least 50 percent of late Form 5500 filers in the DFVCP.
EBSA’s participant assistance staff will continue to respond to an ever-growing number of inquiries from the public about benefits, helping resolve disputes informally, thereby obtaining benefits for workers and their families.
Benefits advisors will continue to connect participants and beneficiaries with lost retirement benefits.
They will field at least 1,700 public inquiries and strive to exceed the FY 2025 monetary recoveries result of $468.7 million.
Finally, EBSA will hire benefit advisors to meet the public demand for timely, accurate, and effective compliance assistance.
EBSA will also seek to enhance its data collection and management systems with the latest technology to reduce costs and data entry requirements for EBSA staff.
Strategic Objective 2.5 – Promote labor union transparency and financial integrity in American workplaces.
OLMS is primarily authorized under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959 (LMRDA) to promote union democracy, financial integrity, and transparency of labor organizations representing private-sector employees.
OLMS enforces LMRDA requirements related to union elections and financial practices, and oversees reporting and disclosure obligations of unions, their officials, employers, labor consultants, and surety companies.
Due to statutory limitations, OLMS prioritizes the timely resolution of union officer election complaints to advance the LRMDA’s union democracy objectives.
In FY 2025, OLMS narrowly missed the target of resolving cases within an average of 65 days, achieving an average resolution time of 68.9 days.
In contrast, OLMS exceeded expectations in compliance outcomes, resolving 84.7 percent of violations through voluntary compliance audits, surpassing the FY 2025 target of 74 percent.
In FY 2026, OLMS will replace this measure with the “fallout” rate to track its effort to better capture its targeted auditing strategy focused on unions exhibiting indicators of embezzlement.
OLMS also made significant progress in improving reporting compliance by reducing the number of unions that chronically filed delinquent annual disclosure reports, thereby making financial information available more quickly to union members and the public.
Specifically, OLMS reduced its chronically delinquent watch list by 47 percent, exceeding its target of 30 percent.
OLMS will continue to refine its methods to improve the timely resolution of union officer election complaints, including the use of team investigations (when resources permit) and enhanced cross-agency communication.
The agency will issue strategy reports more frequently to reinforce mandatory and recommended strategies designed to reduce elapsed time.
OLMS will also conduct audits of local, intermediate, and national or international unions exhibiting indications of possible embezzlement, assess overall compliance with the LMRDA, and provide compliance assistance.
To strengthen oversight and enforcement, OLMS will enhance its information technology systems to improve targeting, quarterly reporting, and data driven decision making.
The agency will also train investigative staff in advanced auditing and investigative techniques, including updates to the compliance audit investigations training.
These actions will improve OLMS’ ability to identify unions with elevated financial risk and focus resources on cases involving misuse of union funds.
OLMS will continue providing targeted compliance assistance and, where warranted, take enforcement actions to prevent unions from remaining or becoming chronically delinquent.
Outreach efforts, including direct contact by phone, letter, and email, will promote more timely reporting and improve transparency, enabling union members, stakeholders, and the public to better monitor union financial operations and activities and helping ensure that union assets are used solely for the benefit of union members.
To further modernize operations, OLMS will replace its legacy system with a secure, cloud-based case management platform that incorporates data visualization and analytical tools to support performance tracking and resource allocation.
This integrated system, the OLMS Labor Investigations Visualization & In-time Analytics System (OLIVIA), will enhance case processing efficiency, expand analytical capabilities to the Online Public Disclosure Display, and allow investigators to devote more time to high-priority investigations.
Collectively, these improvements will strengthen enforcement of the LMRDA and transform the user experience for the regulated community with more timely and accessible public disclosure data.
Strategic Objective 2.6 – Strengthen U.S. trade negotiations by addressing unfair labor practices around the world.
ILAB levels the playing field for American workers and businesses by enforcing trade commitments, strengthening labor standards, and combating international child labor and forced labor.
In FY 2025, ILAB implemented the President’s Memorandum on Reciprocal Trade and Tariffs by bringing expertise to the negotiation/implementation of Agreements on Reciprocal Trade (ARTs), ensuring labor provisions addressed unfair trade practices.
ILAB provided analysis and recommendations to the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) for 72 countries and participated in negotiations with 25 countries.
ILAB ensured that U.S. trading partners committed to international labor standards and addressed unfair labor practices in two new agreements and eleven preliminary agreements.
ILAB brought United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA) Rapid Response Mechanism (RRM) cases to the Government of Mexico for review and dispute settlement.
The United States requested review of alleged denial of labor rights 11 times using the RRM.
Requests were made in two of three priority sectors identified in the USMCA.
In August 2025, the U.S. won a USMCA labor case, the first panel victory under the RRM and first successful labor case under the dispute mechanism of any trade agreement.
This victory demonstrates how the America First trade policy protects American workers from competing against foreign companies that suppress wages by violating labor laws.
ILAB served as a principal member of the Forced Labor Enforcement Task Force (FLETF) and contributed to interagency efforts to support the U.S. Customs and Border Protection’s enforcement of the import prohibition of goods made with forced labor.
ILAB served as co-chair of the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act (UFLPA) Entity List Subcommittee and contributed to the expansion of the UFLPA Entity list, increasing the number of entities to 144 since the law’s inception in December 2021, covering key sectors like cotton, mining, and aluminum.
ILAB contributed to the addition of five high priority enforcement sectors under the UFLPA Strategy, which include caustic soda, jujubes (red dates), copper, lithium, and steel, expanding the UFLPA Strategy to 13 high priority enforcement sectors.
ILAB will hold USMCA partners accountable to commitments and advocate for labor concessions through trade negotiations that will level the playing field for American workers and businesses.
ILAB will enhance implementation of trade commitments, focusing on strengthening the RRM through the USMCA six-year review and developing technical assistance to support implementation of labor concessions in the ARTs, including forced labor import bans.
ILAB will combat China’s efforts to undercut American competitiveness through interagency collaboration under the FLETF and leading supply chain research to support UFLPA enforcement.
ILAB will design technical assistance to address abusive practices in critical sectors like fishing and will press our USMCA partners to seriously address goods made with forced labor in China trans-shipped through North America.
ILAB will include a profile on China in the Trade and Development Act Report documenting use of child labor, and spotlight Chinese state-owned enterprises using child labor in select country profiles.
ILAB will empower American businesses to join the U.S. Government’s fight to keep child and forced labor-made goods out of the U.S. and stop foreign competitors from undercutting American workers.
ILAB will launch selfassessment tools for U.S. companies—including SourcingStrong and ImportWatch—that help businesses identify, assess, and remediate child labor and forced labor risks in supply chains.
ILAB will expand public and business access to mandated reports and high-risk product data through the LaborShield application, strengthening responsible sourcing and supporting resilient American supply chains.
ILAB will contribute information to USTR for the National Trade Estimate (NTE) report, which will discuss unfair labor practices in all 60 countries as foreign trade barriers faced by U.S. exporters.
The NTE report is a primary source for identifying unfair trade practices that must be addressed under the Presidential EO on Reciprocal Tariffs and will inform ILAB monitoring, enforcement, and technical assistance.
Strategic Objective 2.7 – Facilitate lawful temporary employment of foreign workers while safeguarding American workers, employers, and farmers.
OFLC Performance Goal 2.7 – Protect the employment of U.S. workers while facilitating lawful temporary employment of foreign workers.
U.S. employers requested a record 415,496 worker positions through the H-2A program in FY 2025.
Despite record application levels, the OFLC resolved 98.2 percent of complete H-2A employer applications at least thirty (30) days before the date of need, exceeding its target of 97.0 percent.
By successfully meeting statutory and regulatory H-2A adjudication timeframes, OFLC helped ensure that U.S. agricultural employers had reliable access to a legally authorized temporary workforce critical to providing the nation’s food supply.
OFLC anticipates that applications for foreign labor certification will continue to increase through FY 2027.
As the Administration strengthens the nation’s southern border, enhances interior enforcement efforts, and promotes economic growth, employers will increasingly turn to legal pathways – most notably permanent and temporary employment visas – as a vital option to obtain a timely, qualified, and stable workforce that can help their businesses grow and prosper.
To continue to meet required statutory and regulatory processing times amid rising workload volumes, OFLC will employ multiple strategies to facilitate the timely adjudication of employer applications.
In collaboration with other federal immigration agencies, OFLC will implement technological enhancements to integrate its operations with a single web-based portal through which agricultural employers can easily access and navigate the entire H-2A visa admissions process to hire temporary workers in a timely fashion.
OFLC will also continue to look for opportunities to expand technical assistance and outreach events in advance of peak filing periods to provide filing tips and best practices to employer applicants.
In partnership with WHD, OFLC will continue to host and participate in external stakeholder events providing technical assistance and best practices to program users, which in turn assists them in submitting higher quality applications that can be processed more efficiently.
In FY 2025, the DOL strengthened protections for U.S. workers through H-1B reforms.
Project Firewall protects America’s highly skilled workforce, strengthening labor standards, sharpening H-1B enforcement strategies, and prioritizing opportunities for American workers while keeping the nation competitive.
WHD maintained a presence in industries—through enforcement, outreach, and stakeholder engagement—that obtain a significant share of their workforce through foreign worker programs.
WHD prioritized enforcement resources towards addressing exploitative working conditions.
Through DOL rulemaking efforts undertaken in FY 2025, WHD is committed to ensuring rules governing temporary foreign workers obtained through the H-2A visa program are not overly burdensome to America’s farmers, costly, or unnecessary.
WHD aims to increase the efficacy of enforcement related to the temporary employment of foreign workers through the H-visa programs.
Through Project Firewall, WHD will use all available tools to hold employers accountable when they abuse the H-1B visa process to hire foreign workers instead of qualified U.S. workers.
Project Firewall will discourage abuse and fraud in the H-1B program by strengthening enforcement and disseminating compliance assistance information.
WHD will analyze the median days to conclude investigations across all H-visa programs, with the goal of creating a more efficient case development process.
WHD will continue to invest the resources necessary to protect workers from exploitative working conditions.
WHD will also support DOL efforts to strategically manage immigration-related workstreams.
Hiring foreign workers for employment in the U.S. also requires approval from several government agencies.
Through compliance assistance, WHD will coordinate with other agencies and will educate employers on how to comply with the unique requirements of each program.
Enforcement and outreach strategies will be deployed strategically.
OASAM enhanced strategic initiatives focused on efficiency, security, and organizational excellence.
OASAM’s Business Operations Center (BOC) responded swiftly to the need of agencies preparing to host staff returning to the office.
In FY 2025, BOC refurnished and re-issued 70,800 square feet of vacant space in the Frances Perkins Building.
Simultaneously, BOC continued reducing DOL’s real estate footprint, releasing several national capital region General Services Administration (GSA) leased locations comprising over 100,000 rentable square feet and approximately $2 million in rent cost savings.
The Office of Field Operations (OFO) successfully supported DOL’s return to office strategy by placing over 2,200 DOL employees back in offices.
OFO partnered with all DOL agencies and GSA to place over 850 staff in the GSA Space Match Program.
These efforts supported missioncritical workforce needs and significantly advanced the government-wide goal of maximizing utilization and rightsizing the physical footprint, laying a crucial foundation for future cost avoidance.
OASAM’s Office of the Senior Procurement Executive (OSPE) continued to enable the efficient and effective procurement of goods and services, resulting in reduced procurement time, reduced cost, best value, and improved quality of goods and services procured.
Category Management principles support DOL’s ability to buy products and services enterprise-wide, which increases value and generates savings.
In FY 2025, OSPE exceeded its Best-In-Class (BIC) goal of 15 percent with a result of 19 percent.
OSPE also exceeded its percentage of contracts per quarter awarded competitively with a result of 98.42 percent vs the target goal of 85 percent.
OASAM will identify, develop, and implement policies and operational strategies to modernize services and systems to improve overall service delivery for the current and future work environment.
OASAM will provide greater consistency and transparency throughout DOL by streamlining and automating processes where appropriate.
Where appropriate, OASAM will leverage government-wide solutions and approaches to support unique DOL mission needs through policy, guidance, and training as DOL navigates rightsizing and transitioning activities toward a new vision of the future of work.
OASAM will continue to assist DOL’s work to restructure and rightsize its workforce and optimize its use of federal space in support of the Administration’s plans to rebuild the American workforce and economy.
OASAM will ensure work environments promote effective collaboration and management, and that the agency’s real estate footprint is aligned with cross-agency efforts coordinated by the GSA to establish regional federal office hubs.
In FY 2027, OASAM will pursue core real property goals aligned with Federal Real Property Capital Plan mandates.
First, achieve an average building utilization rate of 60 percent or greater in major assets.
Second, reduce the overall office square footage by a minimum of 110,000 square feet through space consolidation and adherence to the 150 usable square feet per person standard.
And third, initiate and execute strategic relocations and consolidations to merge smaller offices into urban hubs, eliminate duplicative infrastructure, and improve customer access, particularly in rural areas.
Strategic Objective 3.2 – Reduce bureaucratic overreach and eliminate information silos across DOL Agencies.
OASP is the principal policy, regulatory, data governance, and evaluation ofice for DOL and advises its leadership on actions to improve the lives of workers, retirees, and their families.
In FY 2025, OASP achieved significant progress in modernizing DOL's data infrastructure, streamlining regulatory processes, and enhancing compliance resources for stakeholders.
These accomplishments reflect a commitment to evidence-based decision-making, operational eficiency, and responsive service delivery.
OASP successfully submitted timely regulatory agendas for Fall 2024 and Spring/Fall 2025 that were aligned with Administration priorities.
OASP published over 100 regulatory documents—including more than 60 deregulatory actions issued within three days—plus more than 300 Federal Register notices, demonstrating capacity to execute high-volume actions during policy transitions while maintaining legal sufficiency.
OASP managed FY 2025 and FY 2026 regulatory cost accounting and ensured regulatory actions were appropriately offset.
21 OASP prepared actionable briefings for the Deputy Secretary that identified which regulations should be rescinded, delayed, or withdrawn to meet Administration goals.
To help the regulated community succeed, OASP coordinated with DOL’s enforcement agencies to expand compliance assistance through enhanced opinion letter and self-audit programs.
DOL issued opinion letters to explain how federal labor laws apply in common workplace situations and utilized self-audit programs to help employers, unions, and pension plans voluntarily review and improve compliance.
OASP conducted a comprehensive data assessment and identified critical gaps including absent enterprise data architecture, limited governance mechanisms, and insufficient semantic frameworks for AI and advanced analytics.
OASP developed actionable recommendations that addressed architecture, governance maturity, staffing, and modernization priorities aligned with the Evidence Act, guidance issued by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), and America's AI Action Plan.
OASP carried out a DOL-wide listening tour with agency teams to identify common challenges and inform strategic recommendations.
OASP revitalized the Data Governance Board to rebuild community and shared ownership within DOL.
Enhanced coordination between the Chief Data and Analytics Officer, Chief Evaluation Officer, and Chief Economist enabled integrated analytics support, positioning DOL for evidence-based decision-making and improved outcomes.
Building on demonstrated successes, OASP is positioned to institutionalize recent progress and drive sustained improvement across regulatory operations, stakeholder engagement, and data modernization through integrated, strategic initiatives.
To advance regulatory excellence, OASP will establish a real-time compliance dashboard monitoring 10-for-1 metrics and cost-benefit performance across all agency actions.
OASP will create standardized templates and operational playbooks to codify best practices for rapid regulatory response, ensuring future high-volume publication efforts maintain rigorous quality standards.
It will carry out quarterly strategic alignment reviews with senior leadership to provide ongoing course correction and ensure continued fidelity to evolving Administration priorities.
OASP will deploy AI-powered guidance tools across its websites that assist workers and deliver personalized compliance assistance at scale, reducing confusion and improving voluntary compliance.
OASP will develop industry-specific toolkits that translate legal requirements into practical, actionable guidance.
OASP’s stakeholder advisory council, expanded customer satisfaction surveys, and integrated feedback tools will ensure services remain clear, effective, and continuously improve based on real user needs.
Data infrastructure maturation requires phased implementation of enterprise data architecture, beginning with high-value use cases.
OASP’s automated data quality monitoring and metadata management will strengthen governance mechanisms, while its targeted AI/machine learning pilots will demonstrate the potential of enhanced semantic frameworks.
OASP will build organizational capacity for sustained innovation through its comprehensive data literacy program.
Finally, OASP will formalize the Data Governance Board's charter and decision-making authority while establishing communities of practice to facilitate cross-agency collaboration.
It will create integrated work plans for the Chief Data and Analytics Officer, Chief Evaluation Officer, and Chief Economist to enable coordinated analytics support.
OASP’s annual maturity assessments will track progress and ensure accountability, creating durable frameworks that transcend leadership transitions.
Strategic Objective 3.3 – Promote fiscal integrity, efficiency, effectiveness, and optimize AI to safeguard American taxpayers from fraud, waste, and abuse.
OASAM’s Security Center (SC) implemented the Trusted Workforce 2.0 initiative to transition DOL to an ongoing investigative program using the Government’s Continuous Vetting and FBI Rap Back programs, improving prescreening determinations and allowing personnel security to receive real-time criminal history data on DOL personnel.
In FY 2025, SC significantly exceeded the target for the average number of days to adjudicate a background investigation for suitability (3 days) and met the target for the average number of days to adjudicate a background for investigation national security (15 days).
In FY 2025, the Office of the Chief Information officer (OCIO) demonstrated the value of AI across DOL.
OCIO achieved significant compliance with the Presidential EO on removing barriers to American leadership in AI and publishing the AI Compliance Report and Strategies for AI in accordance with OMB Memorandum M-25-21, as well as developing contract language for AI procurements per guidance outlined in M-25-22.
22 OCIO enhanced operational efficiency and boosted productivity across 27 agencies with the launch of DOL AI Search Insights.
Additionally, data migration and modernizations that improved legacy systems resulted in $7 million in savings and ultimately enhanced operational effectiveness and secured a more efficient future for DOL.
OSPE prioritized streamlining acquisition processes using key performance measures to enhance enterprise performance.
OSPE issued operational policy and guidance to improve acquisition performance and collaborated with DOL leadership to implement reviews and IT system controls on contracting actions and payments, ensuring fiscal integrity and effective procurement management.
OSPE utilized the OMB Category Management principles where feasible and applicable to leverage the government’s buying power as a single enterprise and buy smarter, including using Best in Class vehicles and other Government-Wide Agency Contracts.
OSPE exceeded its goal of 68 percent for Spend Under Management (SUM) with a result of 84 percent.
To protect American taxpayers from fraud, waste, and abuse and ensure the effective use of funds, OCFO and OASAM will optimize AI to modernize processes, eliminate redundancies, and transform DOL’s financial and technical landscape.
23 Efficient services and operations will redirect resources toward the programs that impact America’s workers every day.
This will enable DOL’s timely compliance with Presidential EOs, mandates from the Treasury, and the production of more accurate and timely financial statements in line with OMB reporting guidance.
In FY 2027, OASAM will utilize DOL’s updated budget system to speed analysis and increase leadership’s access to decision-informing data.
OASAM will ensure an agile, efficient, and effective procurement process that reduces procurement time and costs, delivers the best value, and improves the quality of goods and services.
OASAM will continue to prioritize process improvement, oversight, and accountability throughout the acquisition lifecycle.
OASAM will leverage process automation, templates, training, and guides for program and contracting activities.
OASAM also will leverage the government’s buying power as a single enterprise to make smarter purchases, including using BIC vehicles and other Government-Wide Acquisition Contracts.
OCFO leads DOL through its annual audit in which DOL’s programs, accomplishments, challenges, and management’s accountability for the resources entrusted to DOL is summarized in the Agency Financial Report.
OCFO tracks the number of material weaknesses identified through the annual audit after the conclusion of the fiscal year.
The most serious of findings resulting from an audit are identified as a “material weakness” which is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal controls, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement on DOL’s financial statement will not be prevented, or detected and corrected, on a timely basis.
OCFO oversees the New Core Financial Management System (NCFMS), the financial system of record for DOL.
It supports OCFO’s mission to uphold strong financial management principles and accountability by providing timely, accurate, and reliable financial information.
As a crucial component supporting DOL's finance and accounting activities, NCFMS plays a pivotal role in facilitating invoicing and payments, budget execution, fixed assets management, accounts receivables, general ledger, and project accounting.
To further facilitate fiscal integrity and efficient use of resources through innovation in FY 2025, OCFO held 13 SkillSpark trainings.
These sessions provided tips, tools, and insights into critical financial functions within DOL that can be applied to daily tasks for financial staff across DOL.
Additionally, DOL prioritized data encryption requirements, which ensured that NCFMS data-at-rest and data-in-transit are properly encrypted with appropriate, approved versions of encryption algorithms.
These efforts have helped NCFMS to continue to provide decision makers with accurate and reliable information and allowed OCFO to continue to process payments in a timely manner.
In FY 2025, OCFO exceeded its target for the percentage of payments made without incurring prompt payment interest with a result of 99.51 percent.
In FY 2025, DOL made necessary changes to NCFMS, approved through its established Change Control Process.
Major accomplishments included the successful integration of Treasury’s G-Invoicing System and NCFMS fo new intragovernmental buy/sell transactions and performance.
DOL also completed the NCFMS User Interface Framework Modernization Project to meet modern browser standards, increase Section 508 Compliance, improve defense against cybersecurity risks, and enhance overall user experience.
In alignment with Presidential EOs and guidance from the OMB, which require federal agencies to prioritize the use of Treasury’s Financial Management Quality Service Management Office (FM QSMO) as the preferred marketplace for financial systems and services, DOL continues to actively collaborate with FM QSMO-led initiatives.
24 As part of this effort, DOL will recompete the current NCFMS operations and maintenance support contract, set to expire in September 2026, through the FM QSMO marketplace acquisition process, ensuring continued compliance and alignment with government-wide financial management modernization goals.
Planned activities through FY 2027 include enhancing NCFMS’ core accounts payable functionality through upgrades to both the MarkView and Capture software platforms.
In coordination with the GSA, DOL also plans to initiate the NCFMS and Go.Gov integration project to support the transition from the current E2 Travel system, with full implementation targeted by February 2027.
Additionally, DOL is evaluating the implementation of Treasury’s G-Invoicing 7600EZ and Constructive Order Acceptance capabilities.
In preparation for Treasury’s scheduled decommissioning of the XML gateway by September 2026, DOL is also assessing updates to existing system interfaces to transition from XML to the modern JSON data format as required by Treasury.
Strategic Objective 3.4 – Provide timely, accurate, and relevant information on labor market activity, working conditions, price changes, and productivity in the U.S. economy to support workforce planning and decision-making.
BLS produces various estimates and indexes, including the Consumer Price Index (CPI), which is the nation’s principal gauge of inflation, and the Employment Situation, which comprises the Current Employment Statistics (CES) and Current Population Survey (CPS).
CES measures employment, hours, and earnings by industry and geography from the payroll records of employers.
CPS, a monthly household survey, provides a comprehensive body of information on the employment and unemployment experience of the nation’s population, including the closely-watched monthly unemployment rate.
In FY 2025, BLS achieved its objective of producing timely Principal Federal Economic Indicators (PFEIs) and substantially achieved its objective of producing relevant data for its PFEIs with a result of 99 percent.
With the release of the Producer Price Index (PPI) for July 2025 data, BLS ended calculation and publication of approximately 350 indexes.
As a result, selected industries were eliminated from the PPI, which impacted the scope and is reflected in BLS achieving 85 percent for its accuracy objective.
On average, BLS publishes over 3.5 million series, indexes, and other data products across its programs annually.
In FY 2025, BLS data series, along with other information on the website, were viewed on the BLS website nearly 14 million times on average per month.
The BLS public website was available for data dissemination 100 percent of the time.
BLS also strives to ensure that customers are satisfied with their ability to access material on the website.
FY 2025 represented the first full year after implementation of the GSA customer satisfaction measurement tool, Touchpoints, with 68 percent of customers reporting satisfaction with the BLS website.
BLS continues to monitor and assess mission performance, and seeks to transform how it collects, analyzes, and delivers its data by increasing its use of technology and identifying efficiencies to improve data accuracy, lower respondent burden, increase survey responses, and better reach its customers, while providing high-quality data for decision making.
BLS will continue to be responsive to users’ needs to understand changes in the economy while safeguarding respondent confidentiality and strengthening public trust through equal access to timely data releases.
BLS will adhere to all protocols to protect respondent identifiable information and will ensure embargoed economic data are released fairly, securely, and timely.
In addition, BLS will continue to take action to ensure compliance with Presidential EOs in support of the Administration’s priorities and goals.
BLS also will strive to provide new data and focus on leveraging new technologies and nontraditional data sources.
For example, in FY 2026, the CPS program continues to consult with its large community of stakeholders in government, academia, and the private sector to receive feedback on how to modernize the survey by developing an internet self-reporting system.
In FY 2027, the CPI program will begin a transition to the revised area structure, an updated geographic sample based on the 2020 decennial census.
The CPI program also will continue planning for the revised item structure, which will include an updated market basket classification structure, the first major revision to the item structure since 1998.