Well, thank you very much, everybody.
It's really an honor.
Speaker Johnson; Vice President Vance; First Lady of the United States; Second Lady of the United States; Members of Congress; and my fellow Americans, our Nation is back bigger, better, richer, and stronger than ever before.
Less than 5 months from now, our country will celebrate an epic milestone in American history: the 250th anniversary of our glorious American independence.
This July 4, we will mark two and a half centuries of liberty and triumph, progress and freedom in the most incredible and exceptional nation ever to exist on the face of the Earth.
And you've seen nothing yet.
We're going to do better and better and better.
This is the golden age of America.
When I last spoke in this Chamber 12 months ago, I had just inherited a nation in crisis, with a stagnant economy, inflation at record levels, a wide-open border, horrendous recruitment for military and police, rampant crime at home, and wars and chaos all over the world.
But tonight, after just 1 year, I can say with dignity and pride that we have achieved a transformation like no one has ever seen before and a turnaround for the ages.
It is indeed a turnaround for the ages.
And we will never go back to where we were just a very short time ago.
We're not going back today.
Today, our border is secure.
Thank you.
Today, our border is secure, our spirit is restored, inflation is plummeting, incomes are rising fast, the roaring economy is roaring like never before, and our enemies are scared, our military and police are stacked, and America is respected again, perhaps, like never before.
After 4 years in which millions and millions of illegal aliens poured across our borders totally unvetted and unchecked, we now have the strongest and most secure border in American history, by far.
In the past 9 months, zero illegal aliens have been admitted to the United States.
But we will always allow people to come in legally, people that will love our country and will work hard to maintain our country.
The flow of deadly fentanyl across our border is down by a record 56 percent in 1 year.
And last year, the murder rate saw its single largest decline in recorded history.
This is the biggest decline—think of it—in recorded history.
The lowest number in over 125 years—year 1900.
In fact, substantially before my wonderful father—I had a wonderful father, Fred.
Before he was born—substantially before he was born.
That's a long time ago.
He wouldn't like me to say that, but that's a long time ago.
The Biden administration and its allies in Congress gave us the worst inflation in the history of our country.
But in 12 months, my administration has driven core inflation down to the lowest level in more than 5 years.
And in the last 3 months of 2025, it was down to 1.7 percent.
Gasoline, which reached a peak of over $6 a gallon in some States under my predecessor—it was, quite honestly, a disaster—is now below $2.30 a gallon in most States and, in some places, $1.99 a gallon.
And when I visited the great State of Iowa just a few weeks ago, I even saw $1.85 a gallon for gasoline.
Mortgage rates are the lowest in 4 years and falling fast, and the annual cost of a typical new mortgage is down almost $5,000 just since I took office.
One year.
And low interest rates will solve the Biden-created housing problem while, at the same time, protecting the values of those people who already own a house that really feel rich for the first time in their lives.
We want to protect those values.
We want to keep those values up.
We're going to do both.
And we are going to keep it that way.
The stock market has set 53 alltime record highs since the election—think of that, 1 year—boosting pensions, 401(k)s, and retirement accounts for the millions and millions of Americans.
They're all gaining.
Everybody is up—way up.
In 4 long years, the last administration got less than $1 trillion in new investment in the United States.
And when I say less, substantially less.
In 12 months, I secured commitments for more than $18 trillion pouring in from all over the globe.
Think of it.
Much less than $1 trillion for 4 years versus much more than $18 trillion for 1 year.
What a difference a President makes.
A short time ago, we were a dead country.
Now we are the hottest country anywhere in the world.
The hottest.
As thousands of new businesses are forming and factories, plants, and laboratories are being built, we have added 70,000 new construction jobs in just a very short period of time.
It's getting bigger and bigger and stronger.
Nobody can believe what they're watching.
American oil production is up by more than 600,000 barrels a day.
And we just received from our new friend and partner, Venezuela, more than 80 million barrels of oil.
American natural gas production is at an alltime high because I kept my promise to "drill, baby, drill."
More Americans are working today than at any time in the history of our country.
Think about that.
Any time in the history of our country—more working today.
And 100 percent of all jobs created under my administration have been in the private sector.
We ended DEI in America.
We cut a record number of job-killing regulations.
And in one year, we have lifted 2.4 million Americans—a record—off of food stamps.
And for all of these reasons, I say tonight: Members of Congress, the state of our Union is strong.
Our country is winning again.
In fact, we're winning so much that we really don't know what to do about it.
People are asking me: "Please, please, please, Mr. President.
We're winning too much.
We can't take it anymore.
We're not used to winning in our country.
Until you came along, we were just always losing, but now we're winning too much."
And I say: "No, no, no. You're going to win again.
You're going to win big.
You're going to win bigger than ever."
And to prove that point—to prove that point, here with us tonight is a group of winners who just made the entire nation proud: the Men's Gold Medal Olympic Hockey Team.
Come on in.
Go ahead.
They deserve—they deserve it.
That's the first time I've ever seen them get up.
And actually, not all of them did get up.
But they beat a fantastic Canadian team in overtime, as everybody saw, as did the American women, who will soon be coming to the White House.
They were in the Oval Office before.
And I just want to say a second very big congratulations to Team U.S.A. But I have to say that—and I told them this—and we took a vote of the team.
I said, "Anybody votes no, I'm not doing it."
So they stood there, and they weren't about to say no, because I've never seen a goaltender play as well as goalie Connor Hellebuyck.
Think of it.
Forty-six shots on goal.
And I asked him, "The one shot—the one where you put your stick in the back and it hit the neck of your stick and bounced off, do you practice that, or was that a little lucky?"
He refused to answer that question.
But I just want to tell you that the members of this great hockey squad will be very happy to hear, based on their vote and my vote—and in this case, my vote was more important—that I will soon be presenting Connor with our highest civilian honor, which we will be given—and which has been given to many athletes over the years.
But when I say many, not too many—like 12.
It's called the highest civilian honor in our country: the Presidential Medal of Freedom.
Great athletes have gotten that.
Very great.
The best.
And I thought he deserved it.
And I did take a vote.
Every single one of them—I said, "I'm not giving it if anybody goes, 'No.'" And every single one of them rapidly put up their hand.
So I want to thank you all.
What a special job you did.
What special champions you are.
Thank you very much.
I'm also pleased to say that the next time the Olympic torch is lit, it will be here in America for the 2028 Olympics.
And it's the summer version, right in Los Angeles.
We're going to do a good job in Los Angeles.
And Los Angeles is going to be safe, just like Washington, DC, is now one of the safest cities in the country.
And this year—and I must say, I got them both.
I got them in my first term.
And I was disappointed because I didn't think I'd be the President when this happened.
But strange things took place, and now I've got them, because I got the Olympics and I got the 2026 FIFA World Cup.
And I wanted to claim the 250th, but I didn't get away with that one.
I couldn't claim that one for myself.
But we're getting the World Cup.
So we have the World Cup and the Olympics coming, and that is exciting news.
So this will be a year to celebrate our country and the heroes who have kept it free, men like Buddy Taggart.
At age 17, Buddy volunteered to defend America in World War II, serving in the Pacific under the great General Douglas MacArthur.
He fought bravely in the famous Battle of Manila.
Worked so hard.
He was badly wounded and almost killed by enemy machineguns in Luzon.
And 81 years ago this month, he liberated the largest internment camp in the Philippines—one of the largest anywhere in the world.
Buddy earned many honors, including a Purple Heart and a Bronze Star, came home, started a family, and tonight, he is in the gallery looking forward to July 4, 2026: his 100th birthday.
So, Buddy, you're a brave man, and we salute you.
Even in times of challenge, setback, and immense heartache, the spirit of 1776 has always shown through very brightly.
It was July 4 of last year when floodwaters tore through a girls' summer camp in Central Texas—one of the worst things I've ever seen; I was there—rising 26 feet in the matter of minutes, tragically claiming many, many lives.
You all remember that one.
As the waters threatened to sweep her away, 11-year-old Milly Cate McClymond closed her eyes and prayed to God.
She thought she was going to die.
Those prayers were answered when Coast Guard rescue swimmer Scott Ruskan descended from a helicopter above.
Nobody knew where he came from.
It was Scott's first-ever rescue mission.
A young guy, but very brave.
Very, very top—always top in his class.
And he lifted not just Milly Cate but 164 others to safety.
People watched Scott from a distance, and they couldn't believe what they were seeing.
The winds were blowing.
The rain was pouring.
Everything was going.
And that rapid water—nobody has ever seen anything like it.
They said, "Wow, that's something."
Tonight Scott and Milly Cate are here together, reunited for the very first time.
Thank you, Scott, Milly Cate.
And, Petty Officer Ruskan, I'm pleased to inform you that I am now awarding you the Legion of Merit for extraordinary heroism, which is what it was.
Extraordinary heroism.
Thank you.
I'd like to have the military aide to please come down and take care of this service.
Military aide.
Thank you very much.
Take care of that very important service.
Thank you very much.
From 1776 to today, every generation of Americans has stepped forward to defend life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, and they're really doing it for the next generation.
But now it's our turn.
Together, we're building a nation where every child has the chance to reach higher and go further; where Government answers to the people, not the powerful; and where the interests of hardworking American citizens are always our first and ultimate concern.
That is the debt we owe to the heroes who came before us, and that is the promise we must keep to America for our 250th year.
Last year, I urged this Congress to begin the mission by passing the largest tax cuts in American history, and our Republican majorities delivered so beautifully.
Thank you, Republicans.
All Democrats, every single one of them, voted against these really important and very necessary, massive tax cuts.
They wanted large-scale tax increases to hurt the people instead.
But we held strong, and with the "Great Big Beautiful Bill," we gave you no tax on tips, no tax on overtime, and no tax on Social Security for our great seniors.
And we also made interest on auto loans tax deductible—the first time—but only if the car is made in America.
Right?
Recently in Pennsylvania I met Megan Hemhauser, a devoted mom who's—homeschools her children—beautiful two children—during the day while waiting tables at night, as her husband works overtime operating very heavy equipment.
Megan is here this evening, and she's happy to tell you that she is so, so much richer, because with no tax on tips, no tax on overtime, and our expanded child tax credit—done, again, by Republicans—Megan and her husband will take home more than $5,000 extra just for the year, cutting her tax bill in more than half.
Megan, please stand up.
We're fighting for you, Megan.
Thank you, Megan.
Thank you, Megan.
We're fighting for you, Megan.
Under our bill, parents like Megan can also activate their children's brandnew Trump Accounts.
And I didn't name it.
I did not name it.
I did not name that.
Nobody believes me, but I did not name it.
It was named by a very tall man standing right there in the third row.
Nice man.
A good man.
Tax-free investment accounts for every American child.
This is something that's so special, and it's taken off and gone through the roof.
Millions will be prefunded courtesy of the U.S. Treasury and private individuals—like Michael and Susan Dell, who have donated 6 billion 250 million dollars to fund the Trump Accounts for 25 million American children.
They're great people.
You know, I asked Michael Dell, "How do you make all that money?"
He said: "Well, I just sat on my dorm in school and I made computers, and I'd sell them to people.
And I just kept selling and selling and selling."
And pretty amazing story.
That's called the American dream.
He sold a lot of computers, a lot of those laptops.
So I congratulate him on that.
But I really thank him and Susan, as well as—others, like Brad Gerstner, a very tremendous guy.
He was behind it right from the beginning.
Brad Gerstner.
Thank you, Brad.
So, with modest additional contributions, these young people's accounts could grow to over $100,000 or more by the time they turn 18.
Think of it.
How much money is that for somebody that started with nothing?
Over $100,000.
Could be much more than that.
To make this investment in our children's future, go to Trumpaccounts.gov.
Trumpaccounts.gov.
And a lot of people are doing it.
They're setting every record in the book.
It's popular.
They knew what was going to—what it was going to take.
I'm so proud of them.
I'm so proud of the people that got it started, and now it's just taken off.
One of the primary reasons for our country's stunning economic turnaround, the biggest in history—where the Dow Jones broke 50,000 4 years ahead of schedule and the S&P hit 7,000, where it wasn't supposed to do it for many years—were tariffs.
I used these tariffs, took in hundreds of billions of dollars, to make great deals for our country, both economically and on a national security basis.
Everything was working well.
Countries that were ripping us off for decades are now paying us hundreds of billions of dollars.
They were ripping us so badly.
You all know that.
Everybody knows it.
Even the Democrats know it.
They just don't want to say it.
And yet these countries are now happy, and so are we.
We made deals.
The deals are all done, and they're happy.
They're not making money like they used to, but we're making a lot of money.
There was no inflation, tremendous growth, and the big story was how Donald Trump called the economy correctly and 22 Nobel Prize winners in economics didn't. They got it totally wrong.
They got it really wrong.
And then, just 4 days ago, an unfortunate ruling from the United States Supreme Court—it just came down.
It came down.
Very unfortunate ruling.
But the good news is that almost all countries and corporations want to keep the deal that they already made—right, Scott?
knowing that the legal power that I, as President, have to make a new deal could be far worse for them.
And therefore, they will continue to work along the same successful path that we had negotiated before the Supreme Court's unfortunate involvement.
So, despite the disappointing ruling, these powerful, country-saving—it's saving our country, the kind of money we're taking in—peace-protecting—many of the wars I settled was because of the threat of tariffs—I wouldn't have been able to settle them without—will remain in place under fully approved and tested alternative legal statutes.
And they have been tested for a long time.
They're a little more complex, but they're actually probably better, leading to a solution that will be even stronger than before.
Congressional action will not be necessary.
It's already time-tested and approved.
And as time goes by, I believe the tariffs, paid for by foreign countries will, like in the past, substantially replace the modern-day system of income tax, taking a great financial burden off the people that I love.
Right?
Right?
Moving forward, factories, jobs, investment, and trillions and trillions of dollars will continue pouring into the United States of America because we finally have a President who puts America first.
I put America first.
I love America.
For decades, before I came along, we had the exact opposite.
From trade to health care, from energy to immigration, everything was stolen and rigged in order to drain the wealth out of the productive, hard-working people who make our country great, who make our country run.
Under Biden and his corrupt partners in Congress and beyond, it reached a breaking point with the "green new scam," open borders for everyone.
They poured in by the millions and millions from prisons, from mental institutions.
They were murderers—11,888 murderers.
They came into our country.
You allowed that to happen.
And record-setting inflation that cost the typical family $34,000 in just a speck of time.
Now the same people in this Chamber who voted for those disasters suddenly use the word "affordability"—a word—they just used it because somebody gave it to them—knowing full well that they caused and created the increased prices that all of our citizens had to endure.
You caused that problem.
You caused that problem.
They knew their statements were a lie.
They knew it.
They knew their statements were a dirty, rotten lie.
Their policies created the high prices.
Our policies are rapidly ending them.
We are doing really well.
Those prices are plummeting downward.
The price of eggs is down 60 percent.
Madam Secretary, thank you.
The cost of chicken, butter, fruit, hotels, automobiles, rent is lower today than when I took office by a lot.
And even beef, which was very high, is starting to come down significantly.
Just hold on a little while.
We're getting it down.
And soon, you will see numbers that few people would think were possible to achieve just a short time ago.
Nobody can believe when they see the kind of numbers, especially energy—when they see energy going down to numbers like that, they cannot believe it.
It's like another big tax cut.
I'm also confronting one of the biggest rip-offs of our times: the crushing cost of health care—caused by you.
Since the passage of the "Unaffordable Care Act," sometimes referred to as Obamacare, big insurance companies have gotten rich—it was meant for the insurance companies, not for the people—with our Government giving them hundreds and hundreds of billions of dollars a year as their stock prices soared 1,000, 1,200, 1,400, even 1,700 percent—like nothing else.
That's why I introduced the Great Health Care Plan.
I want to stop all payments to big insurance companies and instead give that money directly to the people so they can buy their own health care, which will be better health care at a much lower cost.
In addition, my plan requires maximum price transparency.