Washington, D. C., November 28, 1900.
Sir: I have the honor to respectfully submit a summary of the operations of the Department of the Interior during the past year, together with such recommendations and suggestions as in my judgment will promote the public interests.
The character and the amount of business transacted in the several bureaus, ofices, and institutions connected with it are set forth in detail in their respective reports hereto appended.
The public business has been promptly dispatched during the period covered by this report, and the work of the several bureaus and offices, I am gratified to state, is in a most satisfactory condition.
The scope of the jurisdiction of this Department is wide and the affairs in its keeping are varied.
The labor involved in the supervising and directing the great diversity of national affairs submitted under you to this Department is enormous and has frequently severely taxed the energies of the several secretaries.
In addition to the accumulation of business arising from the rapid development and the extension of the country, Congress has, from time to time, imposed.new duties on this Department, greatly augmenting the work to be disposed of without any material additions to the force.
This increase of work is notable in the Secretary's office, the great clearing house of the Department, where the handling of the details of the vast volume of business devolves principally upon the chief clerk and the several chiefs of divisions, and requires the exercise of good judgment, superior business qualifications, administrative ability, and, very frequently, legal knowledge.
I have accordingly submitted to Congress, in the annual estimates of the Department, such recommendations as the circumstances appear to demand.
I acknowledge with pleasure the valuable aid and assistance cheerfully rendered by the Assistant Secretaries, the Assistant Attorney-General, the heads of bureaus, the chief clerk of the Department, and the chiefs of divisions of the Secretary's Office in the conduct of the business of this Department, as well as the ability and the energy with which they have severally discharged the duties and obligations of their respective offices.
The general condition of the Indians during the year has continued to be satisfactory; no disturbances or serious troubles have occurred, and a reasonable degree of progress toward civilization has been made.
The management of the Indian schools has been good, and their increase in number as well as in the enrollment and attendance of pupils indicates a healthy and satisfactory growth.
The population of Indians, exclusive of those in the State of New York and those in the Five Civilized Tribes of the Indian Territory, may be stated approximately to be 181,939, an increase of 353 over the previous year.
Five thousand six hundred and eighteen allotments of land in severalty were made during the year, embracing approximately 890,- 982.25 acres.
The total number of allotments of land made to the Indians since the passage of the act of February 8, 1887 (24 Stats., 388), number approximately 63,368, and have an aggregate acreage of 7,873,570.25.
The five nations or tribes of the Indian Territory comprise the Choctaw, Chickasaw, Creek, Cherokee, and Seminole.
The approximate area of lands embraced in the Indian Territory and controlled by these five tribes is 19,776,286 acres, with an estimated aggregate population of 84,750 Indians, icluding freedmen.
It is estimated that at the present time there are approximatety between 350,000 and 400,000 white people, noncitizens, within the limits of the five nations.
No allotments of land have been made to the members of the five tribes, but in the Creek Nation there have been recorded 10,000 selections for allotments.
During the year there were employed 1,605 Indians in the agency service proper as herders, teamsters, harness makers, clerks, shoemakers, butchers, blacksmiths, and kindred occupations, to whom were paid salaries aggregating $318,672; and in the Indian school service there were employed 695 Indians for the work of nurses, matrons, clerks, cooks, bakers, laundresses, industrial and other teachers, usually as assistants but occasionally at the head of the respective departments, receiving salaries ranging from $1,000 to $120 per annum, and aggregating $270,357.
The aggregate of appropriations on account of the Indian service for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1900, was $7,678,863.19.
Of this $7,504,775.81 was provided for in the act making appropriations for the current and contingent expenses of the Indian Department and for fulfilling treaty stipulations with various Indian tribes, and $174,087.38 by various other acts.
The total amount appropriated on account of the Indian service for the fiscal vear ending June 30, 1901, is $8,873,239.24, which is $1,123,287.30 more than for the past fiscal year.
Paid in cash, as provided by law, to the various Indian tribes as treaties require, or expended, under the supervision of the Department, for the support, education, and civilization of the respective Indian tribes.
Expended under the supervision of the Department for the support, etc., of the Indians, or paid in cash, as provided by treaty.
Expended under the supervision of the Department.
Moneys collected through Indian agents, and expended under the direction of the Department for the benefit of the Indians, or paid to them in cash per capita.
The total amount of money expended by the Government for the Indian service from March 4, 1789, to June 30, 1900, is shown by the records of the Treasury Department to be $368,358,217.17.
In previous annual reports it was recommended that Congress give the Department the option of transporting supplies for Indians under contracts let to the lowest bidders, as required by the act of March 3, 1877 (19 Stat., 291), or by "common carriers."
That from and after the passage of this act Indian goods and supplies shall be transported under contract as provided in the act of March 3, 1877, or in open market by common carriers, as the Secretary of the Interior, in his discretion, shall determine (30 Stat., 676).
At the annual letting of contracts in Chicago in April, 1899, all bids for transportation were rejected, and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs made, successfully, the experiment of shipping supplies for the last fiscal year in open market at tariff rates or better.
During that period 13,973,645 pounds of freight were transported at an actual cost of $135,432.91, which, under the rates offered by bidders in April of 1899, would have cost $182,025.39.
The Government now assumes the risks of shortage and shrinkage which hitherto contractors were responsible for.
As an instance, it may be stated that last fall $3,937.37 worth of goods were lost by the sinking of a steamer, but whether this loss will fall on the Government or the carrier has not yet been determined.
Allowing, however, for such accidents and for increase of clerical work required by the new system, the expense of hauling, occasional storage charges, etc., the saving of full 20 per cent has been effected.
The number of Indians who regularly receive rations, usually twice a month, is about 45,270.
From this statement there is omitted, however, 17,876 Sioux whose ration per 100 persons as established by the agreement of 1876 is 150 pounds of beef (or 50 pounds bacon in lieu thereof), 50 pounds flour, 50 pounds corn, 4 pounds coffee, 8 pounds sugar, and 3 pounds beans, so that for every 100 rations the cost equals about $50 per capita per annum.
The Sioux ration has been gradually reduced so that as now issued it costs about $35 per capita.
Even now these Indians receive, in the two principal items, 1 pound beef net, and 5å ounces flour a day to every man, woman, and child.
With this and improvidence they may go hungry, but there is no danger of starvation.
The Indians claim the full ration, but to give it would make their arrival at self-support hopeless.
Occasional rations are issued for the relief of about 12,570 old and indigent Indians at various agencies.
The total cost of subsistence purchased for issue to Indians for the current fiscal year is $1,231,000.
The law of 1875 requires able-bodied male Indians between 18 and 45 to give labor equivalent for rations, and the regulations carry this out, especially requiring that sugar, coffee, and tea shall be issued only in return for full labor.
On some reservations this is doubtless not regarded.
Considerable improvement has been made in the method of issuing rations.
Beef is no longer turned over on the hoof, and issue stations have been established near the homes of Indians.
Nevertheless, indiscriminate gratuitous issues of rations are demoralizing and should be discouraged in every possible way, while those Indians who have been educated at school should be made to depend entirely on their own resources.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 1900, there was sent out for distribution among Indians $1,507,542.68.
The per capita payments ranged from 50 cents to $255.
There are now in the Treasury to the credit of the Indians $33,317,955.09, drawing an annual interest (at 4 and 5 per ceni) of $1,646,485.96.
These payments have a tendency to destroy the labor spirit and foster the habit of living on credit.
The Commissioner expresses the opinion that there should be a gradual extinction of these funds by setting aside sufficient to support schools for, say, twenty-five years, and then dividing the balance per capita, holding shares of minors until they reach the proper age.
By the act of February 28, 1891, it was provided that whenever it should appear that by reason of age or other disability any allottee could not personally and with benefit to himself occupy or improve his allotment or any part theréof it might be leased under such regulations as the Secretary of the Interior should prescribe for a period not exceeding three years for farming or grazing, or ten years for mining purposes.
In 1894 the word "inability"was inserted, and the law made to read "by reason of age, disability, or inability."
The period of the lease was also fixed at five years for farming or grazing and ten years for mining or business purposes.
This remained unchanged until 1897, when "inability"was dropped out, age or disability alone made a sufficient reason for leasing, and the periods changed to three and five years, respectively.
This law was operative until the current year, when it was changed, "inability" restored, and leases limited to five years, for farming purposes only.
Where an Indian allottee is incapacitated by physical disability or decrepitude of age from occupying and working his allotment, it is proper to permit him to lease it, and it was to meet such cases as this that the law was originally enacted.
Had leases been confined to such cases there would be little, if any, room for criticism.
Existing law, however, has opened the door for leasing in general, which defeats the object of allotments and paralyzes Indian industry and progress.
EpucATioN.
The Indian school system does not contemplate giving the Indians what is known as a "higher education."
It aims to provide a training which will prepare the Indian boy or girl for the everyday life of the average American citizen.
As a consequence, the cost of instruction is mostly limited to what is usually taught in the common schools of the country, with the addition of industrial training in the trades, agriculture, and all the domestic arts.
The training of some of the Indian girls as nurses is also being undertaken in a few of the schools.
Nonreservation schools are, as a rule, the largest institutions devoted to Indian education, and are located off the reservations and usually near cities or populous districts, where the object lessons of white civilization are constantly presented to the pupils.
The three largest are at Carlisle, Pa., Phænix, Ariz., and Lawrence, Kans., having, respectively, 1,000, 700, and 600 pupils.
Of the medium-sized schools those at Chemawa, Oregon, and Chilocco, Indian Territory, are examples, accommodating 400 each.
The rest of the 25 nonreservation schools are smaller and not so thoroughly equipped for teaching trades.
There are 81 boarding schools located on the different reservations, an increase of 11 over last year; they rarely exceed 200 in capacity.
They stand as object lessons among the homes of the Indians, the latter being permitted to visit their children wherever possible.
The agency workshops are coordinated with the training received at the schools.
The Government day schools numbered 147 last fiscal year, an increase of 5; they accommodate 30 to 40 pupils and are usually conducted by a man and his wife, who have a garden, some stock, a few tools, and furnish the pupils a noonday luncheon.
The boys get the rudiments of an industrial education and the girls some lessons in cooking, sewing, and laundry work.
Notwithstanding the offer by the Government of $10 per quarter per capita (based on average attendance) to any public school that will receive Indians as pupils, during the past year only 246 pupils have been enrolled in 22 schools, with an average attendance of only 118.
This is the smallest number since 1894.
Public schools are valuable for Indian pupils only when they are located in sections favorable to the coeducation of the races.
ATTENDANcE.
With the exceptions above indicated, the school population of the Indians is from 45,000 to 47,000.
Deducting 30 per cent for the sick and otherwise disabled leaves 34,000 Indian children to be provided for, of whom 26,000 have been in school during the past year.
For the last nincteen years the yearly increase in the enrollment of Indian pupils has averaged nearly 1,000.
This growth should be annually met by increased facilities.
The amount allowed for contract schools last year was only $113,242, being 15 per cent of the amount in 1895.
This does not include three schools among the Osage and Sauk and Foxes paid for out of tribal funds.
Government aid has been given schools carried on by religious societies since a $10,000 allowance was made in 1819.
In 1892 it had reached $611,570.
Since then it has slowly decreased, party through voluntary discontinuance of Government aid by some societies, but especially through legislation.
Beginning in 1896, Congress reduced the amount 20, 30, 10, 10, 15, and 15 per cent, so that for the current fiscal year no authority for making school contracts is given, except that special appropriation was made for the partial support of Indian pupils at Hampton, Va.
For the most part these hitherto contract schools are being continued by the societies having them in charge.
Mission schools are those supported by religious societies without Government aid.
If located where Indians receive regular rations the pupil's share of food and clothing is issued to the school instead of to his family.
These schools enrolled during the past year 1,275 pupils, with an average attendance of 1,139.
The outing system is one by which Indian pupils are placed during the summer or for longer periods in families (generally farmers) where they receive individual care and training and small wages.
It originated with Major Pratt, of Carlisle, and has had its most extensive development there, though it is being put in operation at other schools also.
The earnings of Carlisle's outing pupils for the past year amounted to $24,692.66.
Each pupil has a bank account.
This is carrying out on a large scale and with most satisfactory results the plan of the early colonists in Virginia and Plymouth, who proposed, for.
The ignorance and superstition of the average Indian father and mother is the chief obstacle in the way of getting Indian children into school, and sometimes vicious white men foster the opposition of the older Indians to education.
Many tribes, however, favor the schooling of their children, and returned students are most helpful in that direction.
What is needed, the commissioner states, is a compulsory school law, such as in force in twenty-nine States and two Territories, which will have strong moral effect even though not strenuously enforced.
In buildings constructed in recent years dormitories are of only two stories, and have sufficient fire escapes.
In sewerage, ventilation, and planning of recitation rooms, etc., hygienic principles are carefully considered.
The heating is by steam or hot water, the lighting by electricity or gasoline.
Considerable attention is also paid to the ornamentation of school grounds.
MiscELLANEous.
The value of schools, plants, farms, etc., will reach $4,000,000.
Substantial improvements have been made at many schools during the year, water and sewerage being especially looked after.
The Clontarf, Minn., School has been discontinued and the property sold.
New buildings have been given or are being constructed for the following schools: Morris, Navajo, Little Water, Pyramid'Lake, Oneida, Pima, Fort Belknap, Yuma, Carson, Fort Lewis, Seger Colony, Haskell, Red Lake, Leech Lake, Tomah, Pipestone, and Phoenix.
New schools are about to be established at three points on the Chippewa reservations, Minn., and at Truxton Canyon, Ariz., and Jicarilla Reservation, N. Mex., and Hayward, Wis.
The Perris School, California, has an unfavorable location, and a new site has been chosen near Riverside, for which, with buildings, Congress appropriated $75,000.
The Blackfeet and Fort Hall schools are to be moved to new and suitable sites.
The burned Winnebago and Mount Pleasant buildings are to be replaced; also the miserable buildings at Fort Apache.
A new dormitory will be given the Umatilla School.
A new school is to be established on Pryor Creek, Crow Reservation.
The Flatheads, Southern Utes, and Northern Cheyennes are to be given Government boarding schools for the first time.
School appropriations for the current fiscal year aggregate $3,080,367, as against $2,936,080 for last year, an increase of nearly 5 per cent.
INsTITuTEs.
The association of Indian school employees at the annual institutes is beneficial.
Schools, as a rule, are located far from the centers of civilization and thought, and therefore these gatherings are for the purpose of bringing together those engaged in a similar work in order that notes may be compared upon the best means of effecting the civilization of the Indians.
Different localities represent different types of Indians and different theories of management.
These meetings open discussions of practical matters and furnish food for thought and action during the coming year.
An Indian school service institute was held in Charleston, S. C., July 5 to 13, as a department of the National Educational Association.
An exhibit was made of specimens of literary and industrial work from the various schools which attracted much attention.
Summer schools were also held for those in the vicinity of Chemawa, Puyallup, and Pine Ridge.
An Indian school exhibit was sent to the Paris Exposition to form a part of the educational exhibit of the United States.
It consisted of bound volumes of class-room papers, photographs, and articles manufactured in the various school shops; also a crayon head by Angel Decora·and some specimens of native art used decoratively.
The Crow, Flatheads, etc., commission was, by the act of March 3, 1899 (30 Stat. L., 1235), authorized to continue its work until the 1st of April, 1900, and thereupon to cease.
The appropriation, however, for its salaries and expenses was for a limited amount, and as it was nearly exhausted on the 18th of November, 1899, the commission was directed to stop further work on that date.
The suspension of the commission continued until April 1, 1900, when it ceased to exist as such by operation of law.
There remain of the tribes named in the act of June 10, 1896, which provided for the appointment of this commission, only the Yakima in Washington and the Flatheads in Montana with whom agreements have not been concluded.
The members of the commission appointed July 25, 1900, have been supplied with instructions necessary for their guidance in the conduct of negotiations with these two tribes and directed to proceed first to the Yakima Reservation and begin their work.
The appropriations of this commission since its original appointment of August, 1866, have aggregated $64,500.
The Chippewa commission, consisting of one person, was, as stated in my last annual report, directed to close the work on the 31st of December, 1899; subsequently, however, his services were continued, and on April 9, 1900, a schedule was submitted showing allotments to 4,211 Indians on the White Earth Reservation, and on July 21, 1900, a supplemental schedule was submitted showing additional allotments to 160 Indians on said reservation.
On June 20, 1900, the commission was directed to suspend further work and close its accounts, and on the 21st of July, 1900, the commission reported that on that date it had turned over to the United States Indian agent of the White Earth Agency all books, records, papers, etc., thus finally closing the work of the commission.
The Puyallup commission has, under authority contained in the act of May 31, 1900, continued to superintend the sales of lands on the Puyallup Reservation, which consists of allotted lands and an agency tract.
Satisfactory progress in the work has been made, but the ascertainment and determination of the legal heirs of deceased allottees is necessarily slow and sometimes difficult because the heirs are scattered, some living in other parts of Washington than the reservation, others in Oregon and elsewhere, even in Alaska.
Notwithstanding the fact that it is difficult to reach the parties to obtain proper evidence of heirship, but few cases are delayed on that account.
On the Cheyenne Reservation 127 allotments have been made during the past year.
The agreement concluded with the Comanche, Kiowa, and Apache tribes of Indians October 21, 1892, as ratified by Congress June 6, 1900, provides, among other things, for the allotment of 160 acres of land to each member of said tribes, the allotments to be selected within ninety days from the ratification of the agreement, and authorizes the Secretary to extend this time in his discretion, provided the allotment work shall be completed within six months from the passage of the act.
No appropriation, however, was made for this work, and it was necessary to use for the purpose a portion of the appropriation of $20,000 for surveying and allotting Indian reservations.
Inspector Nesler was assigned to the work, and reports received from him clearly indicate that it will not be possible to complete the making of the allotments within the time fixed by the act of June 6, 1900, to wit, December 6, 1900; nor is the money available sufficient to enable him to do so.
It will therefore be necessary to procure legislation extending the time and a further appropriation to complete the work, as well as an additional appropriation for carrying on the surveying and allotting of other Indian lands.
On the Omaha Reservation the work of making additional allotments has been completed, so far as practicable, pending the determination of suits for tribal rights instituted by mixed bloods.
On the Winnebago Reservation investigation is being made into the rights of parties to whom patents were issued under the act of February 21, 1863, preliminary to completing allotments under the general allotment aet.
Revision of allotments on the Rosebud Reserve so as to divide them equally between husbands and wives has been completed; in all there have been 4,057 allotments, leaving some 800 yet to be made.
On the Shoshone Reservation, Allotting Agent Werts was relieved from duty after he had made 205 allotments; his predecessor had completed 1,310.
Further allotment work has been suspended, pending the determination of a suitable system of irrigation for this reservation.
In the Helena (Mont.) land district 52 applications for allotments were found to have been made for Indian women married to white men, and their children.
Many of them were enrolled and drew rations at the Blackfeet Agency while living on the public domain with their white husbands and fathers.
Proper steps have been taken to cancel these applications.
For the Wenatchi Indians in Washington but little suitable vacant land has been found and only 18 allotments made.
In the Independence, Cal., land district application made August 31, 1891, for an allotment for Mike Williams, aged 15, has been refused, his father being a white man and his mother a full-blood Manache Indian.
The Commissioner of Indian Affairs approved the application for the reason that prior to August 3, 1896, such applicants had been recognized by the Department; the conclusion reached by the Assistant Attorney-General, however, to whom the matter had been referred.
Similarly the application of Stephen Gheen, a half-breed Chippewa Indian, for an allotment was also refused.
IRRIGATIoN.
The Indian appropriation act for the current fiscal year authorizes the Secretary of the Interior to employ not exceeding two superintendents of irrigation, who shall be skilled irrigation engineers.
Under this authority George Butler is employed as superintendent of irrigation on the Wind River Reservation in Wyoming, and John D. Harper has recently been appointed such superintendent for the pueblos of New Mexico, several of these communities being in a distressing state of poverty from lack of water.
The amount of the appropriation available for irrigation purposes during the current fiscal year, aside from the funds of a few tribes, is $50,000.
On Colorado River Reservation, Ariz., a steam engine and pump has been installed by which water has been supplied to and successfully irrigated a limited tract of land.
There is an abundant water supply, said to be capable of irrigating some 300,000 acres of land, which will produce any of the fruits, vegetables, or grains that can be grown in southern California.
To construct a system of irrigation for these lands, will necessarily be an undertaking of considerable magnitude, but it will sooner or later become a necessity.
Pima Reservation, Ariz.
The matter of a proper water supply for the Pima Indians on the Gila River Reservation in Arizona has received much attention.
When the lands around the reservation were sparsely settled, the Indians could obtain a sufficient supply of water to irrigate enough of the reservation to raise crops for their support.
As the country settled up, the water in the river was appropriated by the settlers above the reservation, so that during the last few years the river has been almost dry on the reservation during the irrigation season.
Proper legal proceedings to stop the diversion of water from the Indians have been taken; they are, however, only entitled to so much of the waters of the river as they have been accustomed to use, and this amount it has been found impossible to determine.
The result of an investigation of the water supply, made under the direction of the Geological Survey, showed that there was no method of obtaining a sufficient supply of water, except by the construction of a dam and reservoir at some point on the river above the reservation.
The estimate for the entire work, including damages for right of way and diversion dam at the head of the Florence Canal, was $1,038,926.
The reservoir is estimated to be of sufficient capacity to irrigate100,000 acres in addition to the lands of the Indians.
As the valuation of a perpetual water right is not less than $10 per acre in Arizona, the value of the lands reclaimed, in addition to the Indian lands, would be equal to the proposed appropriation.
During the last session of Congress a bill (H. R. 3733) to authorize the construction of a reservoir near San Carlos to provide water for irrigating Sacaton Reservation and for other purposes was introduced and favorably reported upon by the Department, but failed to become a law.
An appropriation, however, was made of $30,000 for the temporary support of the Indians of the Pima Agency.
Steps were immediately taken to ascertain the extent of the destitution of these Indians.
Temporary aid has been afforded them, and seeds for planting, to enable them to supply crops next season, have been furnished; and means for supplying water for irrigating a part of the lands of the reservation are now under consideration.
These Indians have heretofore been self-supporting, and if provided with a sufficient water supply can without doubt support themselves in comfort with no pecuniary assistance from the Government; otherwise it is likely that appropriations for their support must be continued indefinitely.
A portion of the canal constructed by the Idaho Canal Company on the Fort Hall Indian Reservation, Idaho, has proved a failure, owing to faulty construction, and further payments under the contract have been suspended.
The company is in the hands of a receiver and several thousand dollars of liens have been filed on the work.
As long as the work fails to meet the requirements of the contract and so long as claims on account of the work on the canal remain unsatisfied, which might be enforced to the injury of the Indians, no payments will be made.
The default of the Idaho Canal Company, under its contract, is now being considered by the Department, and such steps will be taken as are necessary to fully protect the interests of the Indians and the Government in the matter.
1896 to give the Fort Hall Reserve a water supply, and suggests that some arrangement be effected whereby a sufficient quantity of water shall be delivered at the reservation boundary, the system within the reservation to be finished and operated by the Government.
On the Crow Reservation $66,000 of the funds of the Crow Indians have been expended during the year upon the irrigation system.
The head gate of the great Big Horn ditch is practically completed, and a ditch on Pryor Creek has been constructed, which will water from 800 to 1,000 acres.
The construction of this irrigation system, which has been in progress during the past eight years, has resulted in great improvement and advancement among the Indians aside from providing one of the best systems in the country.
The money, which belongs to the Crows, has been paid out, for the most part, to the Indians themselves, and this money they expend much more judiciously than that which they receive as annuity payments and which comes to them without labor or effort on their part.
The ditch heretofore constructed on the Wind River Reservation has proved to be practically worthless.
Plans for a new irrigation system are in course of' preparation, which will be capable of irrigating a sufficient quantity of land for the use of all the Indians on the reservation.
Chippewa Reservations in Minnesota.
On the 30th of March, 1899, the Department suspended all cutting or sale of timber on these reservations, and no logging has been done on any of them during the past year.
A statement regarding the sales of timber will be found on page 51 of this report.
La Pointe Agency, Wis.
Logging operations on allotments on the Lac du Flambeau and Bad River reservations have progressed satisfactorily under contracts approved in 1892 and 1893.
On July 28, 1897, the President granted authority for the sale of timber from allotments on the Red Cliff Reservation, and two contracts for the sale of timber to Frederick L. Gilbert, the authorized contractor for the Red Cliff Reservation, were approved January 12, 1900.
Menominee Reservation, Wis.
Under Department authority of August 12, 1899, the Menominee Indians cut and banked 15,000,000 feet of pine timber, which was disposed of at public sale for $16.25 per thousand feet, $1.17 per thousand feet more than last year's rate.
They also removed 1,200,000 feet of pine from a tract of land claimed by Hollister, Amos & Co., of Oshkosh, receiving $5.50 per thousand feet, or $9,687.70 for their labor, and the fee to the land after the removal of the timber.
During the year 15 tracts of land, ranging from 2 to 160 acres, on twelve reservations have been set apart for use by such societies for their religious and educational work among the Indians.
Peoria and Miami Indians.
The total sales of lands by these Indians since the passage of the act of June 7, 1897 (30 Stats., 72), are 68 conveyances by the Peorias, amounting to 5,295.28 acres, valued at $50,393.90, or $9.51 per acre, and 31 conveyances by the Miamis, amounting to 2,437.80 acres, valued at $24,972.50, or $10.24 per acre, making in all 99 conveyances by both tribes, aggregating 7,733.08 acres of land, at a valuation of $75,366.40, or an average of $9.74 per acre.
During the past year 18 conveyances of 1,088.10 acres in all, valued at $12,365.50, were made.
The Citizen Potawatomi and Absentee Shawnee Indians have sold, since the passage of the act of August 15, 1894 (28 Stats., 295), 600 tracts of land, aggregating 61,766.60 acres, for $339,836.43.
During the past year 91 sales of 8,850.24 acres, valued at $45,034.32, were effected.
In the last Indian appropriation act, pursuant to the recommendation of the Department, authority was granted for the sale of allotments held by Citizen Potawatomi and Absentee Shawnee Indians or their heirs, or those holding such allotments by approved deeds, or their heirs, the deeds to be approved by the Secretary of the Interior instead of, as formerly, by the President.
It also permits the adult heirs of a deceased allottee to sell their inherited lands and allows the sale of land inherited by adults and minors, but not the land inherited by minors only.
The Indian appropriation act for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1898 (30 Stats., 62), limits the term for which allotted lands may be leased for farming and grazing purposes to three years and for mining and business purposes to five years.
The act approved May 31, 1900, however, increases to five years the term for which such lands may be leased for farming purposes only, except unimproved allotted lands on the Yakima Reservation, in the State of Washington, which may be leased for agricultural purposes for any term not exceeding ten years upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the Secretary of the Interior.
July 16 last the Department suggested that future leases of Indian allotments should provide for specific improvements which would be more for the benefit of the allottee than an all-money rental, and agents were instructed accordingly by the Commissioner.
Since then leases for a money consideration only have been approved for only two years and grazing leases for only one year, regardless of the term for which they were drawn.
The act of June 6, 1900 (31 Stats., 658), authorizes the Seneca Telephone Company to construct and maintain telephone lines from Seneca, Mo., to the Quapaw Agency, and to Wyandotte, Grand River, Fairland, Oseuma, Afton, and Vinita, in the Indian Territory, subject to the rules and regulations prescribed by the Department, that cities and towns into or through which such telephone lines may be constructed shall have the power to regulate the manner of construction therein, and the company shall be subject to such municipal and Territorial taxation as may be provided for by law.
The act of March 2, 1899 (30 Stat. L., 900), is a general enabling act by which any company may acquire right of way through Indian lands for railroad, telegraph, or telephone lines by complying with Department regulations.
Arkansas and Oklahoma, Cherokee Nation.
Arkansas and Western, Cherokee Nation.
Chicago, Burlington and Quincy, Crow Reservation.
Columbia Valley, Wallula to Vancouver, Wash.
Columbia and Klickitat, Lyle to Goldendale, Wash.
Kiowa, Chickasaw and Fort Smith, Chickasaw Nation.
Kansas Southwestern, Kansas and Osage Reservation.
Kansas Southeastern, Dawson to Wagoner, Ind.
T.
North Arkansas and Western, Indian Territory.
Oklahoma, Okmulgee and Southern, Osage Reserve, Creek and Choctaw nations.
Oklahoma City and Western, Kiowa and Comanche Reserve and Chickasaw Nation.
Shawnee, Oklahoma and Missouri, Seminole, Creek, and Cherokee nations.
Seattle, Tacoma, Puyallup Reservation.
Wichita and Southern, Osage Reserve, Creek and Choctaw nations.
Gulf, Chickasaw and Kansas, Peru, Kans., and Grayson, Tex.
Eastern Railway Company of Minnesota, Fond du Lac Reserve.
By special act of April 17, 1900 (31 Stats., 134), the Minnesota and Manitoba Railroad were given right of way across the Red Lake Reservation.
These Indians, numbering about 600, are the descendants of those Seminole who refused to go with the tribe to the Indian Territory, but remained in Florida.
They have no reservation, and since 1894, from appropriations made by Congress, lands from time to time have been purchased or assigned to them as permanent homes.
During tne past year lands have been purchased in Florida for these Indians aggregating 23,061.72 acres, at a total cost of $13,355.52.
This agreement concluded with a commission February 5, 1898; was ratified by Congress at its last session.
The Indians ceded 400,000 acres for $600,000— $75,000 to be used for a new school plant and the balance to be paid in ten annual installments, first one to be $100,000, the next eight $50,000 each, and the last $25,000, Indians residing on the ceded lands having the option of taking allotments or lands they have lived upon or improved, or upon the reservation.
The improvements abandoned by those who remove to the reservation are to be appraised and sold for not less than the appraised value.
The payment of the first installment of $100,000 is now being made, and the work of allotting and appraising is in progress.
During the past year requests for permission to take Indians from the reservations for show and exhibition purposes have been uniformly denied.
In only two instances was permission granted to the Indians to leave their reservations to take part in local celebrations.
In one case 30 Indians from the Shoshone Agency were permitted to attend the annual "Frontier day celebration" at Cheyenne, Wyo., and the other instance 25 families with tepees were authorized to leave the Standing Rock Reservation, N. Dak., to participate in the "Harvest festival" at Casselton, N. Dak.
In both instances satisfactory arrangements were made by the authorities having charge of the celebrations for the care, protection, and expenses of the Indians.
In my laSt annual report I called attention to the necessity for a new compilation of laws relating to Indian affairs, of Executive orders concerning Indian reservations, and of treaties and agreements made with the Indians.
The last edition of laws relating to Indian affairs was issued in 1884, that of Executive orders relating to Indian reservations, 1890.
The editions of both works are exhausted.
An incorrect revision of Indian treaties then in force was made in 1873.
Since these were issued legislation of vital importance has been enacted and many changes have been made in Indian reservations and new agreements have been concluded.
I renew my recommendations heretofore made that Congress make adequate appropriations to cover the expenses of compiling and printing these publications.
PurSuant to the provisions of the act of July 26,'1892 (27 Stat., 272), one of the employees of the office was designated by the Commissioner as the receiving clerk, and required to give bond in the sum of $1,000; subsequently another clerk in the office was designated as a special disbursing officer, and required to give bond in the sum of $2,000.
No salary, pay, or other emolument is allowed for the performance of the additional duties thus imposed upon them.
As the Department in every instance prefers corporate rather than individual sureties on official bonds, the Commissioner recommends that Congress authorize the payment from year to year, out of the contingent fund of the Department, the annual cost of a surety-company bond required of employees of the Department in cases where no additional compensation is allowed or paid for such services.
The first important legislation passed by Congress affecting the status of the Choctaw and Chickasaw, Seminole, Creek, and Cherokee, comprising the Indian nations in the Indian Territory, is contained in the act of Congress approved June 28, 1898 (30 Stats., 495), commonly known as the Curtis Act.
This act provided for radical and important changes in the administration of the affairs of these Five Tribes, who theretofore, through their respective legislatures or councils, enacted their own laws, and provided for the enforcement thereof through tribal officers.
An agreement with the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations is embodied in section 29 of said act, and provides that their lands should be appraised and allotted by the United States Government equally among all, with certain reservations for town sites, schools, etc.
Coal and asphalt are also reserved from allotment to remain the common property of the tribes, the right to operate same to be controlled by leases made under rules and regulations of the Secretary of the Interior, and revenues derived from royalty thereon to be used for the education of children of Indian blood of such nations.
With certain modifications, the tribal governments of these nations are continued for a period of eight years from March 4, 1898.
The Creeks and Cherokees have not yet ratified agreements pending before Congress, and at present remain under the general provisions of the Curtis Act, which provides for the abolishment of the tribal courts, the allotment of the surface of the land by the Government to individual members of said tribes, and for the leasing by the Secretary of the Interior of the mineral lands of such nations.
The Seminole Nation had, prior to the passage of the act of June 28, 1898, effected an agreement with the United States, now ratified by both parties, and this nation is now governed under such existing law, and as such agreement continues the executive form of government of the nation, tribal control of their schools, etc., practically no matters have arisen demanding the attention of the Department, and conditions in said nation appear to have progressed satisfactorily.
Among other things the act of June 28, 1898, provided for the location of an Indian inspector in the Indian Territory; accordingly, on August 17, 1898, an inspector was directed to proceed to the Indian Territory and give his attention to any duties required of the Secretary of the Interior by law, relating to affairs throughout the Indian Territory, except questions of citizenship and allotment under control of the Commission to the Five Civilized Tribes.
The report of the United States Indian inspector for the Indian Territory, J. George Wright, is of considerable importance and gives a detailed history of the work of the Department in its dealings with the Indians.
The work of the United States Indian agent, Union Agency: superintendent of schools in the Indian Territory, and supervisors for each nation, revenue inspectors for Creek and Cherokee nations and their assistants, mining trustees of the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations, the town-site commissions and the direction of all town-site work in the Indian Territory, are under his immediate supervision.
In the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations, under the agreement heretofore mentioned, all coal and asphalt are reserved from allotment, and leases for same are made and royalties collected under regulations promulgated by the Secretary of the Interior.
The mining trustees appointed by the President of the United States, under said agreement, are N. B. Ainsworth, a Choctaw by blood, and Charles D. Carter, a Chickasaw by blood; they maintain a general office at McAlester, Ind.
T., supervising, under rules and regulations of the Department, mines and their operation.
The area of coal lands under lease June 30, 1900, approved by the Department, amounts to 51,187.85 acres, as against 36,480 acres for the previous fiscal year, the number of leases in force being 54, as against 38 the year ending 1899.
The number of leases applied for during the year ending 1900 was 81, representing 77,093.80 acres, of which 43 applications, representing 41,265.95 acres, were rejected; 16 applications, representing 14,707.85 acres, were allowed to the extent of 14,707.85 acres, and 22 leases, representing 21,120 acres, are under consideration by the Department.
There are also a number of other parties operating under previous tribal contracts which have not yet expired.
The coal output during the year under national contracts and departmental leases has been 1,900,127 tons, as against 1,404,442 tons for the previous year.
The royalty on this coal as fixed by the Secretary of the Interior, commencing January 1, 1899, was 10 cents per ton on screened coal.
This, however, was changed on petition of operators on March 1, 1900, and fixed at 8 cents per ton for the run of the mine.
The policy of the Department with respect to the granting of leases for coal-mining operations in the Territory has been, and will continue to be, to grant leases only to such persons or corporations as will furnish satisfactory evidence that the application for leases is made in good faith for operative as against speculative purposes, with satisfactory evidence that a market has been or will be actually provided to the extent of a fair estimate for the coal covered by the leases, the purpose of the Department being to, in this way, secure to the rightful owners of the coal the full amount of revenue which the operator should, under the law and in justice to the owner, pay for the privilege thus granted.
Under the law each lease covers 960 acres of land, and runs for thirty years; the coal mined to be subject to such royalties, rules, and regulations as may be determined by the Department, the income derived from such leases being, by law, applied to the school fund in the Territory.
The average thickness of a coal vein in the Territory is equal to 4 feet, or about 4,000 tons per acre, which means practically from 3,500,000 to 4,000,000 tons for each 960-acre lease; hence the necessity of granting leases to such extent only and upon such terms as will avoid tying up this valuable property and by so doing render it unproductive for the long period unavoidably called for in each lease, and for the further purpose of preventing the use of such leases as a collateral asset for raising funds with which to build railroads through the Territory, it having been practically demonstrated, in the case of many applications, that the coal represented by the leases applied for could not possibly be mined and marketed within a period covering several times the legal duration of the lease.
Applications for coal and asphalt leases are made to the inspector, and, accompanied by the recommendations in the matter by the mining trustees, are forwarded to the Department for consideration and action.
During the year three asphalt leases have been approved and one or two other companies have been operating in the Territory under tribal charters.
Royalty on asphalt has been fixed by the Department at 10 cents per ton on crude and 60 cents per ton on refined.
Royalties on all minerals in the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations collected by the United States Indian agent during the year amounted to $139,589.50, as against $110,145.25 for the previous year—$137,377.82 being for coal, $1,108.58 for asphalt, and $1,103.10 for other minerals.
Originally the Department held that applications for coal, asphalt, and other minerals could be entertained under this agreement, but on the 11th of May, 1900, the Assistant Attorney-General, to whom the question was submitted, held that the agreement in question did not provide for the making of leases for any minerals other than asphalt, and since that time such applications have not been considered.
Education.
Sections 19 and 29 of the Curtis Act are construed as conferring authority upon the Department to assume such charge of educational affairs in the Five Civilized Tribes (except the Seminole, whose tribal government continues) as will insure better and more economical management.
Under the agreement with the Choctaws and Chickasaws, revenues from coal and asphalt are to be applied to the support of their schools and are to be paid into the United States Treasury and drawn therefrom under rules prescribed by the Secretary of the Interior.
The Choctaws promptly turned the control of their schools over to the Government, but the Chickasaws resented governmental assistance.
The Creeks and Cherokees continued to appropriate for their schools, but cordially accepted Government supervision.
The five tribes have in the past made large expenditures on their schools, but except in those carried on by missionary societies the management was corrupt or inefficient.
There were expensive academies and colleges, while the district schools had the poorest of quarters and equipments.
In spite of the limited powers of the superintendent of education for the Indian Territory, he has been able to institute many reforms and make considerable improvements, especially among the Choctaws.
Summer normal schools have helped to raise the standard among the teachers.
Industrial training has been introduced, examinations of teachers have been held, etc.
The Chickasaws, continuing to support their schools out of their common fund in the old way, have boarding schools run by contract, unsanitary, unfurnished buildings for the day schools, teachers appointed with slight regard to merit, and an indebtedness for it all which exceeds their revenues.
The nation is now endeavoring to secure the revenues received from coal and asphalt leases.
The Cherokees and Creeks have much better school systems and many fine school buildings.
Under Government supervision they have been raising the standard of examining teachers, getting competent school boards, and correcting abuses and methods generally.
The school population of the Territory is estimated to be: Indians, 16,090; negroes, 4,650; whites, 54,600.
The cost of the maintenance during the year of the schools in the Choctaw Nation aggregated $92,881.91; in the Chickasaw Nation, $92,595; in the Cherokee Nation, $76,135, and in the Creek Nation, $65,657.07.
Chickasaws and a decrease among the others, the greatest reduction being among the Choctaws, from $180 to $139.92.
At the same time there was a marked increase in the efficiency of the schools.
There are over 50,000 white children in the Territory who have no educational opportunities, and the children of 8,750 freedmen among the Choctaws and Chickasaws have the most meager school facilities.
Congress should make adequate appropriations for the education of these children.
The tribal taxes assessed by the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations against noncitizens and upon citizens employing noncitizens, etc., are collected by the tribal authorities, and therefore no statement as to the aggregate amount has been obtained.
The question as to the enforcement of these taxes against noncitizens residing within the limits of the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations, having arisen in the administration of affairs, the Department held that the taxes must be paid; that it was the duty of its officers to remove from said nations, under the authority given by the United States statutes, all noncitizens failing to comply with such tribal laws.
A town-site commission in each nation has been appointed under the provisions of the agreement, and they have been engaged in platting, appraising, and selling town sites.
The commission for the Choctaw Nation consists of Dr. J. A. Sterrett, of Ohio, and Mr. B. S. Smiser, a Choctaw by blood.
The commission for the Chickasaw Nation consists of Mr. Samuel N. Johnson, of Kansas, and Mr. Wesley B. Burney, a Chickasaw by blood.
The Choctaw Commission has completed its work at the town of Sterrett, which has a population of about 800 and an area of 480 acres, and also at Atoka, which has a population of 1,200 and an area of 273 acres, and since completing that town, on November 6, 1899, has been engaged in surveying, platting, and appraising the town of South McAlester, the largest town in the Choctaw Nation, which work is not yet completed.
In addition to this work, the commission established, prior to the passage of the act of Congress approved May 31, 1900, the exterior limits of eight towns, a portion of which have taken advantage of the ruling allowing them to survey and plat at their own expense.
The Chickasaw Commission has completed its work at Colbert, with a population of 200 and an area of 129.74 acres, and since that time, September 1, 1899, has been engaged in surveying, platting, and appraising the town of Ardmore, the largest town in the Chickasaw Nation, which work is not yet completed.
The Indian appropriation act approved May 31, 1900, provides that the surveying and platting of towns shall be done under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior, and the work of the commission shall commence only after plats are approved.
In June, 1900, a supervising engineer was appointed, to act under the direction of the Indian inspector, and to supervise the detail work of the surveying corps to be placed in the field to carry out the provisions of this act, and at the close of the fiscal year instructions were being prepared and steps taken to push the surveying and platting of towns under the recent legislation.
The Indian appropriation act also provided for the disbursement of the "incompetent fund"of the Chickasaw Nation, to be paid out under regulations of the Department, claims therefor to be filed within six months after the passage of the act; these claims are now being presented to the United States Indian agent, in accordance with the directions of the Department.
The agreement with the Choctaws and Chickasaws also provides that the United States shall survey and definitely mark the location of the ninety-eighth meridian, being the western boundary of the Chickasaw Nation; after its location due notice of such resurvey was given by the inspector, under date of June 6, 1900.
Under the general provisions of the act of Congress approved June 28, 1898, which applied to the Creek and Cherokee nations, no mineral leases have been made by the Secretary of the Interior in said nations, for the reason that the agreements now pending provide for the allotment of all lands without making any reservations of minerals, and the executive authorities of both tribes protest against the making of any mineral leases for the present.
Temporary permits have been granted Indian citizens to mine coal in small quantities for local consumption only.
The tribal taxes assessed by the Creek and Cherokee nations have, under regulations of the Department, been collected by the United States Indian agent at the Union Agency.
During the fiscal year 1899 but few remittances were received, and in order to ascertain what payments were due and to insure their collection, the Department, in July, 1899, appointed revenue inspectors for each of the Creek and Cherokee nations, with assistants.
In the Creek Nation during the fiscal year 1899, prior to the appointment of the revenue inspectors, there was remitted to the United States Indian agent $4,913.63, while during the fiscal year 1900 there was collected from all sources $26,370.19, and the expenses of the revenue inspectors in that nation during said time were $4,884.52.
In the Cherokee Nation, during the fiscal year 1899, there was remitted $3,150.87, while during the fiscal year 1900 there was collected from all sources $19,455.05, and the expenses of the revenue inspectors in that nation during said time were $5,833.01.
Every effort has been made on the part of the noncitizens in the Creek Nation, and the citizens in the Cherokee Nation, to avoid payment of these tribal taxes.
In the Creek Nation the noncitizen lawyers sought to enjoin the representatives of the Department from collecting the taxes, but the action of the Government was sustained, both in the lower court and in the court of appeals for the Indian Territory.
In the Cherokee Nation, when the store of a citizen was closed for nonpayment of taxes, an injunction was secured in the United States court against the officials of the Interior Department.
Every means has also been resorted to in this nation to avoid the payment of the tribal hay royalty of 20 cents per ton on all hay shipped out of the nation, and it has been necessary to remove from said nation, under section 2149 of the Revised Statutes, certain noncitizens who have refused to comply with this law.
The validity of this tax, and the right of the Interior Department to seize hay for nonpayment of royalty, has been sustained by the courts.
No towns have been surveyed and platted in the Cherokee Nation under the provisions of the Curtis Act.
In the Creek Nation there have been two town-site commissions appointed, one for the town of Muscogee and one for Wagoner, and the plat of the town of Wagoner has been completed and is now under consideration with a view to its approval.
The plat and appraisement of Muscogee have been approved by the Department.
The approved value of lots in this town aggregates $236,136, and the expense of the commission to August 1, 1900, was $15,022.57.
Improved lots under said act are scheduled to the owners of the improvements, to be purchased at one-half of their appraised value, while vacant or unimproved lots are to be sold at public auction at not less than their appraised value.
Notices of appraisement were issued by the commission, but application for an injunction was made to the United States court, alleging the unconstitutionality of the Curtis Act, and claiming the nation had not yet given its consent to the sale of any lots or lands of the tribe.
This restraining order was granted on the 25th of August, the court holding the act to be unconstitutional, and the commission was thereafter furloughed indefinitely without pay.
The report of the inspector gives the personnel of the tribal governments of the different nations, including their law-making bodies, called"national councils" in the Creek, Cherokee, and Choctaw nations, and the"national legislature"in the Chickasaw Nation.
The total expenses of the Creek tribal government during the year, in addition to that for schools, was $62,287.92, and the total expenses of the Cherokee tribal government during the same period, in addition to that for schools, was $30,548.26.
Few acts were passed at the sessions of the council of either nation excepting those making appropriations.
The act of Congress approved June 7, 1897, requires the submission of all acts of the Creek and Cherokee councils to the President of the United States for Executive approval, except resolutions for adjournment, or any acts, or resolutions, or ordinances in relation to negotiations with commissioners heretofore appointed to treat with said tribes.
In the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations the agreement provides that all their acts, except the appropriations for regular and necessary expenses of their governments, be submitted in like manner, which has been done.
About thirty Choctaw acts, covering different subjects, were transmitted through the inspector's office, while about twenty were submitted by the Chickasaw legislature.
The appropriation made for the expense of the Choctaw council was $10,000, with about $7,590 for general officers and $19,500 for tribal courts.
The expenses of the Chickasaw tribal government are not known.
From the best sources of information attainable, however, it appears that the nation's finances are much embarrassed.
Provision is made in section 3 of said act in relation to Indians securing possession of lands which have been improved by noncitizens, requiring procedure on the part of the Indian in the United States court in order to take possession of the same.
This provision should be modified by Congress so as to authorize the Secretary of the Interior to investigate alleged contracts of the noncitizens with Indians and, where facts will warrant, to remove noncitizens, allowing the latter to appeal to the courts, thereby placing upon them the burden of litigation, instead of upon the Indian.
Rental contracts under existing law can be made indiscriminately between Indians and white persons, often to the great disadvantage of the former.
The law should be amended so as to authorize the Secretary of the Interior to approve such contracts where found desirable so long as it is necessary for the protection of the Indians, it being estimated that there are 350,000 white persons not members of any tribe in the Territory.
In the Creek, Cherokee, Choctaw, and Chickasaw nations different rates of tribal taxation prevail.
Good administration demands a uniformity of tax rates throughout the Territory.
In the Chickasaw and Choctaw nations collections are made by tribal authorities, while in the Creek and the Cherokee nations they are made by officers of this Department.
As none of the funds so collected are expended for the benefit of the white people in the Territory, much opposition is encountered to the enforcement of both systems.
In lieu of the present system and rate of taxation Congress should authorize the fixing of a uniform rate of tax on noncitizens and others engaged in business, introducing cattle, etc., to be collected under the supervision of the Department and used for the benefit of the nations, including the improvement of roads and the education of children of noncitizens, including such amounts as may be found advisable for the expenses of the tribal government; furthermore, that authority be given to attach property for nonpayment of taxes instead of removing persons in default from the Territory, the only means now of enforcing the collection of taxes.
There are over 50,000 white children in the Indian Territory who have no educational opportunities, and also the children of 8,000 freedmen among the Choctaws and Chickasaws who have the most meager school facilities.
Adequate appropriation should be made by Congress for the education of these children.
Under the head of "finance," the inspector reports that the agent has received, deposited, and disbursed during the fiscal year the sum of $825,020.76.
He has disbursed for the Choctaw Nation the sum of $59,362.15 from coal and asphalt royalties in connection with its schools; also the sum of $69,710.08 from the appropriation of $75,000 made by Congress for the payment of the outstanding indebtedness of the Choctaw Nation.
There has also been paid the sum of $246,673.83 in the payment of outstanding Creek warrants, and $152,198.50 in interest on and retiring Cherokee warrants, and for the suppression of smallpox in the Creek Nation in the spring of 1899 the sum of $3,964.10.
The collections from all sources in the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations amounted to $150,728.98; in the Creek Nation $26,370.19, and in the Cherokee Nation $19,455.05.
The Cherokee outstanding indebtedness is over $800,000, and draws interest at the rate of 6 per cent, while their invested fund with the United States Government draws only 5 per cent, in view of which fact the inspector suggests that Congress should permit a sufficient amount of the Cherokee funds to be withdrawn from the United States Treasury to pay their outstanding indebtedness.
Existing law authorizing the allotment of lands to the Indians makes no provision for the setting aside of lands for public roads in the Indian Territory, and some legislation should be enacted providing for such roads.
The inspector suggests that 30 feet along each side of section lines be reserved throughout the Territory.
The Indian appropriation act authorizes the Secretary of the Interior to set aside 160 acres of land along the lines of new railroads for town sites.
Prior to action by the Department looking to the setting aside of such town sites, Indian citizens and other interested parties had without authority surveyed and platted town sites at different points in the Indian Territory and disposed of town lots.
Injunction was sought to restrain such citizens from laying out, platting, and attempting to sell town lots, but the court held that Indian citizens could rent their lands in lots or for any other purpose.
The inspector therefore suggests the advisability of additional legislation providing that until allotment citizens may rent their proportionate shares of "agricultural and grazing lands" for such purposes only, as the " renting" of lots have been practically sales, ranging from $10 to $500 per lot, according to location.
A serious epidemic of smallpox raged during the entire winter throughout the Indian Territory, and in order to defray the expense of suppressing same among noncitizens, provision was made in the Indian appropriation act for $50,000, which appropriation was entirely exhausted before the disease was suppressed.
The disease was not as fatal during the last epidemic as it was in the Creek Nation during the previous fiscal year, but there was a much larger number of cases treated, numbering altogether over2,000.
Incorporated towns assumed the expense of fighting the epidemic within their own town limits.
Recommendation is also made that Congress be asked to apply the "estray laws" of Arkansas, as set forth in Mansfield's Digest, to the Indian Territory.
The act of Congress approved June 6, 1900, provided that the procurement of timber and stone for domestic and industrial purposes in the Indian Territory should be governed by regulations to be issued by the Secretary of the Interior, and provided a penalty for violation of such regulations, which have been issued and are now in force.
The Commission to the Five Civilized Tribes was created by act of Congress March 3, 1893, to enter into negotiations with the several nations of Indians in Indian Territory for the allotment of their lands in severalty or to procure the cession to the United States of the lands belonging to the Five Tribes.
The necessity for this step grew out of the inharmonious and chaotic political and social conditions in Indian Territory, where about 75,000 citizens were amenable to no laws save those made and executed by the Indian governments, and within which nearly 300,000 United States citizens had also made their homes.
Crime and lawlessness had increased to an alarming extent.
Children of white parentage and the colored children in several of the nations were without educational adyantages.
Towns had sprung up on communal lands without individual ownership of town lots.
Mineral deposits were being developed; stock growers, citizens, and noncitizens had acquired possession and fenced large tracts of land to the detriment of the poorer classes.
Wellfounded rumors of corruption in various branches of the tribal government had reached Congress.
These and other conditions made it necessary to apply a remedy which should result eventually in the creation of a State of the Union out of the lands of the Five Tribes.
The report of the commission shows that the plan adopted by it for the reorganization of the relations existing between the tribes and the United States was to provide by negotiation for allotment of the lands in severalty among the members of the tribes.
Agreements to this end with the Choctaws, the Chickasaws, and the Seminoles have been made and ratified by Congress.
Several agreements have been negotiated with the Creeks and Cherokees, the last having been concluded at Washington in April, 1900, and are now pending Congressional action, and indications point to a speedy ratification by the tribes of these agreements as soon as Congress shall have given its approval thereto.
The commission reports materially improved conditions under which its work has been prosecuted during the past year, and that with the exception of a small fraction of the full-bloods all the citizens of the tribes are now in sympathy with the movement to bring about a change in conditions.
The character of the final allotment necessitates an amount of preliminary work unknown in any other allotment.
No specific number of acres are to be allotted in any instances, but, after deducting reservations for town sites, etc., the lands are to be divided among the members of the tribes by equality of value.
The allotment is to be made to such persons only as shall, by a prescribed method, be determined by the commission to be entitled to citizenship.
The tribal records are not conclusive of such citizenship, and the commission must, by special adjudication, establish the status of each claimant.
There are believed to be, in the aggregate, about seventy thousand citizens entitled to allotment, but many times that number claim such right.
The work is further complicated by the fact that the lands of each tribe are held by a title differing in some cases essentially from the titles in others.
This is true also as to the terms and measure of allotment to citizens in each, caused by qualifications of the title.
The enrollment of Seminole citizens—Indians and Freedmen—in conformity with agreement concluded with that nation on December 16, 1897, has practically been completed, there remaining only to be added the names of children born to citizens subsequent to the preparation of that roll.
The classification of the lands of that tribe have been completed, and allotments may now be made in accordance with the agreement with that tribe.
After the completion of its work in the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations as outlined in its report for the year ended June 30, 1899, the commission found by comparison of its records with the tribal rolls that there still remained unaccounted for in both the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations a large number of citizens who were justly entitled to enrollment.
Believing that these delinquents were, in the majority of instances, full-bloods, who, through ignorance had neglected to appear for enrollment, the Commission renewed its efforts to effect their enrollment.
Up to and including June 30, 1900, all but 167 out of 16,176 citizens of the Choctaw Nation, whose names appeared on the tribal roll of 1896, had been accounted for.
Out of 5,175 citizens by blood and intermarriage of the Chickasaw Nation, whose names appear on the tribal roll of 1896, all have been accounted for save 88.
The roll of Choctaw Freedmen made in 1896 contains 3,743 names, and all but one of these have been accounted for.
The commission states that during the past year it has been overwhelmed with applications for enrollment made by those whose sole claim thereto is based upon possession of Indian blood, and that much of its time, therefore, which seemingly should have been devoted in other directions, has been consumed in hearing applicants who had not the shadow of a right to enrollment.
Under the act of June 10, 1896, wnich empowered the commission, the various tribal courts, and the United States courts in Indian Territory on appeal to hear and determine applications for citizenship, there were admitted in the Choctaw Nation by the United States courts 2,175 persons, and in the Chickasaw Nation 784.
In the proceedings incident to the enrollment of such persons it transpired that many whose names were included in the judgments of the courts were not named in the original applications for citizenship.
The attention of the United States courts was called to this fact, and orders were made correcting same by striking from the judgments such names as had been interpolated in the appeals.
Two hundred and one names have thus been eliminated from the citizenship of the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations, leaving 2,758 who were admitted in these two tribes by the United States courts in Indian Territory.
The tribes have now raised the question of the right of this class of persons to enrollment, contending that as the Choctaw Nation was not made a party to the suits instituted for Chickasaw citizenship, and the Chickasaw Nation was not made a party to those instituted for Choctaw citizenship, the judgments granting citizenship are void, on the theory that the property owned in common can not be affected by proceedings instituted against one tribe only.
The act of June 28, 1898, contained a provision authorizing the commission to determine the identity of Choctaw Indians claiming rights under article 14 of the treaty of 1830.
One thousand nine hundred and twenty-three such persons have heretofore been reported in Mississippi, and during the past year 1,665 persons have made application in Indian Territory as Mississippi Choctaws, none of whom have been found entitled as such.
The commission expresses the opinion that sufficient time and opportunity have been granted to all persons entitled to benefits under article 14 of the treaty of 1830 to be heard, and recommends that legislation be enacted terminating the authority of the commission to hear such applications, thus enabling the enrollment as Choctaw citizens of those who have been identified before the final roll is submitted to this Department for approval.
There have been listed for enrollment 18,366 Choctaws, 6.425 Chickasaws, 4,168 Choctaw Freedmen, and 5,620 Chickasaw Freedmen.
The importance of fixing a date for closing the citizenship rolls in these two tribes is again urged by the commission.
Two agreements have been entered into by it with the authorities of these tribes to that end within the past year, neither of which has become operative.
As a consequence, applications are received daily for the enrollment of children in both these tribes, as well as those who have established their right to enrollment by intermarriage.
The enrollment of the Creeks is reported to be satisfactorily and gradually nearing completion.
The full-bloods of that tribe have been slow to respond to the invitations to be enrolled, and as the tribal rolls of that nation are very imperfect and incomplete it has not been possible to make the same progress here as in the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations.
Much fraud in the matter of enrollment by the tribal authorities has been found in this nation, and great care and thoroughness has been required and exercised in every step taken by the commission in the enrollment of Creek citizens.
The total number of Creek Indians enrolled by the commission up to and including June 30, 1900, is reported to be 6,060.
It is estimated that 2,500 or 3,000 Indians by blood yet remain to be enrolled in this tribe.
The act of June 28, 1898, with reference to making rolls in the Creek Nation, provided that the roll of Freedmen made by J. W. Dunn in 1867 should be taken as a basis, enrolling all whose names were found thereon with their descendants born since such roll was made.
One thousand seven hundred and eighty-one names appear on the Dunn roll, of which 811 have been identified and listed, 756 are reported dead and 214 are yet unaccounted for, and it is believed that this class of claimants, however, are practically all enrolled, the missing ones being either dead or nonresidents.
Up to and including June 30, 1900, 10,000 preliminary selections of allotments had been filed with the commission by Creek citizens, amounting, approximately, to two-thirds of the citi onship of that tribe.
In the preliminary work of allotments in the Creek Nation great difficulty has been encountered, due to conflicting claims, necessitating the subdivision of sections into 40-acre tracts.
To intelligently adjust conflicts of this character it has been necessary to have farms platted showing location of improvements.
Two survey parties have been engaged during the past year upon this work.
Up to the close of the fiscal year ended June 30, 1900, 227 allotment contests have been instituted by Creek citizens; 160 of these have been finally disposed of, leaving 67 still pending or on appeal.
The rules of this Department promulgated October 27, 1898, provided among other things that contracts for grazing and agricultural purposes covering selections made by citizens should be deposited with the Commission to the Five Civilized Tribes for investigation.
During the fall of 1899 and the spring of the present year stock growers and farmers deposited with the commission contracts made by them for the calendar year 1900, aggregating 1,059, and covering 205,504 acres of land in the Creek Nation.
Several appraising parties have been engaged in the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations during the past year, classifying the lands of those tribes in accordance with the agreement of April 23, 1897.
This work was commenced July 1, 1899, and the progress made during the hot season was slow and unsatisfactory, owing to the great amount of sickness among the appraisers.
As cooler weather approached, however, better conditions prevailed and a most satisfactory showing has been made for the fiscal year.
The total number of acres appraised in those tribes is 4,319,344.97, an average of 72,000 acres per month.
The appraisal of Creek and Cherokee lands has not yet been commenced.
The report which is hereto appended (Exhibit B) sets forth very fully and clearly the progress made during the year, and with the exhibits and appendixes accompanying same affords a very satisfactory and interesting record of one of the most important branches of work under the supervision of this Department.
By Executive order of January 6, 1880, certain lands lying within the boundaries of the Territories of New Mexico and Arizona were set apart as an addition to the Navajo Reservation.
By Executive order of May 17, 1884, certain other lands lying north of 36° 30' north latitude, between 110° and 111° 30' west longitude, were added to the Navajo Indian Reservation, and it was thereby provided 'that any tract or tracts within the region of country described as aforesaid which are settled upon or occupied, or to which valid rights have attached under existing laws of the United States prior to the date of this order, are hereby excluded from this reservation.
And by Executive order of January 8, 1900, the Navajo Indian Reservation was further extended from its then most westerly boundary westward to the Little Colorado River, so as to make that river, the Grand Canyon, Forest Reserve, and the Colorado River proper the western boundary of the reservation.
By enrolled bill H. R. No. 4001, entitled "An act authorizing the adjustment of rights of settlers on the Navajo Indian Reservation, Territory of Arizona," it was provided, among other things, "that all that portion of the Navajo Indian Reservation in Arizona lying north of 36° 30' north latitude and west of the one hundred and eleventh meridian, be, and the same is hereby, opened for mining purposes only and subjected to the mining laws of the United States."
This bill, which was amended by the Senate to the extent of the above proviso, was reported upon by me adversely to the President for the reason that about 960,000 acres of land would be taken from the reservation, besides reducing the water privileges on the western boundary, which had been set apart in January last in order to enable the Indians to obtain within the limits of their reservation sufficient grass and water for their flocks and herds and thus prevent contention and friction between them and the whites.
On May 3 last the President returned the bill to the House of Representatives without his approval.
The act of June 7, 1897 (30 Stat., 92), authorized the Secretary of the Interior to appoint a "discreet person" as a commissioner to visit the Chippewa and Munsee or Christian Indian Reservation, in Franklin County, Kans., and thoroughly investigate the title of each Indian to the several tracts of land which had been allotted to him in that reservation.
Mr. L. A. Smart, the commissioner appointed pursuant to said act, submitted a report, December 9, 1899, which has been approved, giving the.status of each of the 104 allotments and selections made in 1859, and subsequently by the Chippewa and Munsee Indians in Franklin County, Kans.
A schedule of the lands to be patented as well as of the lands to be sold has been approved and forwarded to the General Land Office.
Another schedule of those who were entitled to, but failed to receive, allotments and also a schedule of the whole tribe have been approved.
The funds of these Indians will be disbursed per capita under the law as soon as the net amount to be disbursed can be ascertained.
The fund arising from the lands held in common that are to be sold is to be placed in the Treasury for the benefit of those members who have never received an allotment of land.
The controversy which has existed since May, 1883, between the Oto and Missouri and the settlers, on their former reservations in Kansas and Nebraska, as to the purchase price of these lands has finally been disposed of.
By an agreement concluded with the Indians November 20, 1899, and confirmed by act of Congress approved April 4, 1900 (31 Stat., 59), the act directs that the Secretary of the Interior shall cause notice to be given purchasers of lands of the amounts due and unpaid on their purchases.
Within one year thereafter it is made the duty of such purchasers to make full payment of the amounts due, in default of which the entry of any delinquent purchaser shall be canceled and his lands resold at not less than the appraised value, and in no case less than $2.50 per acre.
Upon making such complete payment within the time limited, each purchaser, his heirs or legal representatives, shall be entitied to receive a patent for the lands purchased.
Under the proVisions of the act of June 7, 1897 (30 Stat., 87), an inspector of the Department has been negotiating with the Yankton tribe of Indians in South Dakota for the purchase of a parcel of land near Pipestone, Minn., on which is located an Indian industrial school.
The propositions made in the matter have heretofore been rejected by the Indians.
An agreement, however, was concluded October 2, 1899, whereby the Yankton Sioux agree to surrender their claim to the Pipestone Reservation, which contains 648.2 acres, for the sum of $100,000, of which $25,000 is to be expended for stock and cattle and the remainder paid to the tribe per capita.
The Indians are to be permitted to quarry stone upon a portion of the reservation, not exceeding 40 acres in extent, to be selected by the Secretary of the Interior with the concurrence of a delegation of 5 Yankton Indians, and is to be suitably marked and designated.
This agreement is now pending in Congress.
The Government has a valuable school plant on this property and is about to expend considerable money for additional buildings.
The desirability, therefore, of an early ratification of this agreement, which would result in the Government's obtaining indisputable title to the land, is self-evident.
The Indian appropriation act of May 31, 1900 (31 Stat., 221), appropriated $171,615.44 to pay for certain lands and improvements of white settlers on that reservation and for the improvements made by the heads of 46 Indian families settled east of Tongue River, as recommended by Inspector McLaughlin.
Most of the necessary deeds have been obtained from the settlers, and their claims will be fully adjusted in a short time.
Payments will be made to the settlers by warrants drawn on the United States Treasury and to the Indians through the United States Indian agent.
Last year the Albuquerque Land and Irrigation Company, a corporation existing under the laws of New Mexico, sought to appropriate surplus waters of the Rio Grande at a point just south of the pueblo of San Felipe and to construct a canal through that pueblo and also through Santa Ana and Sandia pueblos and the lands of many individuals.
Protests were made, and the matter came into the district court at Santa Fe, which held that the company had a right to construct the canal across the Indian lands, but that the Indians had rights as prior appropriators of water in the Rio Grande, and the full capacity of their present ditches was guaranteed to them.
The lands of several pueblos in Bernalillo County, N. Mex., have been assessed for taxation by the county officials, and have been published in the delinquent-tax list for 1898 and prior years; accordingly the special attorney for the Indians was instructed to present every reasonable defense against the proposed tax sale.
In April of the present year Judge Crumpacker, of the district court of Bernalillo County, held that the property of the Pueblo Indians was not taxable.
The Territorial authorities thereupon entered an appeal to the supreme court of New Mexico, where the matter is now pending.
The title papers of the Zuni to their lands were accidently destroyed by fire a few years ago.
A bill (H. R. No. 8685) to confirm their title to lands which the tribe had occupied for two hundred years is pending in Congress, and has been reported favorably by the Committee on Indian Affairs.
It should become a law.
The claim of the New York Indians for compensation for lands in Kansas growing out of the treaty concluded at Buffalo Creek on January 15, 1838, having been finally adjudicated before the Court of Claims, was referred to Congress for an appropriation.
At its last session Congress appropriated the amount of the judgment of the Court of Claims rendered November 23, 1898, with interest from that date to the mandate of the Supreme Court, April 19, 1899, viz, $1,998,744.46, but made no provision for the payment of the money to the beneficiaries.
Special legislation will be necessary.to enable the Department to make distribution of the judgment.
Bitter factional disputes in the election of tribal officers in 1898 caused an investigation to be made by Inspector McLaughlin, who designated who should be chief and assistant chief.
Another dispute in 1899 over the election of the national council had to be settled by the Department.
Moreover, there was no harmony between tribal officers and the Indian agent, the officeholders were ignorant, and moneys received from permit taxes were profligately used.
Accordingly, by Department order of May 21, 1900, the national government and the national council were abolished.
This action has resulted in a reduction of expenses and a considerable saving to this tribe in the amounts heretofore expended for salaries of a long list of tribal officials.
The accounts of the Indian traders of this agency are now being investigated by a special agent of the Department, with a view to determining the character and extent of the indebtedness of the Indians to such traders.
This work is of necessity a tedious and arduous duty, and though the progress is slow, it is hoped that it will be completed before the end of the present year.
The Indians residing in the vicinity of Mission and Wenatchee, Wash., known as the Wenatchi, and those scattered along the Columbia River in that part of the State, formerly known as the Palouse, but now generally included under the head of Wenatchi, have always been regarded as belonging to the Yakima Nation, and the Crow, Flathead, etc., commissioners, who were authorized to negotiate an agreement with the Yakima, made an effort to persuade the Wenatchi to remove to that reservation and take allotments, but without avail.
The Wenatchi claimed that they were not a part of the Yakima Nation; that they spoke a different language, and that they should not be affiliated with them.
The efforts to induce the Indians, 166 in number, to remove to the Yakima Reservation having failed, it was decided to give them allotments where they were living and in the vicinity of Mission and Wenatchee.
Accordingly 18 allotments were made by a special allotting agent, but sufficient unoccupied land to accommodate all could not be found.
Many of the Indians have since expressed a willingness to go on the Colville Reservation, and it is believed that in the near future they can be provided with allotments on that reservation.
Last March Joseph visited this city and begged to be allowed to take his band of 150 Nez Perce Indians from their present location on the Colville Reservation, Wash., back to the Wallowa Valley in Idaho.
An inspector was directed to proceed to Idaho and investigate the matter, and on June 23, 1900, he reported that the valley was quite generally occupied by settlers who have most of the arable land under cultivation; that they did not desire Joseph there, and they do not wish to sell.
Joseph's present location in the Nespelim Valley has a milder climate than the Wallowa Valley, has better hunting and fishing, and has plenty of good, arable land with timber, a sawmill, and a flourmill.
He has a good house and every advantage, but he is a nonprogressive Indian, who retards the progress of his band.
It has been decided that no interest would be subserved by allowing him to remove from Nespelim.
For some years the Yakima Indians in Washington have claimed that the southern and western boundary of their reservation as established by the Government survey was erroneous, and that they were deprived of lands which should properly be embraced within the reservation boundaries.
During the fall of 1898, pursuant to departmental instructions, Mr. E. C. Barnard, of the Geological Survey, made an examination of the disputed west boundary.
He stated as a result of his investigation that the wording of the treaty of 1855 can not be made to conform to the topography of the country; that the reservation as at present surveyed does not extend to the main ridge of the Cascade Mountains as provided in the treaty, and that in his opinion the Indians have been deprived by the survey of the boundary as it now exists of a tract of territory embracing about 357,878 acres.
The boundary of the tract claimed by the Indians does not extend as far west as Mr. Barnard thinks it should and enibraces a tract of only 293,837 acres, or 64,041 acres less than he thinks they are entitled to.
April 7, 1900, the Department approved Mr. Barnard's findings, at least to the amount claimed by the Indians, 293,837 acres, and the Crow, Flathead, etc., commission was directed to adjust the matter, if possible, by inserting in any agreement negotiated a provision for the payment to the Indians of such sum as they could agree upon as compensation for the excluded lands, the terms to be just both to the Indians and to the United States.
It is to be hoped that if an agreement is concluded with the Yakima Indians, as indicated, an amicable adjustment of this claim may be arranged and the same ratified by Congress.
Under the provisions of the act of Congress approved June 7, 1897 (30 Stat. L., 68), an investigation was made relative to the validity of warrants issued by the Creek Nation with a view of disbursing in payment thereof the sum of $333,000 by an officer of the United States.
Said investigation showed that of the warrants drawn on the general fund, amounting to $208,941.08, $11,150 were fraudulently issued, and of the warrants payable from the school fund, amounting to $143,302.08, $74,580 were fraudulently issued.
A full report of the proceedings is set out in Document No. 499, House of Representatives, Fifty-fifth Congress, second session.
A report of the officers who investigated the validity of warrants showed that E. B. Childers and certain other persons, whose names are set out in Exhibit A-1 of said document, were implicated beyond a reasonable doubt in the issuance of fraudulent Creek warrants.
Afterwards separate indictments were presented to the United States court for the northern district of the Indian Territory against said Childers and others.
In due course of time said Childers was tried and convicted and the other parties pleaded guilty to the indictments presented against them.
Charles H. Warth, F. M. Davis, and S. B. Callahan were indicted jointly, and upon a severance of their cases said Warth was tried and the jury failed to agree, and on the second trial he was acquitted.
F. M. Davis has also been acquitted, and the case against S. B. Callahan is still pending.
On January 13, 1900, the President approved the act of the national council of the Cherokee Nation providing for the investigation of the irregularities reported by the Committee on Claims to have been found in the auditor's office of said nation.
Said act directed the principal chief to appoint a commission of two persons to investigate the auditor's office and make a thorough examination of the books and records thereof for the six years prior thereto, and make a tabulated statement of the reports of the district clerks, of the number and amount of certificates issued and to whom given, amounts registered and also receipts given, and to make a full and complete report of the business done in the auditor's office.
States Indian Agent at Union Agency, and one copy to the United States district attorney for the northern district of the Indian Territory.
An investigation was had, and Special Inspector J. W. Zevely assisted in making the same under the directions of the Secretary.
Mr. Zevely reported as a result of said investigation that a large amount of warrants had doubtless been fraudulently issued, but on account of the act of the Cherokee national council, which provided that after claims had passed the inspection of the committee on claims and had been reported upon and after the tickets had been properly audited and canceled the certificates composing such claims were required to be burned in the presence of the senate, thereby destroying the best evidence of fraud that might have been perpetrated upon the Cherokee people.
It was recommended that the United States Indian agent for the Union Agency defer payment upon certain national warrants until satisfactory evidence was furnished that the present owners are innocent holders for a valuable consideration, namely, Nos.
B 70, B 80, B 81, and B 82; amount, $4,632.
The Department concurred in the recommendation and the United States Indian agent was directed to withhold payment of said warrants in accordance with said recommendation.
The force in this office is occupied in great measure with the consideration of matters arising under the public-land laws of the United States, and in lesser measure is engaged in the disposition of matters arising under the Indian, pension, patent, and other laws, the administration of which is committed to this Department.
For the first time in over twenty years the work is now practically current, a result effected only through the unremitting efforts of the Assistant Attorney-General and his assistants in the dispatch of the extremely difficult public business intrusted to them.
Their work merits the highest commendation, and I take pleasure in so stating.
The matters at this time awaiting consideration and disposition are: One hundred and forty-five appeals from the Commissioner of the General Land Office; 55 motions for review of decisions heretofore rendered upon such appeals; 48 miscellaneous matters, including railroad land grant adjustments; 13 requests for law opinions by the Assistant Attorney-General.
Secretary of the Interior, in miscellaneous matters; and 81 law opinions, receiving the signature of the Assistant Attorney-General and approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
The more important of the decisions and opinions prepared in this office during the year have been published in Volumes XXIX and XXX of the Land Decisions, and comprise over 800 pages.
There were disposed of during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1900, public lands aggregating 13,453,887.96 acres, classified as follows: Cash sales, 1,178,982.47 acres; miscellaneous entries, embracing homesteads, timber culture, land warrants, scrip locations, State selections, swamp lands, railroad and wagon road selections, Indian allotments, etc., 12,212,482.40 acres, and Indian lands, 62,423.09 acres; showing an increase for 4,271,474.80 acres as compared with the aggregate disposals for the preceding fiscal year.
The total cash receipts during the fiscal year from various sources, including disposal of public land, $4,056,812.86, and Indian land, $239,769.39, from depredations on public lands, $45,602.99, from sales of timber on forest reserves, $18,756.29, from sales of Government property, $4,387.35, and for furnishing copies of record and plats, $14,429.22, aggregate $4,379,758.10, an increase of $1,309,620.76 over the preceding fiscal year.
The total expenses of district land offices for salaries and commissions of registers and receivers, incidental expenses, and expenses of depositing public moneys, during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1900, were $727,581.98, an increase, as compared with the fiscal year ended June 30, 1899, of $66,179.71.
The total area of the public lands may be stated to be approximately 1,071,881,662 acres, of which 917,135,880 acres are undisposed of and 154,745,782 acres have been reserved for various purposes.
Twenty-nine thousand five hundred and fortyeight patents for agricultural lands were issued during the fiscal year, containing approximately 4,727,680 acres, a decrease of 4,859 in number, and 777,440 in acreage over the previous year.
Of mineral and mill-site patents 1,415 were issued, embracing an area of 42,392.52 acres, a decrease from the former year of 297 patents, and 5,336.75 acres.
Sixty-nine coal patents were issued, embracing 9,149.16 acres, an increase over the previous year of 31 patents and 5,266.06 acres.
During the fiScal year there have been certified or patented on account of railroad grants 1,277,572.68 acres, as against an area patented during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1899, of 504,651.23 acres,an increase of 772,921.45 acres.
There were patented under wagon-road grants 61,501.52 acres, an increase of 1,109.75 acres over the preceding year.
ADJusTMENTs.
The report of the Commissioner of the General Land Office shows that material progress has been made in the exaininations necessary to the adjustment of railroad land grants.
There were patented as swamp land in place 98,097.36 acres, and as swamp land indemnity lands 1,175.63 acres, a total of 99,272.99 acres, a decrease over the amount patented during the last fiscal year of 51,268.14 acres.
School lands were selected and certified during the year to the amount of 772,209.45 acres, an increase of 351,449.30 acres over the preceding year.
Patents of this clasS were issued during the year to the amount of 342,531.26 acres, an increase over the preceding fiscal year of 129,682.53 acres.
The total net increase in lands patented over the preceding fiscal year is 426,384.20 acres.
By section 4 of the act of August 18, 1894 (28 Stat., 373–422), as amended by the act of June 11, 1896 (29 Stat., 413-434), provision is made for the donation to each of the desert-land States of not more than 1,000,000 acres of such lands.
Under these acts one patent for 3,855.25 acres was issued to the State of Wyoming.
One list, aggregating 54,005.92 acres, filed by the State of Idaho was approved.
Under the provisions of the acts of March 3, 1891 (29 Stat., 1095), and May 14, 1898 (30 Stat., 409), five nonmineral entries for lands in Alaska have been patented during the last fiscal year.
Under the act of January 13, 1897 (29 Stat., 484), the number of declaratory statements pending is 7,363; of these 2,470 were canceled or relinquished, but the proceedings were informal and further action is required before they can be disposed of; 348 have been properly amended and 4,545 are held awaiting the reports of the local land officers before they can be further acted upon.
Under the act of March 3, 1875 (18 Stat., 482), providing for rights of way over public lands, the act of May 14, 1898 (30 Stat., 409), providing for rights of way in Alaska and various special acts, there were awaiting action July 1, 1899, 5 articles of incorporation of companies claiming such rights; 77 such articles were filed during the year; 32 were returned for correction; 28 were accepted, and 15 are now awaiting action by the Commissioner or Secretary.
Under these acts 45 maps of the proposed line of road were awaiting action July 1, 1899; 501 were received during the year; 88 had been approved; 28 have been filed which did not require approval; 326 have been otherwise disposed of, being principally returned for correction, and 104 are awaiting action by the Commissioner or Secretary.
6 were filed which did not require approval; 215 were otherwise disposed of, being principally returned for correction, and 37 are awaiting action by the Commissioner or Secretary.
In my report for last year it was pointed out that these two acts relating to right of way for canals, reservoirs, etc., together with four other acts upon the same subject, constitute a group of statutes the administration of which has been the source of much embarrassment because of the unnecessarily large number of acts and the confusing amendments, while they do not, after all, cover the whole subject in a satisfactory manner, failing to provide for certain important uses of right of way and being otherwise too limited in scope.
In pursuance of the recommendation of this Department that a comprehensive act covering the entire subject should be passed a draft of a bill was transmitted by the Department to the Committee on Public Lands of the Senate with favorable recommendation, but no action has been taken thereon.
In view of the importance of this matter to the development of the industries of the West which are dependent upon the storage and conveyance of water, the former recommendation is renewed, and it is hoped that some act of the character indicated will be passed.
The past year has marked the beginning of the development of the petroleum industry in southern California.
The surface indications of the existence of such deposits have been sufficient to induce the expenditure of vast sums of money in sinking wells, which have demonstrated the existence of petroleum deposits in large and profitable quantities.
Many of these wells have been sunk upon public lands.
As a result of this, mineral claimants have given an impetus to the location of mining claims in that region, so much so that practically all public lands containing any indication of petroleum have been located as mineral land.
Coincident with the foregoing, selections under the act of June 4, 1897 (30 Stat., 11), which can only be made upon vacant nonmineral land, began to be filed for lands located as mineral, causing a flood of protests by mineral claimants against such selections.
To meet these conflicting conditions, on December 18, 1899, I instructed the Commissioner of the General Land Office to require notice by publication and posting of all selections of surveyed land within 6 miles of a mining claim, and of all selections of unsurveyed land, to the end that all parties might be afforded an opportunity to be fully and fairly heard on the questions at issue.
In the meantime the Commissioner of the General Land Office, upon protests and petitions of such importance and magnitude as to warrant it, directed the local officers to suspend from agricultural entry lands in 78 townships in southern California until the character of the lands could be investigated, and special agents were at once directed to make a thorough investigation of the same.
It was recognized, however, that the existing mining laws did not sufficiently protect mineral locators, who had based their locations upon surface indications of the existence of petroleum, owing to the fact that the character of the petroleum deposit differed materially from that of other placer deposits, and that the existence of such petroleum deposits could not, as in the case of other deposits, be established except by means of wells, which require vast labor and expense.
Three months from and after the marking of their claims on the ground within which to begin work for the purpose of completing discovery, and such discovery, when made, while working the claim with reasonable diligence, shall relate back and have effect nunc pro tunc as though made before or at the time of marking the claim on the ground.
These bills were referred to this Department for report.
May 9, 1900, they were returned to Congress with my approval of the recommendation of the Commissioner of the General Land Office that these measures, subject to the modification that the work of discovery should be completed within twelve months from date of location, be enacted into law.
During the year an average of 48 agents were employed in the investigation of fraudulent entries and in otherwise protecting the public lands from illegal appropriation and timber trespasses, and also in the examination of applications to purchase timber on public lands.
During the last year 1,356 entries were held for cancellation, 598 canceled, 641 examined and passed, 486 were referred to special agents for investigation, hearings were ordered in 199, and there are now pending 2,962.
There Were 534 cases of depredations upon public timber reported during the year, involving public timber and products therefrom to the value of $572,408.50, recoverable to the Government.
There were 132 civil suits recommended, involving an aggregate of $524,745.09; 134 propositions of settlement accepted, involving $42,719.45, and sales of timber effected, involving $23,932.22.
There were also 160 criminal suits recommended.
The amount involved in propositions of settlement accepted and sales of timber and lumber is $66,651.67.
There were received from compromises effected under section 3469, Revised Statutes, $18,299.55; and the amount involved in fines imposed and judgments rendered is $151,084.03, making a total of $236,035.25, resulting from the work of the General Land Office in investigating timber depredations upon public lands, an increase of $21,860.27 over the preceding fiscal year.
On June 30, 1900, there were pending in the United States courts 131 civil suits for the recovery of a total amount of $996,856.89, for the value of timber alleged to have been cut unlawfully from public lands, and 360 criminal prosecutions for the act of cutting or removing timber in violation of law.
The recommendations made by the General Land Office in previous years for needed legislation compelling the attendance of witnesses at hearings ordered on special agents' reports before the local land officers are renewed.
Attention is earnestly invited to the urgent need existing for such legislation.
By the act of Congress approved March 3, 1899 (30 Stats., 1097), making appropriations for sundry civil expenses of the Government for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1900, and for other purposes, there was appropriated"for surveys and resurveys of public lands" the sum of $325,000, of which amount the Commissioner of the General Land Office was authorized to expend so much as he might deem necessary for examinations in the field, etc.
The sum of $75,000 was set aside to cover the cost of field examinations, and the sum of $10,000 reserved for emergencies, leaving the sum of $240,000 to be apportioned among the several surveying districts.
Further apportionments were made from time to time to several surveying districts from the fund of $10,000 held in reserve, and contracts were let and approved to very nearly the extent of the means available.
The annual surveying instructions for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1900, will be found in the appropriate place in the Commissioner's report.
By act of Congress, approved March 3, 1899 (30 Stats., 1097), the rectangular system of surveys was extended to the district of Alaska, but no apportionment out of the appropriation for surveys and resurveys was made to the said district of Alaska, nor have any surveys under the rectangular system been made in Alaska during the fiscal year.
The surveys made in the district during the fiscal year were executed under the act of Congress approved March 3, 1891, and in conformity with circular instructions dated June 3, 1891, providing that the survey of lands for town site, trading, and manufacturing purposes should be paid for from deposits made by the applicants desiring such surveys, and under instructions issued June 8, 1898, as provided for by the act of Congress approved May 14, 1898 (30 Stats. L., 409).
The surveyor-general reports that there were examined and passed upon 46 returns of surveys, made under the act of Congress approved May 14, 1898, relating to the acquisition of title through soldiers' additional homestead rights; 7 for trade and manufacture, under the act of May 14, 1898, and 6 for trade and manufacture, surveyed under special instructions issued pursuant to the act approved March 3, 1891; 2 applications were made for town-site surveys and 80 applications for mineral surveys; 15 applications for mineral surveys were approved; 9 surveys were suspended and 2 rejected; 62 estimates for office work were prepared and 35 orders for surveys were issued; 54 practical surveyors were appointed as United States deputy mineral surveyors for the district, 28 of whom are located at Nome; $1,520 was deposited for office work in connection with surveys.
The country is not open for settlement under the ordinary meaning of the term, and the larger portion of its inhabitants have no place which they can truly call home.
The provisions for acquiring title to mineral lands in Alaska, prior to extending the lines of public surveys over them, were too restrictive and involved too large an expense upon the part of the applicant to be of much benefit to the ordinary home seeker; and now that the law authorizes the extension of public-land surveys to Alaska, adequate provisions should be made for carrying the law into effect.
For the ascertainment, survey, marking, and permanent establishment of the boundary line between the State of Utah and the Territory of Arizona, being that portion of the parallel of thirty-seven degrees of north latitude lying between the thirty-second and thirty-seventh degrees of longitude west from Washington, an estimated distance of two hundred and seventy-seven miles, including the expense of an examination of the survey in the field, the rate of compensation per mile to the surveyor to be fixed by the Secretary of the Interior, the same to include the cost of the preparation of the plats and field notes of the survey in triplicate, twenty-two thousand eight hundred dollars.
With a view to carry out the provisions of this act, the Commissioner of the General Land Office was called upon to submit a recommendation as to the proper method of establishing said boundary line, and acting upon the suggestions made by him, which were to have the line astronomically determined and marked by iron and stone monuments at mile intervals with six astronomical monuments, and approving his recommendation of a surveyor for this purpose, I authorized him to contract with Howard B. Carpenter, of California, to execute the survey.
The contract was accordingly awarded to Mr. Carpenter, and it is expected that the survey will be proceeded with at the earliest practicable date.
By the terms of the contract the surveyor is allowed $75 per mile for surveying and marking the line, including all field expenses, and the preparation of the plats and field notes in triplicate.
The survey is to be completed and returns thereof made to the General Land Office on or before April 1, 1902.
The act of January 14, 1889 (25 Stat., 642), made provisions for obtaining the cession of the greater part of the reservations occupied by the Chippewa Indians in the State of Minnesota, for the examination of ceded lands, for the purpose of classifying them as either "pine" or "agricultural" lands, and for the disposition of these two classes of lands, etc.
The reservations coming within the provisions of the act were 12 in number.
The aggregate area of the land therein subject to disposal was 2,984,297.98 acres, valued at $5,273,010.72,of which 610,720.42 acres had been disposed of up to the 30th of September, 1900.
On that date the total receipts from sales of Chippewa lands, etc., deposited in the Treasury to the credit of the Chippewa Indians were $837,009.81.
The act of January 14, 1889 (25 Stat., 642), above mentioned, also provides, among other things, that after the survey, examination, and appraisals of the ceded Chippewa pine lands, as provided in said act, have been fully completed, they shall be proclaimed as in the market and offered for sale after publication for four successive weeks in certain newspapers, designated in section 5 of said act; and that when any agricultural lands on said reservation, not allotted in said act nor reserved for the future use of said Indians, have been surveyed as provided in said act, the Secretary of the Interior, after thirty days' notice through one newspaper in certain cities designated in section 6 of said act, may dispose of said lands under the homestead laws to actual settlers only, for not less than $1.25 per acre.
By act of Congress approved February 26 1896, (29 Stat., 17), the act of January 14, 1889, was amended so as to provide that whenever and as often as the survey, examination, and appraisal of 100,000 acres of pine lands or of a less quantity, in the discretion of the Secretary of the Interior, have been made, all portions so surveyed, examined, and appraised shall be proclaimed as in the market and offered for sale.
On March 30, 1899, pursuant to the authority of the act of March 1, 1899 (30 Stat., 929), the Commissioner of the General Land Office was directed by me to suspend until further notice all estimating, appraising, examining, selling, and cutting of timber, as well as the letting of further logging contracts on the Chippewa Indian lands in the State of Minnesota, under the act of June 7, 1897 (30 Stat., 90), and also the sale of said lands.
He was also directed to notify all persons employed in connection with the estimating, appraising, and examining and cutting of timber on the Chippewa lands that they were furloughed without pay until further notice.
That order was modified on July 26, 1899, in so far as it applied to a part of the N. ↓ of sec. 15, T. 145 N., R. 31 W., and such proceedings were subsequently had as resulted in the sale of said tract, aggregating about 290 acres, on November 1, 1899.
Subsequently, representations having been made to the Department by the Senators and Representatives in the Congressional delegation from Minnesota that it would be in the interest of the Indians that the pine lands in the four ceded townships of the White Earth Reservation, Minn., be sold, and the agricultural lands opened for disposition under the homestead laws, I referred the matter to the Commissioners of the General Land Office and Indian Affairs, respectively, and upon consideration of their reports that no practical objection existed to the disposition of said lands as provided for under said acts, I accordingly, on October 6, 1900, directed that the pine lands in said townships, aggregating 39,922.48 acres, be offered for sale on November 27, 1900, and that the agricultural lands, aggregating 33,316.14 acres, be opened for disposition under the homestead law, as provided in said act, on December 4, 1900.
It was also directed that 967.32 acres of pine lands in secs.
8, 17, 20, 22, 27, 29, and 31, T. 148 N., R. 35 W., be also sold on November 27, 1900, making the entire amount of pine land to be offered for sale, 40,809.80 acres, containing 76,872 thousand feet of timber appraised at $232,974.77, and the order of March 30, 1899, was modified accordingly.
The results obtained from the administration of the act of January 14, 1899, have not been satisfactory to the Department, as the system devised thereunder has failed to secure to the Indians the largest benefit from the sale of the pine and agricultural lands.
It is my purpose at as early a day as practicable to bring this matter more fully to the attention of Congress and to suggest such remedy as in my judgment is necessary to a better protection of the interests of the Chippewa Indians.
The forest policy as inaugurated by my immediate predecessor in office has been continued during the year, and the results obtained in the conservation of the national forests and the protection of timber on reserved as well as unreserved lands have demonstrated the wisdom of its adoption, and the necessity, in the interest of the public, for its continuance and increased appropriations by Congress for the carrying on of the work.
On June 30, 1899, there were 37 forest reservations created by Presidential proclamations under section 24 of the act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat., 1095), embracing an area of 46,425,529 acres.
During the year the Olympic Forest Reserve, in the State of Washington, was reduced 265,040 acres, its.
The Prescott Reserve, in Arizona, was enlarged from 10,240 acres to 423,680 acres, and the Big Horn Reserve, in Wyoming, was enlarged from 1,127,680 to 1,180,800 acres.
One new reserve, the Santa Ynez, in California, embracing an area of 145,000 acres, was created during the year.
There were, therefore, on June 30, 1900, 38 forest reservations, embracing an area of 46,772,129 acres.
On October 10, 1900, by Presidential proclamation, the Crow Creek Forest Reserve, in Wyoming, was created, with an area of 56,320 acres.
Numerous requests and recommendations for changes in the boundaries of existing forest reserves and for the establishment of new reserves have been presented, necessitating extensive examinations being made of the lands of various sections of the country in order to determine their fitness for forest reserve purposes, etc.
This work has proved most laborious, calling for close personal inspection on the part of forest officers of vast areas of land, which are mostly rugged and mountainous regions, uninhabited, and lacking in facilities for travel.
At the beginning of the year, July 1, 1899, there were 9 superintendents, 37 supervisors, and about 250 rangers.
During the three great danger months, July 15 to Octobei 15, it seemed wise to make the force as large as possible, even though necessary at a later date to reduce it to an entirely inadequate number.
Accordingly, on July 15 the force of rangers was increased to 350, which force was reduced during October and November to 9 superintendents, 6 supervisors, and the said 85 rangers.
The forest rangers, in addition to their other duties, have been required to clear out old trails and roads and to blaze and cut new trails through the reserve, and at danger points to cut fire breaks.
During the year there have been cleared out and made accessible for unobstructed use 2,250 miles of old trails, and 1,095 miles of new trails have been cut, and 1,396 miles of trails have been blazed; 264 miles of permanent fire breaks have been cut, with an average width of 39 feet.
The opening of trails is considered one of the most important features of patrol work, as it makes possible the reaching of forest fires in the shortest possible time, saving, in many instances, long journeys to get from one danger point to another.
Under former appropriations for the service the number of forest rangers employed was wholly inadequate to meet the requirements of the work, they being scattered over the vast area of lands to be guarded.
The appropriation of $300,000 for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1901, is more commensurate with the requirements of the service.
I concur in the Commissioner's recommendation that not less than the appropriation of $300,000 for the forest service, in connection with the creation and administration of forest reserves, be continued for next year, with a possible increase in case additional lands are set aside as forest reservations.
A comparative statement of fires for the years ending June 30, 1899, and June 30, 1900, shows that the rangers discovered and extinguished 237 more camp fires during the year just closed than last year.
Of the fires that had gained considerable headway there were but 173, against 223 last season; the former burned 12,360 acres, or about 70 acres per fire, while those of last season burned 52,112 acres, or 223 acres per fire.
This shows that not only fewer fires got beyond the incipient stage, but that they were discovered and extinguished more promptly; furthermore, the extra expense of fighting them was but $9 per fire, while last year it was $14.
Last season there were 9 of the large devastating fires, burning over a total area of 79,500 acres, and costing $8,835, whereas this season there have been 8 such fires, burning over but 50,680 acres, and costing $2,315.
During the past year much attention has been.given to the question of putting into operation a system for harvesting and marketing timber on the reserves in accordance with the needs of the local population, coupled with provision for reproduction of the crop and maintenance of proper forest conditions.
The task is one of great proportions, involving much preliminary work of a careful nature, growing out of the fact that heretofore the lumbering system throughout the public domain has been largely to take regardlessly whatever was needed free of cost, leaving an almost certain wake of fire to mark the course, and floods to follow later.
As a preliminary step in the matter, instructions were issued to each of the forest superintendents to make a careful study of the subject of conservative lumbering as applicable to the particular reserves under his charge, and thereafter submit a comprehensive report in regard to each reserve, showing what he deems the best methods to be pursued in connection with harvesting the timber therein.
They were also directed to make a further study and report upon the closely related subject of reforestation and to cooperate with the work of the Agricultural Department in its administration of this branch of forestry.
Future experience in the management of the forestry service may indicate the advisability of the transfer of the supervision of all public forests to the Secretary of Agriculture.
Fifty-three petitions for sale of timber from lands within forest reserves have been received, involving 30,475,271 feet of timber, board measure, 20,555 cords of wood, and 10,000 fence posts.
Forty-eight petitions were pending before the office at date of last report.
Twelve sales have been effected, the proceeds of which amount to $36,754.02.
Petitions have been withdrawn or passed upon unfavorably by the Department in 47 cases, and 42 cases are pending examination by forest officers, completion of advertisements, or necessary official action, to dispose of the same.
The number of petitions received during the year for sales of timber on unreserved lands, under the circular of March 17, 1898, and the act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat., 1093), amounted to 86, involving a total of 48,086,400 feet of timber, board measure, and 23,880 cords of wood, and there were pending at the commencement of this fiscal year 41 petitions for such sales.
Sales of timber have been effected in 13 cases, involving a total of 5,942,515 feet of timber, board measure, and 500 cords of wood, realiz ing the sum of $5,217.38, which had been collected and paid into the Treasury of the United States, and the timber sold had been partially appropriated and was in process of cutting and removal previous to the announcement of Department decision of November 27, 1899, revoking said circular of March 17, 1898, authorizing such sales.
A very large amount of dead timber, which it is not practicable to estimate in feet or cords, was involved in the pending cases.
The latter, numbering 114, have been dismissed as a consequence of the Departmental decision in the premises.
The annual reports of the Land Office have for many years past contained urgent recommendations for action on the part of Congress looking to the elimination from the statute books of the mass of laws that had accumulated on the subject of public timber on unreserved lands, the majority of which were undesirable and to a great extent conflicting, and the enactment of proper laws governing the matter.
In February, 1900, the Commissioner of the General Land Office again called the attention of the Department to the necessity for some legislation in this matter, and submitted a draft of a bill revising the existing laws on this subject, which, under date of March 2, 1900, was transmitted by me to Congress with favorable commendation.
This bill was subsequently introduced in the Senate and House of Representatives, respectively, as H. R. 10405 and S. 3498.
The need for the passage of such an act is so imperative that I earnestly recommend that the bill become a law at the earliest possible date.
There were received during the year 2,023 applications for selections of lands in lieu of holdings within forest reservations, involving an aggregate area of 451,130.23 acres.
There had previously been received 610 applications, involving an area of 71,897.13 acres, making a total received to June 30, 1900, under the act of June 4, 1897, of 2,633 applications, involving an aggregate of 523,027.35 acres.
Of this number 243 have been approved, 156 patented, and 46 rejected, leaving 2,344 awaiting action.
There were received 16 applications for exchange of lands within forest reserves, of which 4 have been rejected, leaving 12 still pending.
During the year numerous recommendations were made to Congress by this Department looking to a modification of that portion of the act of June 4, 1897 (30 Stat., 36), which authorized lieu selections for reconveyed or relinquished tracts, with a view to preventing speculation in public lands, with the result that in the sundry civil act (31 Stat., 614) a provision was inserted which confines said selections to surveyed lands on and after October 1, 1900.
Thus it will be seen that one of the most objectionable features of the act of June 4, 1897—i.
In the interest of public good I am constrained to renew former recommendations for other modifications of this law.
As an instance of the condition of affairs, and to illustrate the abuses under the existing law, the Commissioner calls attention to the fact that owners of large quantities of land within the forest reserves which have been greatly reduced in value by the cutting of the timber therefrom, are selecting in lieu thereof valuable surveyed timber land,*and, under the law, the land department is compelled to allow such selections.
The act of June 4, 1897, is limited to such reservations as have been or may be established "by the President of the United States under the provisions of the act approved March 3, 1891."
Forest reservations have also been established under the acts of September 25, 1890 (26 Stat., 478), and October 1, 1890 (26 Stat., 650), and it is believed that the lieu land provision in the act under consideration, when modified as here suggested, ought to be equally applicable to them.
The attention of the Department was directed to what is known as the Wind Cave in South Dakota, the entrance to which is in sec. 1, T. 6 S., R. 5 E., Black Hills meridian, about 12 miles southeast of the town of Custer, as being a cavern of considerable size and possessing wonders of such surpassing interest as that it should be set apart as a park or pleasuring ground for the people.
An investigation of the cave was accordingly made by two geologists of the Geological Survey, and from their report, which is set forth more fully in the report of the Commissioner of the General Land Office, it appears that the cave is of large dimensions, of great interest and beauty, having many miles of galleries branching and reticulating along the joined planes of carbonaceous limestone, and numerous chambers with stalactitic and stalagmitic formations.
Owing to the existence of a number of unperfected entries covering lands around the mouth of the cave, it would not be advisable at this time to have the same set apart as a national park.
With a view, however, to future action by Congress in the premises, a temporary withdrawal has been made of the necessary lands subject to any and all valid rights acquired by virtue of existing entries.
In February of 1895 the secretary of the Territory of Arizona forwarded to the Department a copy of the memorial of the eighteenth legislative assembly of Arizona praying that certain lands in Apache County, Ariz., known as the Petrified Forest, be withdrawn from entry with a view to the creation of a pleasuring ground or park for the people, for the purpose of preserving for their benefit the natural wonders and curiosities of that region.
An investigation of the lands in question was made, which resulted in the issue by the Department, under dates of December 15, 1896, and December 15, 1899, of orders directing the temporary withdrawal from the settlement, the sale, or other disposal of Ts.
16 and 17 N., Rs. 23, 24, and 25 E., Gila and Salt River meridian, Arizona.
During the last session of Congress a bill (H. R. 9634) providing for the setting apart as a national park of the six townships above described was introduced and is still pending.
The delegation of the State of Idaho in Congress called attention to lands embracing Ts.
9 and 10 S., Rs. 17 and 18 E., on the Snake River, in southern Idaho, with a view to the setting of the same aside as a pleasuring ground or park for the benefit of the people, and an official examination of the region, which embraced the Shoshone Falls, the Twin Falls, and the Blue Lakes, disclosed a region of scenic attractions and great natural beauty, and, as a result, the four townships above mentioned have been withdrawn from further entry or disposal, with a view to the setting of the same aside by Congress, at some time in the future, as a national park.
An Official examination has been made of lands in New Mexico containing extensive ruins, with a view to its reservation as a pleasuring ground or park for the benefit of the people.
The reports received show that the region in question is a tract of land lying between the Rio Grande del Norte on the east and the base of the Rocky Mountains on the west, the Chamer on the north and the Rio de los Frijoles on the south, about 30 miles long by 15 miles in width.
This region is a plateau of an altitude varying from 6,000 to 9,000 feet, of volcanic origin and deeply seamed with canyons.
The district is noted for the remains of prehistoric civilization, of the so-called Cliff Dwellers, with which it is covered.
The act of July 1, 1892 (27 Stat., 62), entitled "An act providing for the opening of a part of the Colville Reservation in the State of Washington, and for other purposes," vacated and restored to the public domain a portion of the Colville Indian Reservation created by Executive order, dated July 2, 1872, and by other proceedings, whereby the same was set apart for a reservation for any Indians or band of Indians, and provided that the same should be opened to settlement and entry by the proclamation of the President of the United States, and should be disposed of under the general laws applicable to the disposition of public lands in the State of Washington.
It was also provided by said act that every Indian then residing upon the portion of said reservation vacated and restored to the public domain, and who was entitled to reside thereon, should be entitled to select from said vacated portion 80 acres of land, which should be allotted to each Indian in severalty, and that no restrictions as to locality should be placed upon such selections further than that they should be so located as to conform to the authorized survey or subdivisions of said tract of country, and that an Indian having improvements should have preference over any other person in and upon the tract of land containing such improvements, so far as they were within a legal subdivision not exceeding in area the quantity of land that he or she might be entitled to select and locate, and that such selections should be made within six months after the date of the President's proclamation opening the lands so vacated to settlement and entry, and after the same had been surveyed, and when such allotments had been selected and approved by the Secretary of the Interior, the title thereto should be held in trust for the benefit of the allottees, respectively, and afterwards conveyed in fee simple to the allottees or their heirs, as provided under the general allotment act approved February 8, 1887, and the act amendatory thereof, approved February 28, 1891, and providing that such allotted lands should be subject to the laws of eminent domain of the State of Washington, and should only convey in fee simple to the allottees or their heirs, and be subject to taxation as other property in that State.
On the 20th day of February, 1896, the United States mineral laws were extended to the portion of said reservation so vacated and restored to the public domain, as above stated.
The Indian allotments in severalty provided for in said act (July 1, 1892) shall be selected and completed at the earliest practicable time, and not later than six months after the proclamation of the President opening the vacated portion of said reservation to selection and entry, which proclamation may issue without waiting for the survey of the unsurveyed lands therein.
Said allotments shall be made upon lands which shall, at the time of the selection thereof, be surveyed, excepting that any Indian entitled to an allotment under said act who has improvements upon unsurveyed land, may select the same for his allotment, whereby the Secretary of the Interior will cause same to be surveyed and allotted to him.
At the expiration of six months from the date of the proclamation by the President, not before, nonmineral lands within the vacated portion of said reservation, which shall not have been allotted to Indians as aforesaid, shall be subject to entry, settlement, and disposition under said act of July 1, 1892.
On April 9, 1900, the Commissioner of Indian Affairs and the Commissioner of the General Land Office, respectively, having reported that the provisions of the acts of July 1, 1892, and of July 1, 1898, as to the survey.
On April 10 said proclamation was issued, fixing October 10 as the date for the opening of said lands to settlement and entry under the provisions of the acts above mentioned, public notice thereof being given through the medium of the press and otherwise; on that date they were so opened, in accordance with the provisions of said acts, under the terms of said proclamation.
The report of the Commissioner of Pensions shows that on June 30, 1899, there were 991,519 pensioners borne upon the roll.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 1900, there were allowed 40,645 pensions on original applications, and the number restored to the rolls was 4,699, making a total of new names added to the rolls of 45,344.
The pensioners dropped from the rolls during the year by reason of death and all other causes aggregated 43,334, leaving the number remaining on rolls June 30, 1900, 993,529, a net increase of 2,010 as compared with the previous fiscal year, 1899.
The number of claims adjudicated during the year was 229,720, of which 124,129 were rejections and 105,591 allowances, the latter divided as follows: Original pension claims, 40,645; restorations, 4,699; increase, reissues, and additionals, 44,674; accrued and duplicates, 15,573.
The report of the Commissioner shows that the total number of claims of all classes pending on June 30, 1900, was 437,104, being a reduction of 40,135 claims for the fiscal year, and a reduction of 197,955 claims since June 30, 1898.
Of the total number of pending claims only 155,990 are for original pension, and about 40,000 of these are duplicates, leaving about 110,000 claimants who have never received any pension.