Washington, D. C., November 21, 1901.
SiR: I have the honor to submit herewith the annual report of the operations of this Department during the past fiscal year, reference being had to the attached reports of the several bureaus and offices connected therewith for a more detailed statement as to the business transacted therein, respectively.
The progress made in the dispatch of the public business has been very gratifying, and notwithstanding the large increase therein during the year the work of the several bureaus and offices is well in hand.
This increase in the volume of work is particularly noticeable in the Secretary's Office, the General Land Office, and the Patent Office; in all likelihood it will continue to increase during the coming year rather than diminish, and in order to be properly and expeditiously handled additional clerical force must, of necessity, be provided.
I have heretofore called attention to the labor incident to the supervising of the work brought before the Secretary and his assistants, and the great tax on their energies·involved in its consideration and disposition.
Again adverting to the subject, I desire to call special attention to the fact that the salary now fixed py law for the First Assistant Secretary of this Department is not an adequate compensation for the exacting duties required to be performed by him; and the same may be said regarding the salaries paid to the Assistant Secretary and to the chiefs of division in the Secretary's Office.
These should be readjusted by Congress on a more equitable basis at the earliest practicable date.
The energy and ability with which the duties and obligations devolving upon the officers of the various divisions and bureaus of this Department have been discharged have been fully appreciated, and I cheerfully make acknowledgment to the Assistant Secretaries, the Assistant Attorney-General, the heads of bureaus, the chief clerk of the Department, and the chiefs of division of the Secretary's Office for the valuable assistance rendered by them in the disposition of the public business.
The force in this office is occupied in greater measure with the consideration of legal problems and claims arising under the laws of the United States relating to public lands and Indian affairs, and in lesser measure with the disposition of matters arising under the pension, patent, and other laws, the administration of which is committed to this Department.
Excepting as action in some matters is withheld or suspended for the time being, awaiting a decision in the courts upon a test case involving like questions, the work of the office is practically up to date or current.
One efect of bringing the work up to date has been to discourage and greatly to reduce the number of groundless appeals and motions for review in land cases, heretofore frequently presented for the purpose of obtaining delay and forcing the successful claimant to make some money or other concession to the unsuccessful one as a means of securing a withdrawal of the appeal or motion for review, and thus removing an obstacle to closing the contest and issuing a patent.
While, however, the volume of work relating to public lands has been perceptibly reduced, there has been more than a counterbalancing increase in the work relating to Indian affairs.
The increased allotment of lands in severalty to the Indians and opening of the surplus lands to the operation of the public-land laws, and the taking of more direct control of the affairs of the Five Civilized Tribes in the Indian Territory have brought forth many legal problems, some new and quite difficult, the solution of which has fallen to this office.
Some of these questions have been carried into the courts of the District of Columbia and elsewhere, in mandamus and injunction suits, and the work of representing the Department in this litigation and of sustaining the legislation of Congress, which is drawn in question, has been performed principally by the Assistant Attorney-General and has involved much time and labor.
I can not commend too highly the able manner in which the affairs of this office have been administered.
The matters at this time awaiting consideration and disposition are: One hundred and sixty-eight appeals from the Commissioner of the General Land Office, 32 motions for review of decisions heretofore rendered upon such appeals, 58 miscellaneous matters largely relating to Indian affairs, and 7 requests for law opinions by the Assistant Attorney-General.
The matters considered and disposed of during the year are as follows: Eleven hundred and nine decisions receiving the approval and signature of the Secretary of the Interior in appeals from the Commissioner of the General Land Office; 317 decisions receiving the approval and signature of the Secretary of the Interior upon motions for review; 644 decisions, regulations, and orders receiving the approval and signature of the Secretary of the Interior in miscellaneous matters; 65 law opinions receiving the signature of the Assistant Attorney-General and the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, and 1,090 decisions upon pension appeals receiving the approval and signature of the Assistant Secretary of the Interior.
The more important of the land decisions and opinions are included in volumes 30 and 31 of the "Land Decisions," the latter volume being now in course of publication.
The total Indian population of the United States, exclusive of the New York Indians and those in the Indian Territory embraced in what is generally known as the Five Civilized Tribes, is approximately 178,919; they are located on 156 reservations in various sections of the country, containing about 55,127,000 acres.
During the past year 8,857 allotments have been made, having an approximate acreage of 1,125,970.80 acres.
Allotments of land in severalty, embracing in the aggregate 7,862,475.11 acres, have been made since the passage of the act of February 8, 1887 (24 Stats., 388), to approximately 64,853 Indians.
The general condition among the Indians during the year has been fairly satisfactory.
Aside from the disturbance created in the Indian Territory by certain full-blood Creek Indians, known as the Snake Band, which was easily suppressed, no serious troubles have occurred.
Some progress toward civilization has been made, but not in such a degree as the efforts put forth by the Government for the betterment of their condition and the large expenditure of money for their comfort and enlightenment would seem to justify.
The management of the Indian service in the field and in the schools, while satisfactory under existing conditions, is not deemed to be the best for the welfare of the Indians, and different methods will hereafter be adopted.
This policy, as hereinafter indicated, contemplates requiring the working by Indian allottees able to do so of a fair portion of lands allotted them and the contributing by their industry to their own support of all not entirely disqualified by actual disability, physical or otherwise; the discontinuance of the issue of rations to those known and determined to be able to support themselves, and the extension to the latter of every possible aid for their well-being and encouragement; the inauguration of industrial training in all schools where not now established, so that Indians of both sexes may be taught the trades or industries adapted to their circumstances.
The Indian school courses, which originally contemplated the giving of a common school education, have been conducted on a plane far beyond the ordinary needs of one whose every-day pursuits would in all probability be largely confined for a long time to the farm and industry of stock raising.
The foundation of an education usually laid in the common schools of the country is all that the Government could reasonably be expected to furnish the Indian, and therefore the course in all Government schools outside, as well as on reservations, will be confined to the essentials of such an education.
The six nations composing the New York Indians number about 5,232, and are located on eight small reservations, aggregating in all 88,000 acres in the State of New York, to some of whom small sums of money and other annuities are distributed under treaty stipulations.
The Five Civilized Tribes in the Indian Territory comprise the Choctaw, Chickasaw, Creek, Cherokee, and Seminole Indians.
Their estimated population, including freedmen, is 84,507.
The lands in the Territory controlled by the Five Civilized Tribes have an aggregate area of approximately 19,475,614 acres.
About 300,648 white people, noncitizens, are said to be living within the boundaries of the Five Civilized Tribes.
Two thousand and twenty-one allotments have been made to the members of the Seminole tribe of Indians, and in the Creek Nation there have been recorded 10,617 selections for allotments.
During the year there were employed 1,621 Indians in the agency service proper as clerks, police, harness makers; teamsters, herders shoemakers, butchers, blacksmiths, and kindred occupations to whom salaries wére paid aggregating $315,802, and in the Indian school service there were employed 679 Indians, who worked as nurses, matrons, clerks, cooks, laundresses, industrial and other teachers, receiving salaries aggregating $247,000.17.
ApPRoPRIATIoNs.
The aggregate appropriations on account of Indian service for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1901, was $9,040,475.89.
Of this amount, $8,873,239.24 was provided for in the Indian appropriation act for the fiscal year 1901, approved May 31, 1900, and $167,236.65 by the deficiency acts of January 4 and March 3, 1901.
IncomE.
The income of the various Indian tribes from all sources during the year may be stated as follows: Interest on trust funds, $1,500,862.38; treaty and agreement obligations, $2,493,249.93; gratuities, $733,400; Indian moneys, proceeds of leases, labor, etc., $611,368.23; aggregating $5,338,880.54, as against $5.599,883.11 for the previous fiscal year—a falling off of $260,952.57, of which $209,398.89 is due to the expiration of treaty obligations and the remainder to a decrease in the proceeds of labor, leases, etc.
It was stated in my last annual report that "The Indian school system does not contemplate giving the Indian what is known as a 'higher education."" While this is true in the abstract, the system in vogue, especially in the nonreservation schools, and even in some of those upon reservations, seems to be gradually growing into one that is leading up to the higher branches of education, thus unfitting the Indian for home life with his tribe upon the reservation after his course is completed, and it is seriously questioned whether the present method is calculated to accomplish the good results hoped for.
I doubt it very much, and for some time have been of the opinion that too much attention is paid to branches outside of those necessary to give the Indian pupil a common-school education.
I am confirmed in my opinion that the curriculum should be restricted to the common-school course, because of facts that have been brought to my attention by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs in his annual report.
Industrial training should and will be inaugurated in both the nonreservation and reservation boarding schools, where not already established, to consists of carpentry, blacksmithing, harness, shoe, and wagon making, and such other industries or trades as males may be adapted to, and females ought to be trained especially in laundering, cookery, tailoring, dressmaking, and the arts of housekeeping, to which more than ordinary attention should be paid.
With this knowledge as a foundation, the Indian youth would be fully as well, if not better, equipped for the battle of life than are a large majority of the sons and daughters of those who people the sections where the Indians are located, and the foundation for whose education is laid in the district or common schools for the neighborhood, where eventually the Indians themselves must necessarily seek the knowledge that they are now getting through the munificence of the Government.
If "higher education" be desired, the means to supply the same should be furnished by the individual effort of those who seek it, or by those interested in such individuals.
Otherwise the Government might justly be charged with discriminating against those who pay the taxes from which is derived the funds that go to support schools for Indians.
In other words, the time has come when the Indian must make an effort at self-support and for the support of those dependent upon him; and I know of no greater use to which a portion of his money may be devoted, if he desires better education for his children, than for himself to pay the expense thereof.
The Government will provide the means upon which to found such "higher education," but it should not be expected or asked to do more.
I am of the opinion that nonreservation schools have fully served their purpose, and that further extension of these schools should not be permitted, but rather that increase in facilities for education of Indians should be sought in the district or common schools of the States and Territories adjacent to reservations, and in the establishment of more day and boarding schools upon reservations.
In the utility and usefulņess of the latter the older Indians would have object lessons, and be less inclined to object to permitting their children to attend schools.
ScHooLs.
The number of nonreservation schools remains the same as at the date of the last annual report (25), but with an increase of 676 in the average attendance.
There were 88 so-called reservation boarding schools, an increase of 7 over the previous year, with an increase in the average attendance of 1,222 pupils.
There were 138 day schools in operation last year, a decrease of 9 from the number of the previous year, with a decreased attendance of 248 pupils.
Contracts with 19 public schools for the education of Indian youths were in operation last year, 3 less than the year before; but the average attendance was 131, an increase of 13 over that year.
In view of the large amounts annually expended in the erection and repair of school plants, which averages over $500,000 per annum, it was deemed to be in the interest of economy and good business management to engage the services of experts to plan and supervise the construction of new buildings and water, sewer, heating, and lighting systems, and not, as heretofore, rely in too large a degree on the judgment of agents, school superintendents, and other officials in such matters.
Therefore, in July last a supervisor of engineering and a supervisor of construction were employed, whose duty it will be to take charge of all matters pertaining to construction and repair of school plants.
I have no doubt that the employment of these experts will result in a more economical use of the funds appropriated for the erection and improvement of school plants, as well as better construction and generally more satisfaction in all matters of detail.
Besides the general appropriation of $240,000, appropriations for specified localities amounting to $419,050 have been made for use during the current fiscal year in the construction, purchase, lease, and repair of school buildings, and for sewerage, water, heating, and lighting systems, and for the purchase of school sites, etc.
Substantial improvements are now being made to many of the school plants.
Improvements to school plants have been made during the fiscal year ending June 30, 1901, at the Cheyenne and Arapaho Agency, Okla.
Colville Agency, Wash.
Fort Yuma, Ariz.
Fort Lewis, Colo.
Green Bay Agency, Wis.
Hoopa Valley, Cal.
Jicarilla, N. Mex.
Klamath, Oreg.
Lac du Flambeau, Wis.
Leech Lake, Minn.
Ponca, Sac and Fox, and Pawnee, Okla.
Oneida, Wis.
San Carlos, Ariz.
Pima, Ariz.
Greenville, Cal.
Cass Lake, Minn., and Yankton, S. Dak.
The capacities of a number of schools have been increased by the erection of new dormitories.
A new school plant has been completed for the Winnebago Reservation, in Nebraska, for the accommodation of 80 to 100 pupils, one for the Southern Ute Reservation will be ready by January 1, 1902, and one for the accommodation of 125 pupils for the Jicarillas, in New Mexico, will soon be completed.
In addition to the foregoing improvements, a number of such have been specially appropriated for by Congress for nonreservation schools, while for other schools treaty funds have been available.
At the Chamberlain (S. Dak.) and Carson City (Nev.) schools, shop buildings have been erected.
Modern electric-light system, cold storage, and warehouse have been erected at Chilocco school, Oklahoma.
For Genoa school, Congress provided $25,000 for a new building and $5,000 for a new hospital.
The new dormitory for Grand Junction school, Colorado, for which last year $20,000 was appropriated, has been completed.
At Haskell Institute, Kansas, the sum of $65,000 has been expended for additional school buildings and steam plant.
At Salem school, Oregon, provision has been made for additional buildings and an extension of the steam-heating and electric-lighting plant, for which Congress appropriated $41,000.
The purchase of additional land for the Phoenix school, Arizona, for which Congress appropriated $4,800, will give needed facilities for extending industrial training.
Congress for the fiscal year 1901 appropriated $75,000 for the erection of school buildings at Riverside, Cal., and in the act for the fiscal year 1902 increased the amount to $150,000, and also provided $10,000 for additional land.
The buildings are now in course of construction, and it is hoped that this school will be opened during the current fiscal year.
Other improvements are contemplated or being made, notably at the Grand River school,.
Provision was made by the Indian appropriation act for the fiscal year 1902 for the establishment of an Indian industrial school at Mandan, N. Dak., "upon lands to be donated to the Government for that purpose, of not less than 160 acres in extent," and $50,000 was appropriated for the erection and completion of the buildings.
A number of sites have been offered, but no selection has so far been made.
In a communication to the Executive, on November 26, 1900, on the subject of the issue of rations to Indians, the Department took occasion to invite attention to the stipulations of the treaties and agreements with the Great Sioux Nation, which obligate the Indians to provide for themselves when able to do so.
I then said, in effect, referring to certain individual Indians who complained that they had not been supplied with the full ration promised by their treaty, that a daily ration had been furnished them of sufficient quantity, "if properly cared for and used with providence, to amply provide for all their needs."
From the representations made by the writers of the communications referred to, it does not seem that they or the other Indians of the * * * Agency are any nearer the goal of self-support than they were twenty-four years ago, when the treaty was made.
Regardless of the provision in the treaty looking to the reduction in the ration as they become able partly, if not wholly, to sustain themselves, which they appear to be able to do, and notwithstanding the facts stated by the Commissioner that individual Ind:ans of this band own nearly 20,000 head of cattle, and that more than 1,500 head were purchased from them last year, at a cost to the Government of more than $50,000, which cattle were afterwards issued to and eaten up by the band, they still claim full benefits under the treaty named.
From the facts stated, it does seem that the time has come when individual Indians who are so well qualified to at least furnish a part of their own support, as some of these Indians seem to be, should be required to take upon themselves a portion of the burden of their own care.
I recommended that those who were known to be able to do so should be required to support themselves and families, and that no rations be issued to them.
I am now able tó report that at one agency 870 names were dropped from the ration rolls, 400 at another, and 300 at another—all these persons being declared and found to be entirely self-supporting, some of them having grown wealthy and some being able to live in comparative affluence.
Similar orders were given to Indian agents having charge of agencies where a modified (not full) ration has been furnished as a gratuity (not under treaty or agreement as in the case of the Sioux).
In these cases the result has been equally gratifying, and it is.felt that a great step toward independence has been taken by the Indians, who have shown a willingness without apparent discontent to depend upon their individual efforts for the maintenance of themselves and families.
These self-respecting Indians deserve commendation for their determination to relieve the Government of their care and encouragement and sympathy in their efforts at self-support.
Many others will doubtless follow their example, and thus the gradual discontinuance of the ration system is looked for so far as it applies to able-bodied Indians.
Of course it is expected that assistance will be needed by indigent and helpless Indians, at least until their relations or friends are able or willing to care for them or other provision for their maintenance is made.
Schedules of 1,040 other allotments have been received at the Indian Office, but no action has been taken thereon.
PATENTs.
The work of allotment to the Crow Indians, which was suspended several years ago because of the construction of extensive systems of irrigation, provided for by agreements with them in 1890 and 1892, was resumed during the past fiscal year.
COngreSS extended for eight months the time for opening the reservation (act of January 4, 1901, 31 Stat., 727).
Allotments to the Indians were commenced at the earliest possible moment, under the auspices of Indian Inspector C. F. Nesler, and the final schedules thereof were approved by the Department on June 18 last.
Allotments to these Indians were made under the same supervision, and the final schedules were approved July 2 last.
A schedule of 27 adopted members was approved July 3, 1901, one day prior to the date of the order of the President opening these and the Kiowa, etc., lands to settlement.
The nonreservation allotments in the Redding and Susanville land districts, California, from reports that seem well founded, appear to be unsuitable, and in many cases the Indian did not know where his land was located, the Indian of course in such cases failing to settle thereon.
Investigation of those in the Susanville district has been or is being made.
Allotment work under the fourth section of the general allotment act of February 8, 1887, and the amendatory acts is being carried on in Oregon and Washington.
No allotments to nonreservation Indians have been approved or trust patents issued for such allotments during the period of this report.
Many allotments made on the Sioux ceded lands in South Dakota under section 13 of the Sioux act of March 2, 1889 (25 Stat., 888), have been relinquished and accepted, the Indians returning to the diminished reservations whereon are located the tribes to which they belong, where they will receive other allotments if found entitled thereto.
The total number of allotments to Indians during the fiscal year 1901 was 8,857, covering 1,125,970.80 acres.
The total number made to Indians from the beginning, not including grants to and reservations for individual Indians and mixed bloods mentioned by name in various treaties, is 64,853, to whom 7,862,475.11 acres were allotted.
ALLoTMENTs.
By an act of Congress approved February 28, 1891 (26 Stat., 794), provision was made for leasing allotments for farming or grazing for a term not exceeding three years, or ten years for mining purposes, when it should "be made to appear to the Secretary of the Interior that, by reason of age or other disability, any allottee of Indian lands under the provisions of the said act or treaty can not personally and with benefit to himself occupy or improve his allotment or any part thereof," upon such terms, regulations, and conditions as shall be prescribed by the Secretary.
This provision was modified by the act of August 15, 1894 (28 Stat., 305), the term being extended to five years for farming or grazing, leasing for business purposes for a term of ten years being also authorized as well as for mining, and the word "inability"was inserted, and the law made to read "by reason of age, disability, or inability."
Further modification was made by the act of June 7, 1897 (30 Stat., 85), by omitting the word "inability" and changing the periods to three and five years, respectively.
By the act of March 1, 1899 (30 Stat., 941), the Indians of the Yakima Reservation were authorized to lease their allotted lands for agricultural purposes for not exceeding five years, and by the act of May 31, 1900 (31 Stat., 246), these Indians were authorized to lease "unimproved" allotted lands, for agricultural purposes, for any term not exceeding ten years, upon terms and conditions to be prescribed by the Secretary of the Interior.
Also by the same act (31 Stat., 229), the word "inability" was restored, and the term for farming leases extended to five years.
The leasing or allotments is therefore limited to three years for grazing and five for farming, mining, or business purposes, except as to the Yakimas, who may lease their "unimproved allotted" lands for agricultural purposes for any term not exceeding ten years.
With the view of increasing the benefits to be derived by Indian allottees from the leasing of their lands, the Department, on July 16, 1900, determined that future leases should provide for some specific improvement, such as clearing and breaking of new land, erection of fences, barns, and other necessary permanent improvements, the character and value of which should be specifically stated in the lease; such substantial benefits being regarded as much more essential to the interests of the allottee than all money payment for rent would be.
Under date of January 4, 1901, the attention of the Indian Bureau was called to the fact that the majority of the leases executed under the above-mentioned provisions of law did not sufficiently show 'the disability of the Indian allottee or his inability to occupy or improve his allotment, and directions were given that all leases thereafter submitted for Department action should show clearly the nature and extent of the disability or inability of the Indian owner of the land; if from old age, the exact or approximate age and physical condition should be given, etc.
In view of the changes in the system of leasing, as indicated, the rules and regulations governing the same, approved September 22, 1894, were found to have become practically obsolete, and instructions were given the Indian Office, under date of June 7, 1901, to formulate a set of new rules and regulations to conform generally to the lines followed by the Department in its action on leases during the eight or ten months immediately preceding that date.
Although the act of May 31, 1900, above referred to, permitted the leasing of the Yakima (unimproved) lands for the period of ten years, the Department has not heretofore deemed it advisable to approve such leases for more than five years; but in view of numerous applications for the ten-year leases—the applicants claiming that the long term was necessary because of great expense for clearing, fencing, irrigating, etc.
His report (received since the end of the fiscal year) shows that leases of these lands for the maximum term provided by the act would not be advisable or beneficial to the Indians except in a few special cases.
He recommended, however, that the Yakima lands be classified for leasing purposes, and this is now being done under authority of the Department.
Until within the last year, as previously indicated, it was almost impossible to obtain full facts upon which to determine the actual status of allottees whose lands were being leased, and many leases were made which doubtless should have been wholly rejected or the terms for which the leases were to run curtailed, many leases having been made for two and three year periods, and in some instances for five years.
Under the present system, inaugurated more than a year ago, and the rules and regulations recently adopted for the government of the leasing of allotments the Department is more fully informed of the facts in each case presented, and consequently is better able to supervise and control where before action was necessarily taken with some doubt as to its propriety.
But notwithstanding the limitations upon leasing allotments, it is felt that many allottees whose cases technically come within the provisions of the law as to "disability" and "inability" are permitted to lease who, being able, should, by strict construction of the law, be required to remain upon and work their allotments, as was evidently intended by Congress when it enacted the "general allotment act," under the terms of which most allotments have been made.
By special legislation, however, the provisions of that act have been modified and the present system has grown up, in a measure putting a premium upon idleness, and in a good many instances an end to all industrial progress.
Many protests against the system have been received and more stringent rules recommended, to the end that able-bodied allottees shall be required to at least cultivate or make use for grazing of a portion of their allotments before being permitted to lease any part thereof.
The matter is now under consideration and further rules will be formulated, in future confining full leasing privileges to those whose "disability" or "inability," to be clearly and conclusively shown, actually disqualifies them from working any part of their allotments, and in a lesser degree to those whose "disability" or "inability," also to be fully and conclusively shown, may be such as to prevent them from working more than a small part of their allotments, such part to be regulated and determined by the actual conditions; all others to be required to work at least 40 acres of their allotments.
In the last two instances the allottees will be permitted to receive a portion or percentage of the income from the rental of their allotments, to enable them to make a start either in stock raising or agriculture and for general improvements, the remainder to be retained until the expiration of the lease period, when they will be better qualified to make proper use of the same.
Since the date of the last annual report 249 leases have been made and 6 permits granted for grazing, agricultural, and mining purposes, from which an approximate income, exclusive of the royalty on the mining leases, of $271,734.08 will be derived for the year, full details of which are set out in the report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
In my last annual report the statement was made that the Department, on March 30, 1899, suspended logging operations on these reservations, and that no logging had been carried on during the year following that date.
On November 2, 1900, the above order was revoked and operations authorized on the said reservations únder certain rules and regulations,1 which were subsequently approved, together with a form of contract to be entered into by purchasers of logs.
Under this authority $11,949.52 was derived from timber cut from the Red Lake diminished reservation and $27,896.83 from the White Earth diminished reservation—in both cases after payment of the expenses of cutting.
On December 21, 1900, the above-mentioned order of suspension, which also covered operations on the ceded lands of the several Chippewa reservations in Minnesota, as well as the diminished reserves, was also revoked as to operations on the said ceded lands, and the rules and regulations adopted for the government of operations on the White Earth and Red Lake diminished reservations were extended thereto, and $87,340.27, after the payment of expenses, is reported to have been derived from these operations.
Logging operations on the Lac du Flambeau and Bad River reservations have progressed satisfactorily.
The act of February 12, 1901 (31 Stats., 785), authorizes the Indians of the Grand Portage Reservation to sell the timber from their allotments.
The matter is now under consideration by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
Under Department authority Menomonee Indians were employed to conduct logging on their reservation for the season 1900-1901.
A total of 15,000,000 feet of timber was cut and the same sold, on sealed bids, at $13.25 per thousand feet.
Of the appropriation of $50,000 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1901, for irrigation, an aggregate of about $31,300 was expended on the San Ildefonso and other pueblos, and on the Southern Ute, Navajo, and Wind River reservations, the balance having been expended in repairs, maintenance, and ditch extension on various other reservations, and payment of the salaries of the employees engaged in irrigation work.
During the year earnest efforts have been made by the Department to provide a system of irrigation for the Indians occupying the diminished Southern Ute Reservation, in Colorado, and on the recommendation of Inspector Graves steps have been taken looking to the purchase of perpetual water rights for these Indians.
No settlement has been reached of the differences with the Idaho Canal Company, due to the alleged faulty construction of canals by them on the reservation, under contract, for the use of the Indians, but the Government is amply secured against any probable loss on this account.
This matter has been carefully considered, but no satisfactory conclusion reached, owing to the absence of certain needed data, which is being sought, and upon its receipt further consideration will be given the matter.
On this reservation work was continued on the construction of the Big Horn ditch, and very satisfactory progress made.
The principal results accomplished were the completion of the main regulating weir or head gate, and the removal of the main obstacle to running water through the finished portions of the canal, viz, the Fort Smith cut, and it is expected that within the next few months the Big Horn Valley can be irrigated for a distance of 18 miles from the head of the ditch.
Snohomish River Boom Company, Tulalip Reservation.
E. F. Sparrow and R. W. Black, Osage Reservation.
Nebraska Telephone Company, Omaha, etc., Reservation.
Osage and Eastern, Osage Reservation.
F. H. Wright, Kiowa, etc., Reservation.
F. H. Wright, Indian Territory.
Arkansas Valley Telephone and Telegraph Company, Indian Territory.
Indianola Telephone and Telegraph Company, Indian Territory.
R. H. Hall, Indian Territory.
Indian Territory Telephone Company, Indian Territory.
J. G. Rucker, Indian Territory.
W. H. Gates, Indian Territory.
Nebraska Telephone Company, Omaha, etc., Reservation.
Iron Range Electric Company, Fond du Lac and Chippewa reservations.
Indianola Telephone and Telegraph Company, Indian Territory.
Indian Territory Telephone Company, Indian Territory.
J. G. Rucker, Indian Territory.
W. H. Gates, Indian Territory.
In 1866 treaties were made by the Government with each of the Five Civilized Tribes providing, among other things, for the continuance of their tribal governments under their respective constitutions and laws when not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the United States.
The supervision by the Government was exercised through its Indian agents appointed for the respective tribes.
During the fiscal year ending June 30, 1874, the several agencies of the Five Civilized Tribes were consolidated into one union agency, which was located at Muscogee, in the Indian Territory.
On March 1, 1889, a United States court was established in said Territory, within certain limits specifically designated, and its jurisdiction was defined, excepting therefrom, however, all controversies between persons only of Indian blood (25 Stat., 783), and by the act of May 2, 1890 (26 Stat., 81), the Indian Territory was divided, and its boundaries, together with those of Oklahoma, were specially defined, and certain general laws of the State of Arkansas, designated by chapters, were put in force in the Indian Territory when not locally inapplicable or in conflict with existing law of the United States upon the subject-matter.
This act also expressly declared that the Constitution and all general laws of the United States prohibiting crimes and misdemeanors within their exclusive jurisdiction, except in the District of Columbia, and the United States laws relating to banking associations shall have full force and effect in the Indian Territory, except that the courts of the Five Civilized Tribes shall have exclusive jurisdiction over all causes wherein members of the said nations are the sole parties, whether such parties are such members by virtue of treaty provisions, by blood relation, or by adoption.
Said act also guaranteed to said civilized tribes the right to punish their members for violations of tribal laws when said laws were not in conflict with the laws and treaties of the United States.
The jurisdiction of the United States courts was also extended to all controversies between Indians of different tribes, and provision was made for the appointment of United States commissioners, who were invested with all the powers of United States circuit court commissioners.
Notwithstanding the enlargement of the jurisdiction of the United States courts in the Indian Territory, the conditions therein continued to be unsatisfactory, and subsequent legislation was had with a view of remedying the defects and affording additional protection to the persons residing in said Territory.
Authority was given by section 16 of the Indian appropriation act of March 3, 1893 (27 Stat., 645), for the appointment of a commission by the President, with the advice and consent of the Senate, to consist of three members, to enter into negotiations with the Five Civilized Tribes "for the purpose of the extinguishment of the national or tribal title to any lands within that territory now held by any and all such nations or tribes, either by cession of the same or some part thereof to the United States, or by the allotment and division of the same in severalty among the Indians of said nations or tribes, respectively, as may be entitled to the same, or by such other method as may be agreed upon between the several nations or tribes aforesaid, or each of them, and the United States, with a view to such an adjustment, upon the basis of justice and equity, as may, with the consent of such nations or tribes of Indians, so far as may be necessary, be requisite and suitable to enable the ultimate creation of a State or States of the Union, which shall embrace the lands within said Indian Territory."
Said commission was duly appointed, and, by the appropriation act for sundry civil expenses of the Government approved March 2, 1895 (28 Stat., 939), the members thereof were increased to five.
Authority was also given in said act for the commission to hear applications for citizenship in any of said nations and to determine the right of the applicants to be enrolled as members thereof.
Said applicants were required to apply to the commission within three months after the passage of said act, and its decisions were to be rendered within ninety days after the applications were filed.
A proviso to said act confirmed the rolls of citizenship of the Five Civilized Tribes as then existing, and any person claiming the right to be added to the rolls as a citizen of either of said tribes, whose right prior thereto had either been denied or not acted upon, was authorized to apply to the proper tribal authority to be admitted to citizenship; and said application was required to be determined within thirty days from the date of the same.
The commission was also authorized to administer oaths, issue process to compel the attendance of witnesses, and to send for persons and papers.
The right of appeal was given to the tribe or any person who felt aggrieved at the decision of the tribal authorities or the commission to the United States district court within sixty days, and it was declared that the judgment of said court should be final.
The commission was also required by said act to cause a complete roll of citizenship of each of said nations to be made within six months, and to add to said roll the names of citizens whose right might be conferred under the provisions of said act, and it was declared that the rolls so made should be the rolls of citizenship of said nations or tribes, subject to the determination of said United States courts.
The commission was further directed to file lists of members as finally approved by it with the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, "to remain there for use as the final judgment of the duly constituted authorities."
It was also required to make a roll of freedmen entitled to citizenship in said tribes and to include their names with the lists of members to be filed with the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
Under the Indian appropriation act approved June 7, 1897 (30 Stat., 83), said commission was directed to examine and report to Congress whether the Mississippi Choctaws were not entitled to all the rights of Choctaw citizenship, excepting the interest in the Choctaw annuities, under the treaties made with the United States.
The jurisdiction of the United States courts in the Indian Territory was further extended to all civil causes in law and equity thereafter instituted and all criminal causes for the punishment of any offense committed after January 1, 1898, by any person in the Indian Territory, and the jurisdiction of the United States commissioners under the existing laws was declared to extend to"all persons and property in said Territory."
The commission was directed to continue to exercise the authority theretofore conferred upon it by law to negotiate with the Five Civilized Tribes, with a proviso that "the rolls of citizenship" referred to in said act of June 10, 1896, "shall be construed to mean the last authenticated rolls of each tribe which have been approved by the council of the nation and the descendants of those appearing upon said rolls, and such additional names and their descendants as have been subsequently added, either by the council of said nation, the duly authorized courts thereof, or the commission, under the act of June 10,1896."
It was also authorized to investigate all other names upon such rolls for a period of six months after the passage of said act.
Additional legislation was made by the act of June 28, 1898 (30 Stat., 495), entitled, "An act for the protection of the people of the Indian Territory, and for other purposes," commonly called the "Curtis Act."
Prior thereto the commission had made an agreement with the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations on April 23, 1897, known as the "Atoka agreement," which, with certain amendments, was ratified by section 29 of said act and was subsequently duly ratified by the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations.
An agreement was also made by the commission with the representatives of the Creek Nation on September 28, 1897, which, as amended, was confirmed by section 30 of the Curtis Act, but the Creek Nation refused to ratify the same.
It was expressly provided in the agreement contained in section 29 of the Curtis Act that the tribal governments, as modified therein, should be continued until March 4, 1906, and it is stated that said stipulation was made in the belief that said governments, as modified, will prove so satisfactory that there will be no desire for further change "until the lands now occupied by the Five Civilized Tribes shall, in the opinion of Congress, be prepared for admission as a State to the Union, but this provision shall not be construed to be in any respect an abdication by Congress of power at any time to make needful rules and regulations respecting said tribes."
The representatives of the Seminole Nation made an agreement with the commission, which was duly ratified by the act of Congress approved July 1, 1898.
30 Stat., 567.)
That said commission shall continue to exercise all authority heretofore conferred on it by law.
But it shall not receive, consider, or make any record of any application of any person for enrollment as a member of any tribe in Indian Territory who has not been a recognized citizen thereof, and duly and lawfully enrolled or admitted as such, and its refusal of such applications shall be final when approved by the Secretary of the Interior: Provided, That any Mississippi Choctaw duly identified as such by the United States Commission to the Five Civilized Tribes shall have the right, at any time prior to the approval of the final rolls of the Choctaws and Chickasaws by the Secretary of the Interior, to make settlement within the Choctaw-Chickasaw country, and on proof of the fact of bona fide settlement may be enrolled by the said United States commission and by the Secretary of the Interior as Choctaws entitled to allotment.
The Indian appropriation act of July 1, 1898 (30 Stat., 591), reduced the number of members of the Commission to the Five Civilized Tribes to four, and declared that it should continue to exercise all authority theretofore conferred on it by law.
Said act also contained a provision allowing appeals from the United States courts in the Indian Territory to the Supreme Court of the United States, by either party, in all citizenship cases and in all cases between either of the Five Civilized Tribes and the United States involving the constitutionality or validity of any legislation affecting citizenship or the allotment of lands in the Indian Territory, under the rules and regulations governing appeals to said court in other cases.
Under the provisions of the Curtis Act the commission was required, among other things, to make correct rolls of citizenship of the members of said nations, including the freedmen, and, upon the completion of the roll of citizenship of any one of the nations, it was required to allot the exclusive use and occupancy of the surface of the land susceptible of allotment to the members appearing upon said roll, "giving to each, so far as possible, his fair and equal share thereof, considering the nature and fertility of the soil, location, and value of same."
By the terms of the agreement in section 29 of said act it was declared that all the lands within the Indian Territory belonging to the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations shall be allotted to the members of said tribe so as to give to each member, as far as possible, a fair and equal share thereof, considering the character and fertility of the soil and the location and value of the land, 'but the coal and asphalt "in or under the lands allotted" were reserved from allotment.
Appropriations have been made for the expenses of the commission from time to time, and its report for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1901, gives an exhaustive account of its work, the magnitude thereof, and the difficulties to be overcome in its execution.
The expenses and work of the commission have probably reached their maximum during the past fiscal year, and while a great deal has been accomplished in the matter of the preparation of the rolls and the allotment of the lands, yet there still remains much to be accomplished before the tribal governments shall finally be dissolved and the lands thereof "be prepared for admission as a State to the Union."
On March 18, 1900, an agreement was entered into with the representatives of the Creek Nation, which, with certain amendments, was ratified by the act of March 1, 1901 (31 Stat., 861), and said agreement as amended was ratified by the Creek council on May 25, 1901, with the exception of section 36 thereof, and the same was duly proclaimed on June 25, 1901.
The agreement entered into with the representatives of the Cherokee Nation on April 9, 1900, as amended was ratified by the act of March 1, 1901 (31 Stat., 848), but was defeated by the Cherokee Nation on April 29, 1901.
Afterwards the Cherokee council passed an act providing for the appointment of another commission to further negotiate with the Commission to the Five Civilized Tribes, which act, on account of the previous action of the Cherokee Nation, was sent to the President with an adverse recommendation and was disapproved by him on June 11, 1901.
The agreement, contained in section 29 of the Curtis Act, with the Choctaws and Chickasaws has been found to be imperfect and ambiguous and does not cover all the matters which should be provided for by law.
On February 7, 1901, the commission entered into an agreement with the representatives of said nations for the purpose of fixing a date after which no names should be added to the rolls of the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations, and on February 23, 1901, the original agreement and an amended agreement were submitted to Congress, which, with departmental letter submitting the same, are contained in House Document No. 495, Fifty-sixth Congress, second session, but said agreement was not confirmed by Congress.
On August 5, 1901, the Department authorized the commission to enter into another agreement with the representatives of said nations looking to the closing of the rolls and relating to other matters necessary to a final adjudication of the private and public interests.
Authority has also been given to said commission to enter into a supplemental agreement with the Creek Nation with a view to remedying certain defects found in the agreement ratified on May 25, 1901, and it is believed that the agreements making the necessary changes relative to the affairs of said nations will soon be completed.
Nation, and making the necessary surveys of the lands of the several tribes.
Although the work of enrolling citizens has been somewhat delayed, the commission reports that commendable progress has been made in the Creek and Cherokee nations.
In the Creek Nation it has been found impossible to close the rolls until a date shall be fixed after which the children born to parents who are citizens of the nation should not be added,and also until further provision is made regulating the disposition of the lands of citizens ertitled to enrollment who shall have died before allotment is made.
It appears that practically all the citizens of the Creek Nation whose names are found upon the last authenticated rolls of that tribe are listed for enrollment, and it is now only required to ascertain the names of those to be stricken from and those to be added to the rolls on account of births and deaths under the ratified agreement above referred to.
Since April, 1899, when applications were received for preliminary allotments by the Creeks, 10,617 persons have made application to select allotments, of which number 9,557 have received preliminary allotments of 160 acres and 1,060 have made partial selections; and the selections up to and including June 30, 1901, include an area of 1,626,917 acres.
It appears that applications for enrollment as citizens of the Cherokee Nation, including Indians and freedmen, have been heard by the commission during the past year, and that progress has been necessarily slow on account of the large number of applicants and witnesses and the great volume of testimony which must be received and considered.
Reference is made by the commission to the fact that in the case of the Cherokee freedmen the testimony concerning their right to enrollment covers a period of forty years.
Concerning the enrollment of the Choctaws and Chickasaws, less progress has been made during the past year than at any other time previous.
The commission states that this is due to the fact that no time has been fixed for the closing of the rolls of those tribes, and until that is done the names of children born to citizens must be added and the names of citizens who have died must be stricken from the records of the commission; that, with the exception of the determination of the claims of Mississippi Choctaws, the final rolls of Choctaw citizens, whether by blood, intermarriage, or adoption, can be completed within a comparatively short time from the date fixed for closing the rolls.
It has been very difficult to identify the Mississippi Choctaws, as required by section 21 of the Curtis Act, because more than seventy years have passed since the date of the treaty of September 27, 1830.
It is therefore recommended that legislative action be taken by Congress which will more accurately define the persons who may be entitled to the benefits under said treaty and also to prescribe more definitely the method and manner of identifying such persons.
The suggestion is made that until this be done the rolls of the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations can not be finally closed.
The classification of the lands and the estimation of timber in the Indian Territory have been completed by the commission during the past fiscal year, on account of which the employees in the field have been reduced some 230, thereby lessening salaries and expenses by nearly $30,000 per month.
The lands of the several tribes have been divided according to classes or grades, and the valuations of the same will be made by the commission, when the location and proximity of the lands to market will also be taken into consideration.
The commission has allotted nearly all of the lands in the Seminole Nation, giving to each Seminole lands valued approximately at $300.
The commission has recommended reservations for town-site purposes, under the provisions of the act of May 31, 1900, at 21 towns in the Creek Nation, along certain railways, and at 10 towns in the Chickasaw Nation.
Since the magnitude of the work to be done by the Government in the Indian Territory has been made known to the public less dissatisfaction has been shown on account of the apparently slow progress made by the commission.
Agreements have been made with all of the tribes, and the same have been ratified, except by the Cherokees, and it is believed that the necessary supplemental agreements will be speedily made and ratified, so that the work of the commission can be fully completed as soon as possible consistent with economy and efficiency.
The validity of the Curtis Act has been affirmed by the judicial tribunals, notably in the case of Maxey v. Wright (54 S. W. Rep., 807), and by the Supreme Court in Stephens v. The Cherokee Nation (174 U. S., 445).
The legislation concerning the Dawes Commission was intended to create and direct its administration through the Department of the Interior, so that as speedily as possible the unsatisfactory condition of affairs among the Five Civilized Tribes should be changed, and that a complete enrollment of the members of each tribe should be made and its property distributed upon a basis of equal value to the duly recognized members of the tribe.
The Department fully recognizes the difficulties that have been met, on account of which the commission has not yet accomplished the purpose of Congress as indicated in said legislation, and it is evident that according to the rate of progress hitherto made it will be many years before the work can be completed.
It has also been demonstrated that a large number of persons, including white men and Indians, will in the future, as in the past, seek to prevent an early and final settlement of the affairs of said nations, in order to advance their own political, personal, and financial interests.
The first commission was created in 1893, and, with certain changes, has continued for nearly nine years, during which time its total expenses have been $842,027.51, or an average per annum of $93,558.61, being at the rate of $9.96 per head, men, women, and children, of the number of Indian citizens, including freedmen, estimated to be 84,507.
As heretofore stated, the rolls of only one nation, viz, the Seminole, have been approved, and their lands have not yet been entirely allotted.
The enrollment of the four remaining tribes has not been completed, and the time can not be fixed with any degree of certainty when such enrollment will be finished.
While the lands of said tribes have been classified, yet the value of each tract has not been given, and this must be done before the lands can be allotted to the members upon a basis of value.
The requirement that the lands must be allotted upon the basis of value, in my judgment, is entirely impracticable, for the reason that the determination of said value must necessarily be from the indications of the surface without any knowledge of or regard for the mineral which may be hidden beneath the surface.
It is a well-known fact that the Indians themselves prefer, because of the association and other influences, lands of their own selection, even though the same shall be of unequal value.
There is a vast amount of labor yet to be performed by the commission in investigating the claims of applicants for enrollment and in equalizing the value of the lands already classified, all of which will require a great deal of work in the field and at the offices of the commission, and this can not possibly be accomplished within a reasonable time by the present members of the commission, and each year's delay only increases the temptation which the continuation of the existing state of affairs will offer to the unscrupulous speculator who fully realizes the opportunities of the prize thus offered.
Therefore in order to accomplish the real purpose of the act creating the Dawes Commission, namely, the complete enrollment of the legal members of said tribes, and the proper distribution of their assets, I urgently recommend that said commission be increased by four members; that a modification be made of the law which requires the lands to be distributed upon a basis of equalized valuation, and that a definite period be fixed for the completion of all the work pertaining to the allotment of lands, etc., among the Indians in the Territory.
The commission's report is hereto appended, page 185, marked "Exhibit A."
The third annual report of the United States Indian inspector for the Indian Territory, Mr. J. George Wright, gives in detail the work accomplished under his supervision during the past fiscal year.
On August 17, 1898, said inspector was directed to establish his headquarters at Muscogee and to assume a general supervision over the affairs of the Union Agency and such other matters requiring action by the Department, except those requiring the action of the Commission to the Five Civilized Tribes.
The superintendent of schools, the revenue inspectors, and the town-site commissions report through the inspector, who makes such recommendations as he deems proper to the Department through the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
The report of the inspector shows that nothing has arisen in the Seminole Nation requiring special attention from him except some investigations concerning the illegal grazing and holding of cattle within its limits by noncitizens.
Mr. Charles D. Carter was appointed trustee for the Chickasaw Nation, in place of Mr. L. C. Burris, whose term had expired.
Mr. Luke W. Bryan, the mine inspector for the Indian Territory, has rendered the inspector valuable assistance during the past year.
Attention is called to the fact that on account of the requirements in the present form of lease that applicants must furnish satisfactory evidence of good faith, financial ability, and experience in mining operations, the number of applications for speculative purposes has largely decreased during the past year.
Two of said leases have been canceled on account of the failure of the lessees to profitably operate their leases.
Kansas and Texas Coal Company.
Southwestern Coal and Improvement Company.
Hailey Coal and Mining Company.
Turkey Creek Coal Company.
Capital Coal and Mining Company.
J. B. McDougall.
M. Perona.
R. Sarlls.
Perry Brothers.
Caston Coal Company.
A limited amount of coal has been mined for local consumption by some other small operators under informal permits granted by direction of the Department.
The royalty of 8 cents per ton on 2,000 pounds mine run, fixed by the Department to take effect March 1, 1900, has not been changed during the past year, and royalties have been collected at that rate.
No change has been made in the rate of royalty on asphaltum, which is 60 cents per ton on refined and 10 cents per ton on crude.
One or two other companies claiming to be operating under tribal charters and contracts have mined to a very limited extent during the past year.
Attention is also called to the fact that the Department has declined to approve any further applications for mining asphalt, on account of the undeveloped state of the asphalt industry, and has given authority to the inspector to grant informal permits to parties desiring to mine asphalt, thereby encouraging competition and not limiting the mining to any particular individual or company.
The amount of royalty from coal is reported to be $198,449.35 and from asphalt $1,214.20, or a total of $199,663.55.
It appears that there are now 79 approved coal leases in effect and 6 asphalt leases, making a total of 85, and that there are 10 operators still mining under national and tribal contracts.
The royalties derived from coal and asphalt in the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations are placed to the credit of said tribes in their proportionate shares, to be used for the education of the children of Indian blood of the members of the tribes, as shall be necessary.
No mineral leases have been made for lands in the Creek Nation under the provisions of the Curtis Act, but informal permits have been granted to several parties to strip coal in small quantities on the prospective allotments selected by Indians with their consent, and the coal royalty collected at the rate of 8 cents per ton amounted during the fiscal year to $4,128.22, showing an increase of $1,104.95 over the amount collected for the previous year, which was $3,023.27.
Since the ratification of the recent agreement with the Creek Nation all coal permits theretofore issued in the Creek Nation have been revoked.
No application for mineral lease in the Cherokee Nation has been received or approved during the past year; but certain informal permits have been granted to mine coal in the Cherokee Nation the same as in the Creek Nation, and the amount of royalty, at 8 cents per ton, collected is $6,326.87, being an increase of $2,470.86 over the amount paid during the previous year, which was $3,856.01.
Satisfactory progress has been made in the surveying and laying out of town sites under the provisions of the Curtis Act, and also the Indian appropriation act of May 31, 1900 (31 Stat., 221), which contains the provision that "the Secretary of the Interior is hereby authorized, under rules and regulations to be prescribed by him, to survey, lay out, and plat into town lots, streets, alleys, and parks the sites of such towns and villages in the Choctaw, Chickasaw, Creek, and Cherokee nations as may at that time have a population of two hundred or more, in such manner as will best subserve the then present needs and the reasonable prospective growth of such towns."
There are also certain other provisions in said act authorizing the Secretary of the Interior, upon the recommendation of the Commission to the Five Civilized Tribes, to set aside new town sites along the lines of railroads which shall be constructed or in process of construction through the Territory, and also to authorize the surveying and platting of town sites by contract, and to grant the permission to the authorities of any town to survey and plat its own town site at the expense of the town, subject to the supervision and approval of the Department.
Under said provisions relative to reserving land for town-site purposes along the lines of railroads the Department has segregated during the year town sites at 8 stations in the Creek Nation and 10 in the Chickasaw Nation, along the line of the St. Louis, Oklahoma and Southern Railway, which extends from Sapulpa, Creek Nation, to Denison, Tex.
The names of the towns in the various nations whose exterior limits have been established are given, showing 25 in the Choctaw Nation, 42 in the Chickasaw Nation, 8 in the Creek Nation, and 29 in the Cherokee Nation, and one town in each of the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations whose exterior limits are yet to be fixed.
The cost of surveying and platting town sites has been, on an average, about $3.50 per acre, and the expense per acre in the future will probably be less on account of the experience which the surveying parties have had.
The efforts on the part of towns to survey and plat their own town sites, under the provisions of the act of May 31, 1900, have not been satisfactory, and the work has had to be done over again by the Government officers; the plats of only four towns in the Choctaw Nation made by the town-site authorities have been approved by the Department.
Attention is called to the difficulty of collecting the tribal revenues of the respective nations on account of the refusal of the noncitizens to pay the taxes in accordance with the tribal laws and the regulations of this Department.
The revenues of the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations are collected by the tribal authorities, except the royalties on coal and asphalt and for timber cut for railroads and mines.
The Department has been requested by the chief executives of said nations from time to time to remove persons refusing to pay the tribal taxes under the provisions of sections 2147 to 2150, inclusive, Revised Statutes, and such persons have been removed.
The revenues in the Creek Nation are collected and disbursed by the United States authorities, and the right to collect such taxes has been sustained by the judicial tribunals of the Territory and the United States court of appeals in the case of Maxey v. Wright (54 S. W. Reporter, 807).
The total amount of revenue collected from all sources in the Creek Nation during the past year is $30,827.60.
The expenses of the United States revenue inspector, whichare paid from said sum, were$4,230.80, and exchange was $52.32, leaving $26,544.46 to the credit of the nation.
The comparative statement furnished shows a material increase in the net amount to the credit of the nation.
The recent agreement with the Creeks, ratified on May 25, 1901, does not change the tribal tax laws of said nation except that no permit tax is required from noncitizens for the privilege of renting lands for agricultural purposes, nor is a tax required upon cattle regularly grazed by Creek citizens upon their selections.
In the Cherokee Nation no revenue has been collected from Cherokee citizens carrying on a mercantile business in said nation on account of the decision in the United States court enjoining the officials from collecting said tax.
The total amount of revenue collected for the Cherokee Nation is $19,392.65; the expenses of the revenue inspector for said nation, which are also paid from the amount collected, are $4,038.34, which, with $37.13 paid for exchange, leaves a net balance of $15,317.18 to the credit of the nation, which is a net increase of $1,695.14 over the amount collected for the previous year.
Attention is called to the report of Mr. John D. Benedict, superintendent of schools in said Territory, and also to the reports of the supervisors for the Choctaw, Cherokee, and Creek nations, submitted with his report.
According to the report of the superintendent of schools, the schools have been maintained in the Choctaw Nation satisfactorily during the past year, and the boarding schools will compare favorably with the average high school in the States; that much progress has been made in manual training and industrial work, and the enlarged attendance in the boarding and neighborhood schools shows the increased interest in educational matters.
There are 5 boarding schools or academies in the Choctaw Nation, 2 of which are orphan academies, whose pupils remain the entire year.
The term is nine months, and there have been enrolled 525 pupils, with an average attendance of 430 and a cost of $58,469.84, or $135.98 per capita.
For the same time there were 161 neighborhood or day schools, with 2,879 pupils, average attendance of 1,924 and a total cost of $34,391.02, or $17.87 per capita.
Besides said day schools, 305 Choctaw pupils attended day schools in the Chickasaw Nation, for whom teachers were paid $2 per month, making a total expenditure for Choctaw pupils residing in the Chickasaw Nation of $3,147.70, showing a total cost of $96,008.56; whole number of pupils, 3,709; average attendance, 2,555 in the Choctaw Nation.
In the Chickasaw Nation the schools have been maintained from the funds other than the royalties on coal and asphalt.
On April 11, 1901, an agreement was made with the tribal authorities whereby the funds that have accrued from the royalties on coal and asphalt should be applied to the indebtedness incurred on account of the support of the schools.
No figures are given of the cost of the schools of the Chickasaw Nation during the past fiscal year, the number of pupils, nor the average attendance.
It is believed, however, that under the agreement above referred to, the proper supervision will be exercised over the appointment of teachers and the disbursement of funds, and the schools will become more efficient in the future.
During the past year the Creek Nation has supported 9 boarding schools, 6 for Indian children and 3 for children of freedmen; 64 neighborhood schools, 41 for Indian and 23 for colored children.
In the 9 boarding schools there were 591 pupils; average attendance, 450; total cost, $50,470.40, or $112.16 per capita.
In the neighborhood schools there were enrolled 2,070 pupils, an average attendance of 957 and a total cost of $17,788.28, or $18.58 per capita, making a total enrollment of 2,661 pupils, average attendance of 1,407, and total cost of $68,258.68.
There have been in the Cherokee Nation during the past year 3 boarding schools and 1 colored high school.
The number of pupils has been 686; average attendance, 455; total cost, $48,275, or $106.10 per capita.
During seven months of the year there have been 124 neighborhood or day schools with 4,153 pupils, average attendance of 2,356, cost $34,460, or $14.63 per capita, making the whole number of pupils 4,839, average attendance 2,811, and the whole cost $82,735.
Attention is also called to the provision of the agreement with the Creek Nation ratified by act of March 1, 1901, and duly proclaimed to be in effect, subject to section 36 thereof, by the proclamation of the President dated June 25, 1901.
Special reference is made to the town-site provisions of said act, and it is stated that the towns of Muscogee and Wagoner were being disposed of in accordance with the terms of said agreement.
Attention is also called to section 42 of the agreement excepting the general appropriation acts for the necessary incidental and salaried expenses of the Creek Nation from the requirement relative to the approval of the acts of the nation by the President.
A list is given of the contracts under the regulations promulgated in accordance with the provisions of the act approved June 6, 1900 (31 Stat., 660), entitled “"An act to provide for the use of timber and stone for domestic and industrial purposes in the Indian Territory," and under said regulations Indian citizens are permitted, when in possession of their pro rata share of the lands of the tribe or prospective allotment, to sell and dispose of timber cut in such clearing, as stove wood or cord wood, to any person requiring same for domestic purposes in said Territory when such timber is cut in clearing the land for cultivation in good faith.
The cutting of timber under said regulations has been restricted by the Department to timber required for props and caps for mines, and for ties, bridge timber, and piling for railroads.
These regulations are still in force except as to the allotted lands in the Creek Nation, upon which the cutting of timber is regulated by section 38 of said agreement with the nation.
The total amount of receipts is shown by the report of the Indian agent to be $286,514.02, being an increase over the amount collected the previous year of $89,959.80.
It is recommended that legislative action be had permitting the withdrawal of a sufficient amount of the funds of the nation to take up said indebtedness, which draws interest at 6 per cent, while the interest paid to the nation by the Government is only 5 per cent.
It appears that the interest from the funds of the Creek Nation, together with the revenues collected for its benefit, are sufficient to pay the current expenses of its tribal government.
Reference is made to the report of the Indian agent concerning the adjudication of the Chickasaw incompetent claims under the provision of said Indian appropriation act of May 31, 1900.
There have been filed in his office 243 claims, aggregating in amount the sum of $180,000.
He has reported adversely upon all of said claims on account of the failure of the applicants to furnish satisfactory proof in support of their applications, and his recommendations have been confirmed by the Department.
Attention is called to the so-called "Snake uprising"of certain fullblood Creek Indians, known as the Snake Band, during the winter of 1900-1901.
Said band, of which Chitto Harjo was the leader, elected a principal chief and other tribal officers and attempted to establish a Creek tribal government in opposition to the one recognized by the United States.
On account of the hostile attitude of said Indians warrants were issued for their arrest, and a troop of United States cavalry was ordered to assist the civil authorities in the execution of said warrants.
The Indians were arraigned before the United States court in Muscogee and plead guilty to the charge of conspiracy, and upon taking oath to obey the laws of the United States and to recognize the established government of the Creek Nation and also to keep the peace they were paroled by the court during good behavior.
This action caused said organization to disband and no further trouble from said Indians is apprehended.
Telephone and telegraph lines have been established in the Indian Territory, the names of which are set out in a list hereinbefore inserted.
The most necessary and important work to be done in the Indian Territory at the present time by the Government is to allot the lands in severalty to the citizens of the several tribes, so as to finally wind up their affairs.
It is suggested that there should be additional legislation, if necessary, providing for a simpler manner of allotments of the lands than that under existing agreements with the several tribes.
A recommendation is renewed relative to the payment of the outstanding indebtedness of the Cherokee Nation by withdrawing from the United States Treasury a sufficient amount of their funds for that purpose.
It is suggested that 30 feet along each side of section lines be reserved from allotment for roads in the Indian Territory.
Under the provisions of the recent agreement with the Creek Indians the Indian agent is required to remove objectionable persons from allotments and to place allottees in possession of their land.
It is recommended that the compensation of the Indian policemen be fixed at $75 per month for the captain and $50 per month for the privates, together with their necessary traveling expenses.
It is shown that the relations between the tribal authorities and the Department are more satisfactory than heretofore, especially where conferences have been had with the executives of the nations by the officials of the Department.
Provision was made in the Indian appropriation act approved March 3, 1901 (31 Stat., 1058), making an appropriation of $5,000 to enable the Secretary of the Interior to investigate and report to Congress at its next session whether it is practicable to provide a system of taxation of personal property, occupations, franchises, etc., in the Indian Territory sufficient for maintaining a system of free schools for all the children of said Territory.
A special agent has been appointed to secure the necessary information, and a report to Congress will be made as soon as the same is obtained.
THE CROw, FLATHEAD, ETC., CoMMISSION was engaged negotiating with the Yakima and Flathead Indians during a portion of the past fiscal year, but failed to conclude agreements with them.
During the remainder of that year a part of the commission was engaged in special work in the field, under the provisions of the act of June 6, 1900 (31 Stat., 302), which required the members of the commission to perform such duties as the Secretary of the Interior might direct.
During its existence, about five years, this commission has negotiated three agreements with Indian tribes—one each with the Uinta Utes, Crows, and the Indians on the Fort Hall Reservation—the latter alone having been ratified by Congress, leaving the others pending before that body.
This commission, originally created by the act of March 3, 1893 (27 Stat., 633), is still engaged in the sale of the allotted and common or tribal lands of the Puyallup Indians.
More sales were made during the last than in any previous year.
A reappraisement of some of the common lands has been authorized, it appearing that the original valuation was too low.
An agreement with the Indians of this reservation was concluded June 27, 1901, by which they cede the surplus lands, 25,791 acres, for $28,000 in cash, the shares of adults to be paid within one hundred and twenty days after ratification of the agreement and the shares of minors as they arrive at the age of 18 years.
On May 6, 1901, an agreement was concluded with the Indians of this reservation, they having indicated their desire to cede certain of their surplus lands, by which 56,560 acres were acquired for a consideration of $70,700, to be expended in young cattle for issue to the Indians and in the construction of a fence around the reserve.
That portion of the surplus lands of this reservation lying in Gregory County, S. Dak., was ceded by the Rosebud Indians by an agreement dated September 14, 1901, the Government acquiring 416,000 acres, for which $1,040,000 was agreed to be paid, part in cash, in installments, and the remainder to be expended for stock cattle for issue to the Indians of the reservation.
These agreements, all of which were negotiated through an Indian inspector, under the provisions of the act of March 31, 1901 (31 Stats.
1077), will be submitted to Congress, in accordance with the requirements of that act.
An agreement was concluded by an Indian inspector with these Indians in 1900 in which provision was made for compensating them for certain lands in dispute, which was submitted to Congress for its action.
Discrepancy was found therein in describing the lands ceded, and it was deemed necessary that the same should be resubmitted to the Indians to be corrected.
This has been done and a new agreement obtained, which will be transmitted to Congress at its next session.
By this agreement the Government acquires title to 621,824 acres of land which it has practically had possession of for many years owing to an alleged erroneous survey, for which the Indians are to receive a gross sum of $537,007.20, a portion of which is to be placed to their credit in the Treasury at 5 per cent interest, and the balance to be paid in cash and expended for their benefit.
The claim for compensation for lands excluded from the Yakima Reservation by alleged erroneous survey, involving some 293,837 acres, is still pending, the Indians having refused to negotiate with an Indian inspector who was sent there for the purpose during the present year.
These investigations will be continued until information of the character contemplated by the law shall have been obtained of all reservations.
Since my last annual report conveyances have been approved by the Department for 920.68 acres of Peoria lands, at a valuation of $14,868, and 700 acres of Miami lands, valued at $7,820.
Conveyances for 24,371.65 acres of Citizen Potawatomi Indian lands, having a value of $122,945.18, and for 4,309.61 acres of Absentee Shawnee lands, valued at $36,833.88, were approved by the Department during the same period.
Lands belonging to Indians in Michigan to the extent of 972.14 acres, valued at $5,135, were sold and conveyances therefor approved by the Department during the past year.
The claimS of white settlers on that reservation for certain lands and improvements provided for by act of Congress approved May 31, 1900 (31 Stat., 221), have been paid, with one exception, and the settlers have removed from the reservation.
In that case the settler has been unable to produce a clear title, consequently the matter is still pending.
Another settler has filed a claim for $2,400 in addition to $2,100 which was paid him upon a quitclaim deed for his land and improvements.
This claim has not been disposed of.
The heads of 46 Indian families east of Tongue River were paid for their improvements as provided by the aforesaid act.
By a recent survey of the northern boundary of the reservation 7 additional settlers have been found within its limits.
They are without title to the land they occupy and their improvements are of small value, being estimated at only $2,965.
An appropriation to pay the same was asked from the last Congress, but no action was taken by that body.
The attention of Congress will again be called to the matter.
The appraisement of the improvements of Indians on the ceded lands of the Fort Hall Reservation, who elected to remove therefrom to the diminished reserve, provided by the act of June 6, 1900 (31 Stat., 672), was completed during the year, and allotments were made to Indians who had located and decided to remain on the ceded lands.
The total appraised value of the improvements is $5,851.50, belonging to 23 Indian heads of families, and 7,177.17 acres were allotted to 90 allottees.
In my last annual report I took occasion to state that the results obtained from the administration of the act of January 14, 1889, under the provisions of which the Chippewa Indians in Minnesota ceded the greater portion of the reservations occupied by them (25 Stat., 642), had not been satisfactory to the Department, as the system devised under said act and subsequent legislation had failed to secure to the Indians the largest benefit from the sale of the pine and agricultural lands.
I then expressed the intention at the earliest date practicable to bring the matter more fully to the attention of Congress and to suggest remedies such as, in my judgment, might be necessary to better protect the interests of the Chippewa Indians.
Certain members of the Minnesota delegation in Congress, who were well informed of the necessity for some modification of existing law, and the Commissioners of Indian Affairs and the General Land Office, who recognized the great need for further legislation, conferred with the Department on the subject, whereupon a draft of proposed legislation was prepared which authorized the sale of all merchantable pine timber, "green or growing or dead, standing or fallen," on said ceded lands, upon certain stated conditions which seemed to meet the views of all interested in the.
Action on both the bills named and the substitute measure failed, and consequently no relief has been afforded in these matters.
Under the conditions, the existing legislation failing to properly guard or conserve the best interests of the Indians, which are so largely involved in the sale of the lands and the timber thereon, the proceeds of the lands under the law going to their credit in the Treasury as a permanent fund, I have considered it a duty to them to further postpone all action until Congress shall provide some measure for their relief whereby the greatest possible benefit may be derived from the sale of their lands.
These lands have been occupied by the Zunis for more than two hundred years.
All the title papers were accidentally destroyed by a fire a few years ago.
A bill to confirm title to them was introduced in Congress February 16, 1900 (H. R. 8635), but failed to become a law.
The matter is urgently recommended to the favor of Congress.
The claimants or heirs to funds derived from the sale of the allotments of certain deceased Chippewas and Munsees, sold under the provisions of the act of June 7, 1897 (30 Stat., 92), having been finally ascertained and a schedule thereof prepared, payment will soon be made.
The surplus lands belonging to these Indians having been sold by the General Land Office, the proceeds will be distributed per capita among 54 claimants, who are members of the tribe but never received allotments, when they shall severally reach the age of 21 years.
In the meantime the fund remains in the Treasury of the United States.
A plan for the allotment of the common lands of these Indians was submitted to Congress on February 1, 1901, with favorable recommendation and urgent request for speedy action.
It is hoped that this matter will be favorably considered by the next Congress.
There has been no change in the condition or status of the Seminole Indians in Florida since the date of my last annual report.
At that date 23,061.72 acres of land had been purchased for them, at a cost of $13,355.52.
By a decree of the Supreme Court of the United States, an adverse decision was rendered on a claim of some Mission Indians to retain occupancy of a tract in southern California, known as Warners Ranch or Agua Caliente.
The effect thereof will be to render homeless about 200 Indians who claim to have held these lands for generations.
In the meantime, pending action by the next Congress, and as a temporary expedient, certain lands in the vicinity were withdrawn from settlement and entry for the use of the Indians.
It has since been ascertained that the lands withdrawn are practically worthless, and that such as might be available would support but a few families.
Therefore, an Indian inspector is under orders to proceed to California to endeavor to locate and arrange to secure suitable lands for these Indians.
WENATCHIE INDIANS, WASHINGTON—The removal of these Indians to the Colville Reservation failed because the undertaking proved to be greater than anticipated, and consequently a more expensive one.
The matter will be brought to the attention of the next Congress.
Congress, by act approved March 3, 1901 (31 Stat., 1077), provided that not exceeding $10,000 might be used by the Secretary of the Interior to pay the "expenses necessary in ascertaining the beneficiaries" of the judgment of the Court of Claims on the claim of said Indians for lands arising under the treaty of Buffalo Creek of January 15, 1838, authority being given to use not exceeding the sum named out of the amount appropriated by the act of February 19, 1900, to pay said judgment.
Consequently, prompt steps were taken by the Department with the view of "ascertaining the beneficiaries," so that distribution of said fund might be made at the earliest possible date.
Notice has been given to claimants by public advertisement in a number of newspapers, beginning September 1 last, and to continue to November 30 next, when the rolls will be closed.
It may be said that the rolls are in a formative state.
All applications will be duly considered and the rights of applicants determined, and from these the rolls prepared as soon thereafter as possible and payment of the fund made to those found entitled.
The Work of many of the pupils of both the reservation and non-reservation as well as day schools, was placed on exhibition at Buffalo, and showed decided improvement over that furnished for previous expositions.
The custom of allowing Indians to take part in shows and exhibitions has been practically discontinued, but one permit for the purpose, the case being an exceptional one, having been granted during more than two years past.
The Department has considered it a degradation of the Indian to permit him to be used for exhibition purposes, and a means of perpetuating habits that large sums of money are annually being spent to eradicate.
In September last application was made to the Department for a permit to authorize a small delegation of Indians from the Fort Peck Agency, Mont., to exhibit the products of their farms and display the work of the agency boarding school at a fair to be held later at Glendive, Mont., under the auspices of the Dawson County Fair Association.
The apparent desire to become exhibitors instead of exhibits was regarded as highly commendable and as showing a degree of selfrespect in sharp contrast with the other phase that was exceedingly gratifying to the Department, and leads to the hope that others will emulate the desire of these Indians to show in a public manner the products of their labor and industry.
Permission was gladly and promptly given for the Indians to take part in the fair as exhibitors under proper safeguards.
In accordance with this provision of law, steps were taken by the Department on March 14, 1901, to obtain from the aforesaid traders complete statements of all outstanding accounts against the Osage Indians, with necessary data to show the basis for their claims and proofs to establish the same.
I am informally advised by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs that the said traders have submitted their claims against the Indians to his office, and that the same are undergoing examination preliminary to their transmission to the Department for its examination and determination under the law.
Twenty-two tracts of land, from one-half acre to 160 acres in size, on nine reservations, were set apart during the year for educational and religious work among the Indians.
Instructions were issued during the last fiscal year designed to regulate or legalize marriages between Indians and between Indians and whites, and for keeping registers of licenses and marriages at Indian agencies, from which much good is hoped.
There were disposed of during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1901, public lands aggregating 15,562,796.30 acres, classified as follows: Cash sales, 1,301,668.94 acres; miscellaneous entries, embracing homesteads, land warrants, scrip locations, State selections, swamp lands, railroad and wagon road selections, Indian allotments, etc., 14,151,780.34 acres, and Indian lands, 109,347.02 acres, showing an increase of 2,108,908.34 acres as compared with the aggregate disposals for the preceding fiscal year.
The total cash receipts during the fiscal year from various sources, including disposal of public land, $4,307,437.15, and Indian land, $585,661.27; from depredations on public lands, $36,471.83; from sales of timber on forest reserves, $25,305.95; from sales of Government property, $597.78, and for furnishing copies of records and plats, $16,686.81; aggregate, $4,972,160.79, an increase of $592,402.69 over the preceding fiscal year.
The total expenses of district land offices for salaries and commissions of registers and receivers, incidental expenses, and expenses of depositing public moneys during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1901, were $773,617.99, an increase, as compared with the fiscal year ended June 30, 1900, of $46,036.01.
The net surplus remaining in the Treasury at the end of the fiscal year, after deducting from the total cash receipts the entire amount expended for the administration of the public-land and forestry systems, equaled $3,158,441.67, an increase over the surplus remaining at the end of the preceding fiscal year of $357,845.30.
Attention is also directed to the fact that the cash receipts from depredations on the public lands, compromises, fines, etc., amounted, during the fiscal year, to $261,573.84, an increase over the preceding fiscal year of $25,538.59.
The total area of the public lands may be stated to be approximately 1,809,539,840 acres, of which 914,096,974 acres are undisposed of, 147,356,902 acres have been reserved for various purposes, and 748,085,964 acres have been appropriated.
Forty-two thousand two hundred and thirty-seven patents for agricultural lands were issued during the fiscal year, containing approximately 6,757,920 acres, an increase of 12,689 in number and 2,030,240 in acreage over the previous year.
Of mineral and mill-site patents 1,388 were issued, embracing an area of 50,852.458 acres, a decrease from the former year of 27 patents and an increase of 8,459.934 acres.
One hundred and four coal patents were issued, embracing 12,060.87 acres, an increase over the previous year of 35 patents and 2,911.71 acres.
During the fiscal year there have been certified or patented on account of railroad grants 2,470,804.55 acres, as against an area patented during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1900, of 1,277,572.68 acres, an increase of 1,193,231.87 acres.
There were patented under wagon-road grants 165,547.18 acres, an increase of 104,045.66 acres over the preceding year.
AdJusTmENTs.
The report of the Commissioner shows that material progress has been made in the examinations necessary to the adjustment of railroad land grants, including the administration of the acts of July 1, 1898 (30 Stat., 597–620), March 2, 1899 (30 Stat., 994), and March 2, 1901 (31 Stat., 950), relating to grants to the Northern Pacific Railroad Company.
A detailed statement of the progress made in the adjustment of these grants will be found at page 72 of said report.
There were patented as swamp land in place 215,963.86 acres, and as swamp-land indemnity lands 3,239.83 acres, a total of 219,203.69 acres, an increase over the amount patented during the last fiscal year of 119,930.70 acres.
School and other lands were selected and certified during the year under their several grants to the various States and Territories to the amount of 1,243,519.92 acres, an increase of 471,310.47 acres over the preceding year.
Patents of this claSS Were issued during the year to the amount of 448,536.40 acres, an increase over the preceding fiscal year of 106,005.14 acres.
The total net increase in lands patented over the preceding fiscal year is 4,036,135.48 acres.
By section 4 of the act of August 18, 1894 (28 Stat., 372–422), as amended by the act of June 11, 1896 (29 Stat., 413–434), and act of March 3, 1901 (31 Stat., 1133–1188), provision is inade for the donation to each of the desert-land States of not more than 1,000,000 acres of such lands.
Under these acts two patents were issued to the State of Wyoming, aggregating 7,305.75 acres.
Lists were approved as follows: State of Idaho, one, 6,528.05 acres; State of Wyoming, one, aggregating 77,198.76 acres.
Under the provisions of the acts of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat., 1095), and May 14, 1898 (30 Stat., 409), three nonmineral entries for lands in Alaska have been patented during the last fiscal year.
Under the act of January 13, 1897 (29 Stat., 484), the number of declaratory statements on hand at the beginning of the fiscal year was 9,563.
There were received during the year 4,137 reservoir declaratory statements, making the total pending for action 13,700.
Of this number, 4,104 were acted upon during the year, 3,979 of which were canceled or relinquished and the remainder, 125, were found to be in proper form and await further action under the law by the declarants.
There were, accordingly, pending for action at the end of the fiscal year 9,596.
Under the act of March 3, 1875 (18 Stat., 482), providing for rights of way over public lands, the act of May 14, 1898 (30 Stat., 409), providing for rights of way in Alaska, and various special acts, 38 articles of incorporation were accepted, 478 maps of locations of railroads were received during the year, of which 118 were approved, 14 filed (not requiring approval); 4 were pending at the end of the fiscal year before the Secretary of the Interior, and 316 had been otherwise disposed of, a few of which were rejected and the rest returned for correction.
Under the provisions of sections 18 to 21, inclusive, of the act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat., 1095), as amended by section 2 of the act of May 11, 1898 (30 Stat., 404), 40 rights of way have been approved during the year for canals and reservoirs.
Three hundred and twenty-four maps of the line or route of canals or sites for reservoirs were presented during the year; 60 were approved; 16 were filed which did not require approval; 191 were otherwise disposed of, being principally returned for correction, making, with the 36 pending at the beginning of the year, a total of 93 awaiting action by the Commissioner or Secretary.
Under the provisions of the tram-road act of January 21, 1895 (28 Stat., 635), as amended by section 1 of the act of May 11, 1898 (30 Stat., 404), 5 applications for permission to use rights of way have been approved during the past fiscal year.
Twenty maps were on hand for action during that time, of which 6'were approved and 12 were otherwise disposed of, most of them having been returned for correction.
Under the act of May 14, 1896 (29 Stat., 120), providing for permission to use rights of way for electrical purposes, 3 applications were approved during the past year.
There were pending during the year for action 23 maps, of which 3 were approved and 13 otherwise disposed of, most of them having been returned for correction.
In my reports for last year and the year before it was pointed out that the two acts above mentioned relating to right of way for canals, reservoirs, etc., together with four other acts relating to rights of way for various purposes over the public lands and reservations of the United States, constitute a group of statutes the administration of which has been the source of much embarrassment because of the unnecessarily large number of acts and the confusing amendments, while they do not, after all, cover the whole subject in a satisfactory manner, failing to provide for certain important uses of right of way and being otherwise too limited in scope.
In order that a comprehensive act covering the entire subject should be passed, appropriate legislation has been recommended by this Department, but no action has been taken thereon.
In view of the importance of this matter to the development of the industries of the West which are dependent upon the storage and conveyance of water, my former recommendation is renewed, and it is hoped that some act of the character indicated will be passed.
Attention is also called to the draft of a bill submitted to Congress by the Department on May 10, 1900, providing that the Secretary of the Interior be authorized to declare a forfeiture of a lapsed right of way for railroads, canals, reservoirs, etc., over the public lands and reservations of the United States, after notice to grantee.
The importance of this legislation, to enable the Department to satisfactorily administer the various acts granting right of way over the public lands and reservations of the United States, for railroads, canals, reservoirs, etc., can not be too greatly emphasized.
Under the act of May 21, 1896 (29 Stat., 127), granting right of way for pipe lines for the transportation of oil in the States of Colorado and Wyoming, no applications were received during the past year.
By the act of Congress approved June 6, 1900 (31 Stat., 615), making appropriations for the sundry civil expenses of the Government for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1901, and for other purposes, there was appropriated "for surveys and resurveys of public lands" the sum of $325,000, of which amount the Commissioner of the General Land Office was authorized to expend as much as he might deem necessary for examinations in the field, etc.
The sum of $75,000 was set aside to cover the cost of field examinations, and the sum of $10,000 was reserved for emergencies, leaving $240,000 to be apportioned among the several surveying districts.
Further apportionments were made from time to time to several surveying districts from the fund of $10,000 held in reserve, and contracts were let and approved to the full extent of the means available.
The annual surveying instructions for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1901, will be found in the appropriate place in the Commissioner's report.
The figures above given show an increase of about 16 per cent in the total area surveyed over that of the preceding fiscal year.
By the act of March 3, 1899 (30 Stat., 1097), the rectangular system of surveys was extended to the district of Alaska, and an apportionment of $5,000 from the appropriation of $325,000 for the survey and resurvey of public lands was made to that district, and a contract, No. 1, has been issued to A. J. Adams, by which he is required to establish an initial point near Copper Center, on Copper River, and run the necessary base and meridian lines, to extend the public surveys northward into the agricultural and grazing lands of the interior.
The surveyor-general in his annual report refers to the great need of a rapid extension of lines of survey in the immense areas where rapid settlement and valuable interests already prevail, and presents an estimate of $108,872 for survey of public lands, mission stations, and other reservations for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1903, and in support of that estimate he refers to the vast expanse of grazing lands, hay lands, valleys adapted to the production of oats, potatoes, and other vegetables; also valuable coal deposits, to which no title can be acquired in advance of rectangular surveys.
He also recommends that the act of May 14, 1898, be amended so as to allow homestead entries to be made for 160 acres of land instead of 80 acres.
He also shows that during the past fiscal year 38 applications for mineral surveys were filed.
Thirty-one mineral surveys were ordered, embracing 110 locations.
Twenty-five mineral surveys were approved, embracing 90 locations.
Two nonmineral applications for town-site surveys were made; also 15 nonmineral applications for the survey of missionary stations, and 2 nonmineral applications for survey of private claims.
Sixteen nonmineral surveys were approved, 18 suspended, 2 rejected, and 5 were awaiting action at the end of the fiscal year.
During the year military bounty land warrants to the extent of 8,960 acres were located in the several land States and Territories.
The report of the Commissioner of the General Land Office shows that the excess of expenditures over receipts at the Sitka office from October 20, 1897, to June 30, 1901, was $7,118.17; that the receipts at the Rampart office from July 10, 1900, to June 30, 1901, were only $10, while the expenditures were $4,249.60; that the expenditures at the St. Michael office from July 1, 1900, to July 1, 1901, were $2,533.33, with no receipts at all; that the expenditures at the Circle office from July 1, 1899, to July 1, 1900, were $5,587.41, with no receipts; that the expenditures at the Peavey office from August 28, 1899, to May 31, 1901, were $7,153.12 with no receipts; that the expenditures of the Weare office were $1,868.30, with no receipts; that the rent charges at both St. Michael and Rampart are $600 per annum, with wood $15 per cord and coal at from $40 to $75 per ton at St. Michael; wood $20 per cord at Rampart and coal too expensive for fuel; that it required $600 to supply the Rampart office with wood alone last winter.
From this showing it appears that the offices heretofore maintained in the valley of the Yukon for the accommodation and encouragement of miners have required an expenditure of $21,391.76, with but one single application and a fee of $10.
After carefully considering all the facts and estimating future probabilities, the Commissioner is of the opinion that both the Yukon and Circle districts should be abolished, their territory added to the Sitka district, and their offices consolidated with the Sitka office at least for the present, and until such time as there shall appear some real necessity for an office in the Yukon country.
In my last annual report I set forth the conditions developed by the discovery of petroleum in southern California, and of the action of this Department in withdrawing a number of townships in southern California until the character of the lands could be investigated.
There has been no abatement in the exploration for oil in California, and prospectors have been active in other localities, notably in Wyoming and Colorado.
The suspensions heretofore made of townships said to contain valuable deposits of oil from disposition under the agricultural laws and the examination of the lands by special agents have allayed to some extent the excitement theretofore existing, caused by the supposed appropriation of these lands by lieu scrippers.
These suspensions have been continued through the year, and must continue until relief is obtained through legislation, the mining laws and regulations being inadequate to protect the bona fide prospectors who are spending their time and money in exploring for oil.
Three months from and after the marking of their claims on the ground within which to begin work for the purpose of completing discovery, and such discovery, when made while working the claim with reasonable diligence, shall relate back and have effect nunc pro tunc, as though made before or at the time of marking the claim on the ground.
I recommended the passage of those bills, subject to the modification that the work of discovery should be completed within twelve months from date of location.
I desire now to renew that recommendation, as I believe some such legislation necessary for the adequate protection of oil lands and the stimulation of the oil industry.
It appears that during the year there was an average of about 60 special agents employed in the investigation of fraudulent land entries, and in otherwise protecting the public lands from illegal appropriation and timber trespass; that 1,086 cases were referred to them for investigation, hearings were ordered in 124 cases, 1,137 entries were held for cancellation, 741 were canceled, and 680 examined and passed.
Final action was taken on 1,531 cases, and there are now pending 3,848 cases.
There are also pending in the General Land Office 187 agents' reports on land claims, 51 records of hearings, and 288 registers' and receivers' reports and miscellaneous letters.
There were 548 cases of depredations upon public timber reported during the year, involving public timber and products therefrom to the value of $1,464,214.89, recoverable to the Government.
One hundred and fifteen civil suits were recommended, involving an aggregate of $731,179.68; 86 propositions of settlement were accepted, involving $29,200.30, and sales were made of timber which had been cut unlawfully from public lands involving $4,291.53.
There were also 188 criminal suits recommended.
There was received from compromises effected under section 3469, United States Revised Statutes, $13,573.54.
In addition, the amount involved in fines imposed and judgments rendered is $214,508.47, making a total of $261,573.84, an increase of $25,538.59 over the preceding fiscal year.
On June 30, 1901, there were pending in the United States courts 152 civil suits for the recovery of a total amount of $1,916,914.70, the alleged value of the timber involved, and 308 criminal prosecutions for cutting and removing timber in violation of law.
The recommendations made by the General Land Office and by this Department in previous years for needed legislation compelling the attendance of witnesses at hearings ordered on special agents' reports, before the local land offices, are renewed.
Attention is earnestly invited to the urgent need existing for such legislation.
During the past year there were reported to the General Land Office 161 cases of unlawful fencing of public lands, embracing 2,487,657 acres.
Thirty-four inclosures were reported as having been removed in compliance with notice requiring such action, embracing 227,440 acres; 127 cases were laid before the United States attorneys of the various States and Territories for action under act of February 25, 1885 (23 Stat., 321), embracing 2,260,217 acres.
In addition to the unlawful inclosures, special agents reported during the year 4 drift-fence cases; 2 in New Mexico, which are pending further action, and 2 in Oklahoma, in which the fences were removed in compliance with notice to the owners.
For several years this Department has been urging the enactment of legislation to regulate the sale and use of timber on the unappropriated and unreserved public lands.
The experience of this Department has been that the act of June 3, 1878, which authorizes residents of certain States and Territories therein named to cut and remove for building, agricultural, mining, and other domestic purposes, any timber growing on mineral lands, under rules and regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Interior, and the act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat., 1093), as extended by the acts of February 13, 1893 (27 Stat., 444), and March 3, 1901 (31 Stat., 1436), authorizing the residents of the States and Territories therein named to take timber from nonmineral public lands in such States and Territories for use therein for agricultural, mining, manufacturing, or domestic purposes, under rules and regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Interior, and the act of June 3, 1878 (20 Stat., 89), known as the timber and stone act, will, if not repealed or radically amended, result ultimately in the complete destruction of the timber on the unappropriated and unreserved public lands.
As an illustration of the manner in which the timber and stone act operates to encourage the denudation of the public timbered lands, attention is called to section 5 of said act, which provides that any person who is prosecuted in the States therein named for trespass on the public timbered lands, under section 2461 of the United States Revised Statutes, if not for export from the United States, may be relieved from prosecution by paying a sum equal to $2.50 per acre for the land on which the timber was cut.
The attention of this Department has just peen called to four cases, involving 720 acres of vaulable timbered lands, the timber on which is worth several thousand dollars, where the parties escaped criminal prosecution by paying the wholly inadequate sum, equal to $2.50 per acre, for the land on which the timber was cut.
It will be seen from these illustrations that said act is a direct encouragement of depredations upon the public timber, and in theinterests of that valuable portion of the public domain should be unconditionally repealed.
March 2, 1900, I transmitted to the President of the Senate pro tempore and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, with the recommendation that it be enacted into law, a bill entitled"A bill to authorize and regulate the sale and use of timber on the unappropriated and unreserved public lands."
These bills were subsequently introduced in the Senate and House, respectively, as S. 3498 and H. R. 10405.
On the 4th day of February, 1901, I again urged the passage of this proposed legislation, with an amendment thereto, as recommended by the Acting Attorney-General.
The need of the passage of such an act is so imperative that I earnestly recommend that the bill, with the amendment suggested by the Acting Attorney-General, become a law at the earliest possible date.
The opportunity offered by the act of June 3, 1878, known as the timber and stone act, for the fraudulent acquisition of title to public timbered lands was illustrated during the past year by the discovery, in Idaho and Montana, of a number of fraudulent entries under that act.
Prosecutions are now pending against a number of individuals in both of the States named for perjury and subornation of perjury, and suits have been instituted to vacate the patents upon the entries that were apparently obtained by fraud, embracing 12,000 or 14,000 acres.
The national forest reserves cover a part of the timbered public lands left as unoccupied lands in the agricultural settlement of the West.
Lying almost wholly on high land in mountainous regions, the importance of these reserves to the prosperity of the West is threefold.
In the first place, they are vitally essential to irrigation and to all the other interests that depend on water supply.
Secondly, they are essential to the mining, lumbering, and other interests of the West, and, in fact, of the whole country, which depend on wood.
Thirdly, they furnish to great numbers of cattle, horses, and sheep a summer range, without which they could not survive the year.
Public opinion concerning the forest reserves has been transformed during the past few years.
At first hostile, through widespread misunderstanding, the great bulk of the Western people are now not only in full sympathy with the maintenance and wise administration of the reserves, but are eager, because of the manifest benefits which they bring, for their extension to those parts of the country which are at present without them.
The irrigators of the West have been specially active in urging the necessity of complete protection of the forests from fire and other destructive agencies and in asking that the reserves be extended to include all areas of public land from which issue streams of importance as sources of water supply.
The extreme drought in many parts of the country during the past year has seriously diminished the flow of mountain streams.
Together with the deplorable scarcity of water in portions of the West during the three preceding years, it has called public attention as never before to the vital necessity of forest preservation and reforestation.
Whatever tends in any degree to reduce the vast losses which have been sustained by the agricultural interests is of vital importance to the farming communities.
It is urged by them not only that the forests should be protected for their effect upon water supply, but that the Government should take the steps necessary to hold and save the waters which alone give value to droughtstricken lands.
Congress years ago moved in this direction by authorizing the segregation of reservoir sites, the most important of which are near the headwaters of streams within the forest reserves.
The time has arrived when these reservoirs must be built and managed as part of a national system of forest and water conservation.
They can not be successfully maintained without a thorough system of forest protection, for reservoirs whose drainage basins are not protected by forest lie open to the danger of being transformed by the washing of the soil from reservoirs of water to reservoirs of silt.
To give to the people of the West the full benefits which the forest reserves are capable of yielding, two things are necessary.
First, the demand for more reserves should be -met by the careful extension of the reserved area in accordance with the results of careful study on the ground, and, second, there should be a thoroughly practical and efficient administration of the reserves and the resources they contain.
In order to secure practical treatment and better protection for the forest reserves, and, above all, to bring about prompter and more effective use of their resources for the good of the people, the administration of them, while it remains in the Interior Department, will be carefully supervised and conducted by the Secretary himself.
Forestry is a business which can not proceed without skilled men with a practical knowledge of the best ways of handling and protecting forests.
As with lumbering, its success depends on work in the field, and especially upon intimate knowledge of local conditions and requirements.
It is of the first importance to employ in the forest service men of high local reputation for character, ability, and knowledge of the woods, in addition to such practical trained experts as may be available.
Men thoroughly versed in lumbering and woodcraft are essential.
The time for the introduction of practical forestry on the forest reserves has fully come.
States and private owners of forest land are already cooperating with the Government for the better handling of their holdings to the extent of more than 5,000,000 acres.
Some of the forest reserves are not less favorably situated for practical forestry than the best of these lands, and it is of the first importance both to the interests of the forest and to the interests of the West to give the reserves the best practical treatment without delay.
It was found necessary about two years ago to apply to the Agricultural Department for working plans for conservative lumbering on the reserves and for reports upon all subjects requiring special knowledge of forestry except the mapping of the forests, now thoroughly well done by the Geological Survey.
The keynote of the administration of the forest reserves should be to increase the value of the reserves to the public and to perpetuate their forests by wise use.
The utility of the reserves to the agricultural, mining, grazing, and lumber interests of the regions in which they lie is so great, so generally recognized, and so rapidly on the increase that to give them any form of management but the best available is a most serious blow to the prosperity of the West.
Workmanlike administration of the forest reserves means protection through them to all the interests which depend upon them.
Forestry, dealing as it does with a source of wealth produced by the soil, is properly an agricultural subject.
The presence of properly trained foresters in the Agricultural Department, as well as the nature of the subject itself, makes the ultimate transfer, if found to be practicable, of the administration of the forest reserves to that Department essential to the best interests, both of the reserves and of the people who use them.
Hereto appended, page 218 (Exhibit B), will be found an outline of the principles and practice governing the administration of the national forest reserves which the Commissioner of the General Land Office has been directed to carry into effect.
The Payson Forest Reserve, in Utah, created by proclamation of the President dated August 3, 1901, embracing an estimated area of 86,400 acres.
By Executive order dated June 29, 1901, 46,080 acres were eliminated from the Cascade Range Forest Reserve, in Oregon, and by proclamation of the President dated July 1, 1901, 142,080 acres were added to said reserve, making the net increase in the size of the reserve 96,000 acres.
The Washington Forest Reserve, in Washington, by proclamation of the President dated April 3, 1901.
The Big Horn Forest Reserve, in Wyoming, by Executive orders dated April 15, 1901, and June 25, 1901.
The Olympic Forest Reserve, in Washington, by proclamation of the President dated July 15, 1901.
There are now 41 forest reserves, created by Presidentia, proclamations, under section 24 of the act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat., 1095), embracing an estimated area of 46,410,209 acres, a list of which reservations, with the respective areas and the States and Territories in which they are located, will be found in its appropriate place in the Commissioner's report.
The forest policy inaugurated by my immediate predecessor continues to vindicate the wisdom of its establishment.
During the past year not only has the acreage burned over in the reserves been greatly reduced over that of the preceding fiscal year, but the acreage per fire has been reduced nearly one-half, and the necessity for continuing this policy in the interest of the public, and for an increased appropriation by Congress for the carrying on of the work has been clearly demonstrated.
The patrol of the reserves was carried on by a force of rangers, which during the fiscal year was brought to the maximum during the fire season, of about 500, four hundred and seventy-five of whom were on duty at one time.
October 15, 1900, about 415 rangers were still on duty; the force was then rapidly reduced, so that a month later there were about 209 rangers, which number was still further reduced so that the maximum number during December, 1900, and January, February, March, and April, 1901, was from 165 to 185, about 100 of them being employed in the southern reserves.
In May, 1901, the force was increased to 215 and in June to 280.
The character of the duties required of these rangers was set forth at length in my report of last year, and in view of the increased efficiency of the force I concur in the Commissioner's recommendation that not less than the appropriation of $300,000 for the forest service in connection with the creation and administration of forest reserves be continued for next year, with a possible increase in case additional lands are set aside as forest reservations.
In my annual report for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1900, I renewed my former recommendations for further modifications of the act of June 4, 1897, permitting the selection of lands in lieu of those relinquished in forest reserves.
I set forth in that report illustrations of the abuses under the existing law.
Those abuses still exist and are the chief obstacle to the extension of the forest-reserve system.
The enactment of legislation along the lines recommended by this Department is, in my judgment, absolutely essential to correct the abuses in regard to such lieu selections, and I earnestly recommend that such legislation be passed.
An idea of the present extent of lieu-land selections may be had from the showing made by the Commissioner in his report that there had been submitted by individuals; firms, and corporations under and since the act of June 4, 1897, 4,231 selections, embracing 892,509.10 acres, and that of these, the selections submitted during the past fiscal year alone embraced 332,770.07 acres.
The greatest number of relinquishments made as bases for these selections were of lands in the States of California and Oregon.
For the calendar year ending December 31, 1901, the Department authorized the grazing, under permits to be issued on application approved by the Department, of 1,400,000 head of sheep on the eight reservations mentioned in the Commissioner's report.
During the year 387 permits, covering 1,180,318 sheep, have been approved by me.
The Department also authorized during the calendar year, or such part of the year as was customàry to the reserve, 434,750 cattle and horses to graze on the thirty-three reservations mentioned in the Commissioner's report, each horse to count as two head of cattle in certain of said reserves.
Under that authorization 1,921 permits have been approved by me, covering 252,746 cattle and 24,302 horses.
The localities covered by many of these forest reserves embrace areas -that include the ranges over which large numbers of sheep for years past have grazed, and the wool-growing interests of those sections have insisted that any curtailment of their grazing privilege would be inimical, if not destructive, to that industry.
On the other hand, those engaged in agricultural pursuits purely and who are.
With these contending interests clamoring before the Department for recognition and each insisting on the absolute correctness of its theory, the Department has had no little embarrassment in determining upon a policy that would be fair to both of them.
I recognize fully the vast interests involved in the wool-growing industry, but I also recognize that the paramount question before the people of the West to-day, especially those in the arid regions, is how to properly conserve and protect the water supply so as to furnish a sufficient amount to answer all the demands for irrigating purposes, and the best solution that has yet been offered to that problem is the creation, the efficient patrolling, and the proper administration of forest reserves.
Under these circumstances I have adopted the policy of permitting sheep to graze in that portion of certain reserves where it is shown, after careful examination, that such grazing is in no way injurious to or preventive of the conservation of the water supply, and that policy it is my purpose to continue.
Such a policy, in my judgment, will afford all the encouragement to the wool-growing industry that it can reasonably ask in this connection from this Department, and is not inconsistent with those vast interests dependent upon irrigation, which demand consideration at my hands.
Seventy-five petitions for sale of timber from lands within forest reserves were received during the past year, involving 26,175,271 feet of timber, boardmeasure, and 21,715 cords of wood; and three petitions have been received in which the statement of the amount of timber sought was so indefinite that no estimate thereof was possible.
Forty-two petitions were pending before the General Land Office at the beginning of the fiscal year and 31 sales have been effected, amounting to $29,250.88, which sum has been paid to the receivers of the public moneys of the several United States land offices.
Petitions have been withdrawn or passed upon unfavorably by the Department in 25 cases, and 62 cases are pending examination, completion of advertisements, or necessary action by forest officials.
A rigid insistence on the use of dead timber to supply the demand wherever practicable has won for the system the commendation and support of thinking men, who appreciate the effort to minimize the use of living timber to save the dead timber, to realize its value, and to rid the forests of an undesirable element.
The provisions of the law are becoming better understood every day, and as that occurs its popularity is demonstrated by the increased number of petitions and the cheerful compliance with the provisions of the law and the regulations of the Department thereunder.
During the past two vears I have been endeavoring to reach some arrangement with the owners of the odd-numbered sections adjoining the San Francisco Mountains Forest Reserves in Arizona that will enable me to recommend to the President such action as would effect the consolidation of said reserves.
During the past year such proceedings were had in the matter that a proposition was finally submitted to this Department by the owners of the odd-numbered sections within the exterior limits of said reserves which I approved and which it was expected would effect the consolidation desired.
Approximately, said odd-numbered sections embrace an area of 900,000 acres, all of which I understood was to be relinquished to the United States, and other lands in lieu thereof selected elsewhere.
When it came, however, to the carrying out of the proposition submitted, it was discovered that the owners of the odd-numbered sections had overlooked the fact that an estimated area of 150,000 acres, and which were timbered lands, could not be relinquished because they were either covered by contracts of sale or by contracts providing for the removal of the timber therefrom.
Other information received by the Department led me to believe that a large portion of the remaining 750,000 acres which it was proposed to relinquish was in no sense timbered lands, and that the actual acreage of timbered lands that would be acquired by the Government if said 750,000 acres were relinquished to it would not be great enough to warrant the Government in making the exchange of lands under the terms of the proposition, nor great enough to aid materially in conserving the water supply.
I therefore declined to proceed further in the matter, or to ask the President to make such consolidation by proclamation, and I so advised the parties in interest.
A very clear statement of the proceedings had before this Department in relation to said proposed consolidation is set forth in my letter of July 2, 1901, to Mr. A. B. Leach, president of the Arizona Water Company, New York City, N. Y., in reply to his communication of June 21, 1901, addressed to the President.
Both of said letters, that of Mr. Leach and the directors and attorneys of the Arizona Water Company to the President, and my reply thereto, are hereto appended, page 222, marked Exhibit C.
Proposed Elkhorn forest reserve, in Montana.
Proposed Salt Lake forest reserve, in Utah.
Proposed Las Animas forest reserve, in Colorado.
Proposed Tooele forest reserve, in Utah.
Proposed Elk Creek forest reserve, in Oregon.
Should it be found on investigation that it is inadvisable or impracticable to create forest reserves from the areas thus temporarily withdrawn, the order of temporary withdrawal will be revoked and the land restored to the public domain for disposition under the various public-land laws.
Proposed Pajarito national park, in New Mexico.
Proposed El Moro (or Inscription Rock) national park, in New Mexico.
Proposed Wind Cave national park, in South Dakota.
The Subject of conservative lumbering in forest reserves was referred to in my last annual report.
It was there stated that the subject was under consideration in connection with the Agricultural Department, and that as a preliminary step in the matter instructions had been issued to each of the forest superintendents to make a careful study of the subject as applicable to the particular reserve under his charge, and thereafter submit a comprehensive report in regard to each reserve, showing what he deemed the best methods to be pursued in connection with harvesting the timber therein, and that they were also directed to make a further study and report upon the closely related subject of reforestation, and to cooperate with the work of the Agricultural Department in connection with this branch of forestry.
The subject is still under investigation, and it is hoped that definite results will be obtained by the time my next annual report is submitted and that I will be able to make definite recommendations at that time in relation thereto.
A brief history of the legislation passed by Congress in relation to these lands is set forth in my last annual report, and it was therein stated that a sale of the pine lands in the four ceded townships in the White Earth Reservation had been ordered, the sale to take place on November 27, 1900, and that the agricultural lands in said townships had been directed to be opened for disposition under the homestead laws on December 4, 1900, and that certain other tracts mentioned in my said report had also been ordered to be sold at the same time.
The sale occurred on the day mentioned, namely, November 27, 1900.
Subsequent thereto, information having reached me that the bidders at said sale had colluded and conspired to keep down the price of said lands, I directed the Commissioner of the General Land Office not to approve any of the purchases made at said sale nor to issue any patents thereon until further advised by this Department.
In a few instances, where the purchasers have shown that they made their purchase in good faith, paid a reasonable price for·the lands, and were not parties to any collusion or conspiracy to keep down the price of said lands, I have modified said order and authorized the Commissioner of the General Land Office to approve the purchase and issue patent thereon.
Otherwise the order directing that said sale shall not be approved or patents issued thereon still stands, and will stand until an investigation by a reliable officer of this Department shows that there was no irregularity in the matter of said sale as charged.
OPENING OF KIOWA, COMANCHE, AND APACHE INDIAN LANDS IN THE TERRIToRY OF OKLAHoMA.
Under agreements ratified by the acts of March 2, 1895 (28 Stat., 895), and June 6, 1900 (31 Stat., 676), certain lands in the Territory of Oklahoma were ceded to the United States by the Wichita and affiliated bands of Indians, and the Kiowa, Comanche, and Apache tribes of Indians, respectively, and by the act of March 3, 1901 (31 Stat., 1093–1094), it was provided that the lands to be opened to settlement and entry under said acts above mentioned should be so opened by Presidential proclamation; that said proclamation should prescribe the manner in which said lands might be settled upon, occupied, and entered by persons entitled thereto, under the acts ratifying said agreements, respectively, and that no persons should be permitted to settle upon, occupy, or enter any of said lands except as prescribed in said proclamation until after the expiration of sixty days from the time when the same should be opened to settlement and entry.
By proclamation dated July 4, 1901, the President prescribed the manner in which said lands might be settled upon, occupied, and entered by persons entitled thereto under the acts ratifying said agreements, a copy of which proclamation is hereto appended, page 225, marked Exhibit D.
It was provided in said proclamation that the Secretary of the Interior should prescribe all needful rules and regulations necessary to carry into full effect the opening therein provided for, and under the authority thus conferred I designated Hon.
W. A. Richards, Assistant Commissioner of the General Land Office, to take charge of the opening under my instructions; and he was given full authority in the premises.
The unparalleled success of said opening, the successful manner in which the Assistant Commissioner and his assistants conducted and completed their unusual and extremely laborious work, and the systematic and businesslike way in which he discharged the duties imposed upon him by the Department will, I trust, cause said opening to be accepted as a precedent for all future openings of the public domain.
The detailed account of the services performed by the Assistant Commissioner, and of the manner in which said opening was accomplished, is set forth in his report to this Department, dated October 9, 1901, a copy of which is hereto appended, page 246, marked Exhibit E.
Briefly, the Assistant Commissioner, under the instructions of the Department, was required to subdivide the country to be opened into counties, locate the county seats of said counties, and survey and subdivide them into town lots.
He also had charge of the registration of those who desired to make homestead entry under the President's proclamation and of the drawing which determined the order in which the registered applicants were to be permitted to make homestead entry of the lands embraced in said opening.
One hundred and sixtyfour thousand four hundred and sixteen persons were registered and participated in said drawing, but there were not lands enough to satisfy more than 13,000 applications.
The Assistant Commissioner also had charge of the sale of town lots in the county seats which he located and surveyed.
Every lot was sold.
The total receipts from the sale aggregated $736,033.
The expenses incurred in making the sales of said town sites aggregated $5,831.15, a little less than four-fifths of 1 per cent of the total receipts, leaving a balance of $730,201.85, which was deposited to the credit of the Secretary of the Interior, as trustee of said town sites, in the subtreasury at St. Louis.
Under the act of March 3, 1901, it was provided that the expenses incident to surveying and subdividing, platting, and selling of said town lots should be deducted from the sales thereof.
Those expenses equaled $5,284.23, one-third of which, or $1,761.41, is properly chargeable against the receipts from the sale of each town site, and as the whole sum, $5,284.23, was audited by the General Land Office and paid from the appropriations to which they were properly chargeable, said sum should be deducted from the receipts of the sales of said town lots, on account of said expenses, and deposited to the credit of the Treasurer of the United States, which would leave the total net receipts from the sale of the three town sites $724,917.61.