DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, Washington, D. C., November 19, 1902.
SIr: I have the honor to submit for your consideration the annual report of this Department, with the reports of the bureaus, offices, and institutions which are placed under its supervision.
I have heretofore had occasion to advert to the great increase in the business of this Department, and to the measure of responsibility involved in its consideration and dispatch.
The past year has been characterized by a further increase in the volume of business, notably so in the Patent Office, General Land Office, Geological Survey, and the Secretary's Office.
While, in consequence thereof, it has been necessary, in some instances, to extend the hours of labor, the service required has been cheerfully rendered, and the work dispatched in such an expeditious manner that I am gratified to state the public business is well in hand and there is but little arrears; such increase in the force, etc., as existing conditions appear to demand has been noted in departmental estimates to be brought to the attention of Congress in the manner prescribed by law.
Considerable progress has been made in the inauguration and carrying into effect of necessary reforms in various branches of the service.
The advisability of the early enactment of legislation looking to the reclamation of the arid lands of the country has been frequently mentioned in previous annual reports of the Department, and Congress at its last session recognized the national importance of irrigation by the passage of the reclamation law, approved June 17, 1902.
This law creates a fund from the moneys received from sales of public lands, to be expended in the construction of irrigation works which pass ultimately into the control of the settler, the moneys received therefor to be applied to the further extension of the irrigation system.
The act is general in character, and leaves to administrative action most of the details, thereby imposing upon the Secretary of the Interior a very great responsibility in carrying it into effect.
New forest reservations have been established during the year, the forestry service extended, a better and more thorough system of patroling the reservations has been perfected, and the work of reforestation on the various reservations has been entered upon with satisfactory results.
The unlawful fencing of the public lands for grazing and other purposes referred to hereafter has greatly increased in some sections of the West and grown so flagrant as to cause much concern; vigorous measures, however, have been pursued regarding these unlawful occupants of the public domain, and prompt steps taken looking to the institution of civil or criminal proceedings against them.
Timber on the unreserved public lands can not now:be properly protected; existing laws relating thereto, and especially the act of June 3, 1878, known as "the timber and stone act," if not repealed or radically amended, will result ultimately in the complete destruction of the timber on the unappropriated and unreservea public lands.
The situation demands the passage of the remedial legislation on this subject hereinafter mentioned.
Under the act of January 14, 1898 (25 Stat. L., 642), the Chippewa Indians failed to receive the full amount of money to which they were entitled from the proceeds of the sales of timber on their ceded lands in Minnesota, owing to improper classification of lands, to fictitious values of timber fixed by incompetent estimators, and frauds perpetrated by the contractors for the handling of the timber.
Under the act of June 27, 1902, enacted by Congress upon the recommendation of the Department, timber will be sold only under sealed bids and not at public auction.
The measurement thereof will hereafter be made at the stump, and none is to be removed until it has been cut, banked, and scaled where cut; the quantity, as per scale, to be paid for at the price bid per 1,000 feet, insuring to the Indians full value for their property, a result which it was not practicable to obtain under the administration of the old law.
In the Indian service regulations have been adopted providing for the consideration of sealed bids for leases of Indian grazing lands, and awards made to the highest responsible bidder, thereby securing to the Indians a just return for the use of the leased lands.
Under the old method of permitting the tribes to indiscriminately enter into contracts for the use of their lands, such a result was not practicable.
Agreements have been negotiated with the Five Civilized Tribes of Indian Territory whereby just allotments of land can be made to them in severalty.
Provision has been made for the leasing of coal, asphalt, and other minerals in the Seminole, Creek, and Cherokee nations, respectively, and also for the sale of coal and asphalt lands in the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations, respectively, in such a manner as'to protect the interests of all parties.
A definite time has been fixed for the closing of the citizenship rolls of the several Indian tribes, as a result of which, in all probability, it will be practicable for the Five Civilized Tribes Commission to finally close its work in the Territory within the next two years.
Detailed statements regarding the matters above mentioned will be found under appropriate headings in this report.
It affords me pleasure to acknowledge the valuable assistance cheerfully rendered by the Assistant Secretaries, the Assistant Attorney-General, the Heads of Bureaus, the Chief Clerk of the Department, and the chiefs of division of the Secretary's Office in the disposition of the public business.
The force in this office is occupied in greater measure with the consideration of legal problems and claims arising under the laws of the United States relating to public lands and Indian affairs, and in lesser measure with the disposition of matters arising under the pension, patent, and other laws, the administration of which is committed to this Department.
The work is up to date, save as action on a few matters is suspended to await decisions by the courts upon test cases of like character.
The matters at this time awaiting consideration and disposition are: One hundred and ninety-four appeals from decisions of the Commissioner of the General Land Office, 26 motions for review of decisions heretofore rendered on such appeals, 40 miscellaneous matters, and 12 requests for law opinions by the Assistant Attorney-General.
The matters considered and disposed of during the last year are as follows:, Elaven hundred and eighty-four decisions receiving the approval and signature of the Secretary of the Interior in appeals from decisions of the Commissioner of the General Land Office; 283 decisions receiving the approval and signature of the Secretary of the Interior upon motions for review; 707 decisions, regulations, and orders receiving the approval and signature of the Secretary of the Interior in miscellaneous matters; 54 law opinions receiving the signature of the Assistant Attorney-General and the approval of the Secretary of the Interior; 2,689 decisions upon pension appeals receiving the approval and signature of the Assistant Secretary of the Interior.
The more important of the land decisions and opinions are included in volume 31 of the land decisions, now in course of publication.
A digest in two volumes of the land decisions has been prepared in this office and recently published.
The Assistant Attorney-General and his assistants have also been engaged in presenting and protecting the Government's interests in a considerable amount of litigation in the courts of the District of Columbia and in the Supreme Court of the United States.
Notable among the cases are Maese v. Hermann (183 U. S., 572) and Minnesota v. Hitchcock (185 U. S., 373).
I desire to most earnestly commend the able manner in which the extremely difficult public business intrusted to this office has been administered.
There were disposed of during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1902, public lands aggregating 19,488,535.30 acres, classified as follows: Cash sales, 1,757,592.63 acres; miscellaneous entries, embracing homesteads, land warrants, scrip locations, State selections, swamp lands, railroad and wagon-road selections, Indian allotments, etc., 17,614,- 792.55 acres, and Indian lands, 116,150.12 acres, showing an increase of 3,925,739 acres as compared with the aggregate disposals for the preceding fiscal year.
The total cash receipts during the fiscal year from various sources, including disposal of public land, $5,880,088.65; and Indian land, $288,666.68; from depredations on public lands, $41,415.97; from sales of timber on forest reserves, $27,478.70; from sales of Government property, $1,014.45, and for furnishing copies of records and plats, $23,262.73; aggregate, $6,261,927.18, an increase of $1,289,766.39 over the preceding fiscal year.
The total expenses of district land offices for salaries and commissions of registers and receivers, incidental expenses, and expenses of depositing public moneys during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1902, were $818,498.60, an increase, as compared with the fiscal year ended June 30, 1901, of $44,880.61.
The net surplus remaining in the Treasury at the end of the fiscal year, after deducting from the total cash receipts the entire amount of expenses and liabilities incident to the administration of the public land system, equaled $4,380,338.78, an increase over the surplus remaining at the end of the preceding fiscal year of $1,221,897.11.
Attention is also directed to the fact that the cash receipts from depredations on the public lands, compromises, fines, etc., amounted during the fiscal year to $284,078.85, an increase over the preceding fiscal year of $22,505.01.
The total area of the public lands may be stated to be approximately 1,809,539,840 acres, of which 893,955,476 acres are undisposed of, 151,161,638 acres have been reserved for various purposes, and 764,422,726 acres have been appropriated.
Forty-one thousand one hundred and forty patents for agricultural lands were issued during the fiscal year, containing approximately 6,583,672.33 acres, a decrease of 1,097 in number and 174,247.67 in acreage as compared with the previous year.
Of mineral and mill-site patents 1,553 were issued, an increase over the former year of 165 patents and of 6,796.94 acres.
One hundred and eight coal patents were issued, embracing 12,799.10 acres, an increase over the previous year of 4 patents and 738.23 acres.
During the fiscal year there have been certified or patented on account of railroad grants 4,851,353.41 acres, as against an area patented during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1901, of 2,470,804.55 acres, an increase of 2,380,548.86 acres.
There were patented under wagon-road grants 156,778.25 acres, a decrease compared with the preceding year of 8,768.93 acres.
ApJusTmENTs.
The report of the Commissioner shows that material progress has been made in the examinations necessary to the adjustment of railroad and wagon-road land grants, including the administration of the acts of July 1, 1898 (30 Stat. L., 597–620), March 2, 1899 (30 Stat. L., 994), and March 2, 1901 (31 Stat. L., 950), relating to grants to the Northern Pacific Railroad Company.
A detailed statement of the progress made in the adjustment of these grants will be found at page 285 of said report.
There were patented as swamp lands in place 68,744.97 acres, and as swamp land indemnity lands 19,893.78 acres, a total of 88,638.75 acres, a decrease compared with the amount patented during the last fiscal year of 130,564.94 acres.
Indemnity, school, and other selections were made and certified during the year under their several grants to the various States and Territories to the amount of, 1,003,793.09 acres, a decrease of 239,726.83 acres as compared with the preceding year.
Patents of this clasS Were issued during the year to the amount of 1,753,591.76 acres, an increase over the preceding fiscal year of 1,305,055.36 acres.
The total net increase in lands patented over the preceding fiscal year is 3,146,718.69 acres.
By section 4 of the act of August 18, 1894 (28 Stat. L., 372–422), as amended by the act of June 11, 1896 (29 Stat. L., 413–434), and act of March 3, 1901 (31 Stat. L., 1133-1188), provision is made for the donation to each of the desertland States of not more than 1,000,000 acres of such lands.
Under these acts there was approved one list, embracing 244,025.98 acres, selected by the State of Idaho.
As recommended in my last annual report, the Yukon and Circle land districts in Alaska were abolished and their offices consolidated with the Sitka office.
One town-site entry and 34 nonmineral entries have been made in Alaska under the provisions of sections 11 to 14, act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat. L., 1095), as amended by section 10, act of May 14, 1898 (30 Stat. L., 409).
Twelve of the nonmineral entries have been patented during the last fiscal year, 10 having been previously patented, and 9 canceled, leaving 3 suspended for insufficiency of proof submitted, or other causes.
Under the act of January 13, 1897 (29 Stat. L., 484), the number of declaratory statements on hand at the beginning of the fiscal year was 9,596.
There were received during the year 314, making the total requiring action 9,910.
Of this number, 3,070 were acted upon, of which 2,175 were canceled or relinquished and the remainder, 895, were found to be in proper form and await further action under the law by the declarants.
There were, accordingly, pending for action at the end of the fiscal year 7,728.
Under the act of March 3, 1875 (18 Stat. L., 482), providing for rights of way over public lands, the act of May 14, 1898 (30 Stat. L., 409), providing for rights of way in Alaska, and various special acts, 51 articles of incorporation were accepted; 595 maps of locations of railroads were on hand for action during the year, of which 146 were approved, 11 filed (not requiring approval); 8 were pending at the end of the fiscal year before the Secretary of the Interior, and 375 had been otherwise disposed of, a few of which were rejected and the rest returned for correction.
Under the provisions of sections 18 to 21, inclusive, of the act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat. L., 1095), as amended by section 2 of the act of May 11, 1898 (30 Stat. L., 404), right of way has been approved to 332 companies, individuals, and associations of individuals, of which 50 received their first approval during the past year.
Under the act of January 21, 1895 (28 Stat. L., 635), "An act to permit the use of right of way through the public lands for tramroads, canals and reservoirs, and for other purposes," as amended by section 1 of the act of May 11, 1898 (30 Stat. L., 404), applications for permission to use right of way have been approved to 10 companies, individuals, and associations of individuals, of which one received its first approval during the past year.
There were received during the year under these acts six maps, which, with those already pending, made a total of eight maps requiring action during the year.
One was approved and four otherwise disposed of, most of them being returned for correction.
Under the act of May 14, 1896 (29 Stat., L. 120), entitled "An act to amend the act approved March 3, 1891, granting right of way upon the public lands for reservoir and canal purposes," there have been approved the applications of 15 companies, individuals, and associations of individuals.
Under the act of February 15, 1901 (31 Stat., L. 790), entitled "An act relating to rights of way through certain parks, reservations, and other public lands," there were filed during the year 38 maps, which, with those pending under the act of 1896, made a total of 45 maps requiring action.
Eight of these were approved and 32 otherwise disposed of, most of them being returned for correction.
Under all of the foregoing acts there were on hand requiring action during the year 1,089 maps, 984 of which were disposed of during the year, leaving a total on hand awaiting action at the end of the fiscal year of 105 maps.
In my report of last year attention was called to the fact that the above-designated acts constituted a group of statutes the administration of which has been the source of much embarrassment because of the unnecessarily large number of acts and the confusing amendments, while they do not, after all, cover the whole subject in a satisfactory manner, failing to provide for certain important uses of right of way and being otherwise too limited in scope.
Attention was also called to the necessity for legislation that would empower the Secretary of the Interior to declare a forfeiture of a lapsed right of way for railroads, canals, reservoirs, etc., over the public lands and reservations of the United States, after notice to grantee.
With the purpose in view of securing legislation along the lines indicated, the Department, on April 4, 1902, transmitted to Congress such a bill as in its judgment would meet the requirements of the case, with the recommendation that it receive the approval of Congress and be introduced as a substitute for Senate bills 3374 and 3711, relating to the same subject.
On June 4, 1902, the Committee on Claims submitted a report on Senate bill 3374, in which it was recommended that the title of the bill be amended by striking out the same and inserting in lieu thereof the following: "A bill providing for rights of way in and through public lands, reservations, and certain national parks, and for other purposes," and it was further recommended that the bill be amended by striking out all after the enacting clause and inserting in lieu thereof practically the provisions of the bill transmitted to Congress by my letter of April 4, supra.
In view of the importance of this proposed legislation, I earnestly urge the passage of Senate bill 3374, as amended.
By the act of Congress approved March 3, 1901 (31 Stat. L., 1159), making appropriations for the sundry civil expenses of the Government for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1902, and for other purposes, there was appropriated'for surveys and resurveys of public lands" the sum of $325,000, of which amount the Commissioner of the General Land Office was authorized to expend as much as he might deem necessary for examinations in the field, etc.
The sum of $75,000 was set aside to cover the cost of field examinations, and the sum of $10,000 was reserved for emergencies, leaving $240,000 to be apportioned among the several surveying districts.
Further apportionments were made from time to time to several surveying districts from the fund of $10,000 held in reserve, and contracts were let and approved to practically the full extent of the means available.
The annual surveying instructions for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1901, will be found in the appropriate place in the Commissioner's report.
By the act of March 3, 1899 (30 Stat. L., 1097), the rectangular system of surveys was extended to the district of Alaska, but no surveys under that system have as yet been executed in that district, nor has the pending contract for the establishment of a principal meridian and several parallels, issued to A. J. Adams and referred to in my last annual report, been executed.
The report of the surveyor-general shows that 63 mining locations were approved during the year, with 65 others awaiting final action, and that 20 surveys of this class were filed, embracing 70 different mining claims.
The non-mineral surveys were for the most part of additional homesteads, with a few sites for trade and manufacture and military reservation, and a site for the Sitka Magnetic Observatory.
Of this class there were pending on July 1, 1901, 29; received during the year, 97; total, 126; approved during the year, 85; suspended, 12; rejected, 5; awaiting action June 30, 1902, 24.
The surveyor-general recommends an appropriation of $113,872 for surveys in the district of Alaska for the next fiscal year.
The grounds upon which he urges this appropriation are the necessity of establishing the rectangular system of surveys; of protecting the numerous interests that have within the past few years been developing in that district, and of preventing conflict between the mission, church, and school reservations on the one hand, and claims under the various public-land laws on the other, which are sure to arise if delay of surveys because of inadequate appropriation be longer continued.
The following is a statement of the number of acres represented by military bounty-land warrants located in the several land States and Territories for the year ended June 30, 1902, or not heretofore reported, which warrants were issued under the acts of 1847, 1850, 1852, and 1855.
The aggregate number of acres is computed at the rate of $1.25 per acre.
It does not show the exact area of the lands located with the warrants.
During the year an average of 58 special agents were employed in the investigation of fraudulent land entries, and in otherwise protecting the public lands from illegal appropriation and timber trespass; 2,010 cases were referred to them for investigation; hearings were ordered in 213 cases; 1,501 entries were held' for cancellation; 921 were canceled; and 940 examined and passed.
Final action was taken on 1,978 cases, and there are now pending 5,468 cases.
There are also pending in the General Land Office 461 agents' reports on land claims, 34 records of hearings, and 827 registers and receivers' reports and miscellaneous letters.
There were 482 cases of depredations upon public lands reported during the year, involving property of the value of $1,435,186, recoverable to the Government, including one case of trespass on coal lands, involving 210,000 tons of coal, of the estimated value of $664,278.28.
One hundred and seven civil suits were recommended to recover damages estimated at $873,- 562.90; 131 propositions of settlement were accepted to the amount of $33,765; and there was received from sales of timber cut unlawfully from public lands the sum of $11,625.35.
There were also 124 criminal suits recommended.
There was received from compromises effected under section 3469, United States Revised Statutes, $43,265.58.
In addition, the amount involved in fines imposed and judgments rendered is $195,422.92, making a total of $284,078.85, an increase of $22,505.01 over the preceding fiscal year.
168 civil suits for the recovery of a total amount of $2,970,151.10, the alleged value of the timber involved, and 324 criminal prosecutions for cutting and removing timber in violation of law.
The recommendations made by the General Land Offiee and by this Department in previous years for needed legislation compelling the attendance of witnesses at hearings ordered on special agents' reports, before the local land offices, are renewed.
Attention is earnestly invited to the urgent need existing for such legislation.
The avowed policy of the Government to preserve the public domain for homes for actual settlers has no more implacable and relentless foe than the class that seeks to occupy the public lands for grazing purposes, by maintaining unlawful fences thereon.
The fight between this class and the Government has been going on for years and resulted, seventeen years ago, in the passage of the act of February 25, 1885 (23 Stat. L., 321), which provides for the institution of civil proceedings for the removal of such fences and criminal prosecution of the trespassers, and authorizes the President, if necessary, to call out the civil and military authorities to remove such unlawful inclosures; but notwithstanding the passage of said act and the efforts of this Department to enforce it the abuse has continued, and the beneficiaries thereof have grown so bold and arrogant that they practically defy the efforts of the Department and the Government to execute the law.
There is now pending before Congress a bill entitled 'A bill to provide for the leasing, for grazing purposes, of the vacant public domain, and reserving all rights of homestead and mineral entry, the rentals to be a special fund for irrigation.
A copy of said bill, together with the very excellent report of the Commissioner of the General Land Office, adverse to its passage, and my letter transmitting said report, with my approval thereof, to the Public Lands Committee of the Senate, will be found beginning at page 167 of the Appendix to this report, marked, respectively, Exhibits A,.
B, and C.
Should that bill become a law, the public domain in the 16 States and Territories mentioned therein, aggregating an area of 525,000,000 acres, practically all of the vacant public domain west of the Mississippi, would be subject to lease at 2 cents per acre for ten years, with a privilege of renewal for ten years more.
85,558 persons; and during the present fiscal year indications are that more entries will be made, affecting more people, and embracing a greater acreage.
It is needless to say that such a bill, if enacted into law, would place the last acre of desirable public land out of the reach of the home seeker and defeat the purpose of the Government to preserve the public domain for homes for actual settlers.
It would also defeat the operations of the reclamation act approved June 17 last, and make possible the formation of a land monopoly never contemplated by the public lana system, but which, on the contrary, it is one of the purposes of that system to prevent.
For numerous other objectionable features, reference is had to the copy of the bill in the Appendix, and to its discussion by the Commissioner of the General Land Office in his report.
During the past year the localities in which the largest number of cases of unlawful fencing have been found were the State of Nebraska and the Territory of New Mexico.
In Nebraska it is alleged that a large part of the public domain is under fence in some manner or other, and that the homestead law is practically a dead letter.
What is known as "hobo filing,"the making of entries by tramps and other irresponsible persons in the interest of those desiring to obtain large quantities of public lands for grazing purposes, so it is averred, is there resorted to.
The Department is using every effort, with the limited force at its command, to break up this practice, have the fences removed and the land illegally inclosed thrown open to occupation by actual settlers, and the trespassers brought to justice.
In the Territory of New Mexico 1,079,000 acres of public lands are embraced within the unlawful inclosures of the Interstate Land Company.
Under representations to this Department that its order to remove said fence by April 1, 1902, would prevent the execution by the company of contracts to deliver large quantities of stock on June 1, in that removal of the fences would cause an intermingling of the herds and great financial loss, the President authorized an extension of time for the removal of said fences to July 1, 1902.
The understanding was that the fences would be removed at that date.
They were not removed then, and said company manifests no disposition to remove them.
In fact, its attitude is one of defiance and of utter contempt for the law of February 25, 1885, and of either the disposition or the ability of the Government to enforce it.
The company assumes an exemption from criminal prosecution, and hopes that by continuances, appeals, and other delays incident to civil proceedings it.
The matter is now in the hands of the proper officers with a view to the institution of proceedings under the act of February 25, 1885, to cause the removal of said fences and punish the trespassers.
Pressure of all sorts has been brought to bear on this Department to cause a cessation of the vigorous policy it has pursued against these unlawful occupants of the public domain.
It has been frequently alleged by them that the Department has been making war upon the cattle industry of the West, and they have written letters to different breeders of cattle in the eastern and middle western States, and presented to them the argument that their occupation would suffer if the zeal of the Government were not abated; and these breeders in the eastern and middle western States have, in some instances, written to their Senators and Representatives in Congress, who have in turn written to this Department.
Copy of a letter written by a citizen of one of the middle western States to his Representative in Congress, and of the letter of the Representative to this Department, with my reply thereto, will be found beginning at page 175 of the Appendix to this report, marked, respectively, Exhibits D, E, and F.
In such correspondence, as in every other effort by those who seek to prevent the removal of such unlawful fences, it is sought to evade and obscure the only question at issue.
It is the duty of this Department to enforce the laws relative to the public domain.
One of these laws, which "forbids and prohibits" the unlawful occupancy or fencing of the public domain, is being continuously and persistently violated.
Under such circumstances a conscientious executive officer with a proper conception of the nature of his oath can pursue but one course.
It (the Government) would be recreant to its duties as trustee for the people of the United States to permit any individual or private corporation to monopolize them (the public lands) for private gain and thereby practically drive intending settlers from the market.
It needs no argument to show that the building of fences upon the public lands with intent to inclose them for private use would be a mere trespass, and that such fences might be abated by the officers of the Government or by the ordinary processes of courts of justice.
During the last year there were reported to the General Land Office 153 cases of unlawful fencing of public lands, embracing 3,952,844 acres.
In one case one man was shown to have under fence over 60,000 acres of lands that are subject to disposition under the public-land laws, but which he withholds from such disposition in defiance of the law he is openly and notoriously violating, and of the rights of those who are entitled to the benefits and protection of the public-land system.
There were also reported as having been removed during the year, in compliance with notice requiring such action, 9 inclosures, embracing an area of 24,564 acres; 144 cases were reported as in process of removal or were laid before the United States attorneys of the various States and Territories for action under act of February 25, 1885 (23 Stat. L., 321), embracing 3,928,280 acres.
Sections 2304, 2305, and 2306 of the United States Revised Statutes confer upon soldiers, sailors, and marines who served ninety days or more during the war of the rebellion homestead and additional homestead rights, and section 2307 provides that upon the death of any soldier, sailor, or marine whose rights are defined by the sections above stated, his widow, if unmarried, or in case of her death or marriage then his minor orphan children, by a guardian duly appointed and officially accredited at the Department of the Interior, shall be entitled to all of the benefits enumerated in the sections above referred to, subject to all the conditions as to settlement and improvement therein contained.
One of the methods resorted to by those seeking to acquire control of large portions of the public domain is to have the widows of soldiers make entry of lands under the law above cited: The speculator furnishes all the money, pays all the fees, and pays the widow a liberal compensation for her services in the matter.
Unquestionably an entry made in good faith by the widow of a soldier under the section above mentioned would be valid.
It is the purpose of the Department to investigate all of such entries, to ascertain whether they were made for speculative purposes and in the interest of any person or persons other than the widow.
It is evident that a law passed by Congress for the benefit of the defenders of the country and their widows and orphans was never intended to be used as a vehicle to enable speculators to obtain title to the public domain intended for homes for actual settlers.
During the fiscal year ten convictions have been secured for frauds committed in connection with soldiers' additional assignments executed in Arkansas.
A most systematic conspiracy for the purpose of defrauding the Government in these cases was discovered to be in existence during the latter part of 1901 in this State, which has been completely broken up, and all the members of the gang sentenced to periods of imprisonment in the United States penitentiary at Fort Leavenworth ranging from three years down, together with the imposition of fines.
The Commissioner of the General Land Office reports that in the States of Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan many applications have been suspended and rejected which were found to be clearly fraudulent.
For several years this Department has been urging the enactment of legislation to regulate the sale and use of timber on the unappropriated and unreserved public lands.
The experience of this Department has been that the act of June 3, 1878, which authorizes residents of certain States and Territories therein named to cut and remove for building, agricultural, mining, and other domestic purposes any timber growing on mineral lands under rules and regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Interior and the act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat. L., 1093), as extended by the acts of February 13, 1893 (27 Stat. L., 444), and March 3, 1901 (31 Stat. L., 1436), authorizing the residents of the States and Territories therein named to take timber from nonmineral public lands in such States and Territories for use therein for agricultural, mining, manufacturing, or domestic purposes, under rules and regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Interior, and the act of June 3, 1878 (20 Stat. L., 89), known as the timber and stone act, will, if not repealed or radically amended, result ultimately in the complete destruction of the timber on the unappropriated and unreserved public lands.
The rapidity with which the unreserved and unappropriated public timbered lands are being denuded of their timber under the acts above mentioned, and the opportunity offered under the timber and stone act for the.
In order to put an end to such an undesirable system of disposing of the public timber and the public timbered lands, I, on March 2, 1900, transmitted to both branches of Congress a bill embodying the views of the Commissioner of the General Land Office and this Department on this subject.
Said bill was subsequently introduced in the Senate and House, respectively, but was never enacted into law, and, on the 4th of February, 1901, I again urged the passage of said proposed legislation, with an amendment thereto recommended by the Acting Attorney-General.
Repeating my efforts along that line I, on February 8, 1902, transmitted to the chairman of the Committee on Public Lands of the House of Representatives a report on H. R. 4371, "To authorize and regulate the sale and use of timber on the unappropriated and unreserved public lands, and prevent depredations thereon," and recommended certain amendments thereto.
Said bill is almost identical with that recommended by me on March 2, 1900.
The need of the passage of such an act is so imperative that I earnestly recommend that the pending bill, H. R. 4371, with the amendments suggested by this Department, be enacted into law at the earliest possible date.
The provisions of said bill deal with every possible interest that could be affected by a measure of that character.
Its terms are fair and equitable and meet every reasonable demand that could be made by those requiring the use of timber from the unappropriated public timbered lands.
A copy of said bill, with the amendments recommended by this Department, will be found at page 177 of the Appendix to this report, marked "Exhibit G."
In this connection and for the purpose of emphasizing the above recommendation, attention is called to the fact that the reports from one public land State alone for the quarter ending June 30, 1902, show that the number of timber and stone entries was 331 during that quarter, embracing 48,585.50 acres; that during the quarter ending September 30, 1902, the number of entries had increased to 1,183, embracing 181,052.02 acres, an increase during the last over the preceding quarter of 852 entries and 132,466.52 acres, and in another State during the same period there was an increase of 294 entries and 45,086.28 acres.
Should this rate of entry continue during the entire year in that one State it would mean the acquisition, in round numbers, of 600,000 acres of timber lands under the timber and stone act, and if the same activity in that class of entries were extended to the other public land States, then before the expiration of two years practically every acre of unappropriated public timbered lands would have been absorbed and the successful operation of the reclamation act of June 17 last rendered doubtful, if its failure be not absolutely assured, for the reservation of public timbered lands that must of necessity be made to assist in conserving the waters to be impounded by the irrigation systems to be established under that act, will be defeated or made so expensive by the purchase of said lands from private owners as to greatly delay the completion of the irrigation systems contemplated by that act.
The reports of the special agents of this Department in the field show that at some of the local land offices carloads of entrymen arrive at a time, every one of whom makes entry under the timber and stone act.
The cost of 160 acres of land under that act, and the accompanying commissions, is $415.
As many as five members of a family, who, it can be readily shown, never had $2,075 in their lives, walk up cheerfully and pay the price of the land and the commissions.
Under such circumstances there is only one conclusion to be drawn, and that is that where a whole carload of such people make entry under that act, the unanimity of sentiment and the cash to exploit it must have originated in some source other than themselves.
In all such cases a rigid inquiry will be instituted to determine the bona fides of the entry, and if it be ascertained that the entry was not made in good faith, but in the interest of some person or persons other than the entryman, the entry will be promptly canceled and proper criminal proceedings instituted against the entrymen.
Another method resorted to by unscrupulous speculators to obtain timber upon the unreserved timbered lands, and to which the attention of the Department has been called by its special agents, is the location of so-called mining claims under the placer-mining laws.
Quite a number of such claims have been located in fine bodiés of timber in a number of the western States.
So far as the records of the Land Department show, these lands are unappropriated public lands, and there is nothing to call the Department's attention to them, and it would never know of these locations unless reported by a special agent or the locator should apply for a patent.
Assuming the land to be really mineral, so long as the locator does the annual assessment work required by law he will be entitled to maintain possession of the tract embraced in his mineral location.
If it be made for speculative purposes only, and for the purpose of acquiring the timber within the limits of the location, the only way by which the Government can reach him will be by a careful investigation of the character of the land upon which the location is made, and if, after such investigation, it be determined that the land is not minéral in character and that the location is made for speculative purposes, to arrest the locator as soon as he begins to cut the timber.
The only defense he can make will be to show that the land is mineral in character and that he is cutting the timber to develop his claim as allowed by law.
Should he fail in that, he will have to pay the penalty.
From the foregoing it will be seen that the duty of protecting the public domain from the inroads of those who seek to despoil it is an onerous one, and is a matter that should receive the early and careful consideration of the Congress.
There are now 54 forest reserves, created by Presidential proclamations under section 24 of the act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat. L., 1095), embracing 60,175,765 acres.
Enlarged: San Francisco Mountains Forest Reserve, Big Horn Forest Reserve, Yellowstone Forest Reserve, Teton Forest Reserve.
Reduced: Cascade Range Forest Reserve, Olympic Forest Reserve, San Jacinto Forest Reserve, White River Forest Reserve.
Established: Wichita Forest Reserve, Payson Forest Reserve, Santa Rita Forest Reserve, Santa Isabel Forest Reserve, Niobrara Forest Reserve, Dismal River Forest Reserve, Medicine Bow Forest Reserve, Santa Catalina Forest Reserve, Mount Graham Forest Reserve, Lincoln Forest Reserve, Chiricahua Forest Reserve, Little Belt Mountains Forest Reserve, Madison Forest Reserve, The Alexander Archipelago Forest Reserve, The Absaroka Forest Reserve.
It is the policy of the Department to temporarily withdraw from settlement, entry, sale, or other disposal, such public lands as are included within the limits of projected new forest reserves or additions to those already created.
In my last report I discussed at some length the purpose and necessity of forest reserves and the method and character of service that should be observed in their administration.
It is believed that a careful investigation of the forest-reserve system adopted by this Department, in view of the obstacles with which it has had to contend, will justify all that has been done in that direction in the mind of every candid and unprejudiced investigator.
The fact that the forest fires that have raged with such devastation during the past season throughout the West have been confined almost wholly to the unreserved timbered lands, speaks volumes for the efficiency of the patrol system which has guarded and preserved the forest reserves from that destructive element, and of itself has no doubt resulted in a saving of public property the value of which is far in excess of the appropriation required to maintain and administer the forest-reserve system.
The adequate protection of the forest reserves and the extension thereof to other public timbered lands as occasion arises must of necessity go hand in hand with the operations looking toward the reclamation of the arid lands of the West under the reclamation act approved June 17, 1902.
Notwithstanding that patent fact, and the great benefit that forest reserves have already been to that section of the country, and will continue to be, a pernicious activity on the part of some person or persons, through interest or ignorance, to create sentiment adverse to forest reserves in communities affected thereby has been going on of recent months, as the correspondence of this Department will show.
1. To protect a growth of timber on land which is not fit to grow other crops and under conditions where no such protection is assured or can be supplied by private persons or local authorities.
2. To keep a growth of vegetation, especially of timber on mountain lands which would otherwise wash and gully.
It prevents the rain and snow water from rushing off as fast as it otherwise would and thus prevents floods.
It maintains a pervious layer of earth into which the water can soak and be stored up for the summer months, when, in most western States, it is needed for irrigation.
Forest reserves have been and are created from lands (nearly all mountain lands) unfit for agriculture for reasons of altitude and consequent climate usually reinforced by poverty or insufficiency of soil.
These lands generally bear a stand of timber or indicate that they have borne such and are likely to be restocked with forests if protected.
Where these mountain forests have not been reserved and have passed into private ownership their history has generally been that of the Northern pineries and other forest areas.
They are culled over for whatever will pay the expense of exploitation, the cutting is careless and wasteful, the profits of the timberman small and to the district much smaller.
Since this work of denudation is a temporary matter it does little for the permanent improvement of the locality, but leaves behind it the characteristic ruins of abandoned sawmills and the devastated, fire-scorched mountain lands robbed of their forest and fertility alike and doomed for years, in many cases for centuries, to remain as unsightly, barren wastes where the much-needed waters gather unhindered to rush from the mountains and be wasted.
To avoid this permanent injury to districts where every drop of water is precious, and where the protective function of the mountain forests, therefore, is of the greatest importance, is the first object of the creation of forest reserves.
To husband an immense wealth of timber, to regulate its use, to utilize only the growth of these mountain forests and thereby insure a continued supply of one of the most important materials, is the second object of the reserve policy.
A great deal of misunderstanding appears still to exist in regard to the laws and regulations concerning forest reserves and the consequent effect of the creation and maintenance of such forest reserves on the various local interests, particularly mining, prospecting, the use of timber and grass growing on the reserves, as well as the opportunity of building roads, railways, etc.
It appears, too, that interested persons have made an effort to circulate misinformation with a view to producing erroneous impression and opinion, and to create adverse sentiment.
This important industry is in no wise interfered with.
Prospecting and mining may be and are carried on in forest reserves in exactly the same unrestricted manner as on the public domain outside of the reserves, so that the prospector and miner is especially privileged within forest reserves.
The law provides that 'any mineral lands in any forest reservation which have been or which may be shown to be such, and subject to entry under the existing mining laws of the United States and the rules and regulations applying thereto, shall continue to be subject to such location and entry," notwithstanding the reservation.
This makes mineral lands in the forest reserves subject to location and entry under the general mining laws in the usual manner.
Owners of valid mining locations made and held in good faith under the mining laws of the United States and the regulations thereunder are authorized and permitted to fell and remove from such mining claims any timber growing thereon for actual mining purposes in connection with the particular claim from which the timber is felled or removed.
As a matter of experience it may be stated that of about 50 reserves only about four are without active prospecting, and that in several of the reserves, notably the Black Hills, extensive mining has been carried on ever since the creation of the reserves.
In addition it may be stated that in all of these cases the reserve has proven an advantage rather than a hindrance to the bona fide prospector and miner in guarding him against bogus claimants and consequent blackmail, and also in providing the means of purchasing timber in such quantities as he requires, a matter of great importance, and one not provided for in the case of the nonreserved public lands.
While for the open public lands there is no provision of law which enables the Department to sell timber in such quantities as are required for mining, agricultural settlement, etc., such provision is made for the forest reserves, much to the advantage of the people as well as the forests.
1. It is given away free of charge to settlers and prospectors, etc., who require small quantities for buildings, fencing, fuel, etc.
2. It is sold in larger quantities to anyone at moderate prices and in the most expeditious manner.
For the purpose of preserving the living and growing timber and promoting the younger growth on forest reservations, the Secretary of the Interior, under such rules and regulations as he shall prescribe, may cause to be designated and appraised so much of the dead, matured, or large growth of trees found upon such forest reservations as may be compatible with the utilization of the forests thereon, and may sell the same for not less than the appraised value in such quantities to each purchaser as he shall prescribe, to be used in the State or Territory in which such timber reservation may be situated, respectively, but not for export therefrom.
Before such sale shall take place, notice thereof shall be given by the Commissioner of the General Land Office, for not less than sixty days, by publication in a newspaper of general circulation, published in the county in which the timber is situated, if any is therein published, and if not, then in a newspaper of general circulation published nearest to the reservation, and also in a newspaper of general circulation published at the capital of the State or Territory where such reservation exists; payments for such timber to be made to the receiver of the local land office of the district wherein said timber may be sold, under such rules and regulations as the Secretary of the Interior may prescribe; and the moneys arising therefrom shall be accounted for by the receiver of such land office to the Commissioner of the General Land Office, in a separate account, and shall be covered into the Treasury.
Such timber, before being sold, shall be marked and designated, and shall be cut and removed under the supervision of some person appointed for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, not interested in the purchase or removal of such timber nor in the employment of the purchaser thereof.
Such supervisor shall make report in writing to the Commissioner of the General Land Office and to the receiver in the land office in which such reservation shall be located of his doings in the premises.
The Secretary of the Interior may permit, under regulations to be prescribed by him, the use of timber and stone found upon such reservations free of charge by bona fide settlers, miners, residents, and prospectors for minerals, for firewood, fencing, buildings, mining, prospecting, and other domestic purposes as may be needed by such persons for such purposes; such timber to be used within the State or Territory, respectively, where such reservations may be located.
In carrying out this provision of the law every effort is made to avoid unnecessary delay, and the few restrictions are such as are demanded in any orderly system of business and such as are necessary to assure the proper continuance of a forest cover.
In this way millions of feet of timber are given away each year to worthy settlers, and many millions more have been sold to mining concerns, contractors, lumbermen, and others, and in no case was there a disposition on the part of the Department to curtail the utility of the forest reserve as a proper source of forest supplies.
Pamphlets fully describing the details of making applications, etc., and also the necessary forms, are distributed liberally among the people, so that everyone in and about all of the older forest reserves knows the manner of procedure, and it is safe to say that wherever the rules and regulations have been followed and respected the people have learned to recognize their value and prefer the present system of a regulated manner of utilizing the forest over the former reckless, help-yourself methods with their slashes and fire traps and with their heedless denudation and destruction.
In the management of the timber affairs, small amounts, such as a year's supply of materials needed by a settler, are given on permit issued by the supervisor or local officer, so that hardly an hour's delay need occur; larger amounts, with stumpage value of $100 or less, are sold, commonly without advertisement, so that the delay involves little more than the time necessary for the transmission of papers, while even in larger sales, where thirty days' advertisement is prescribed by law, provision is made for emergency cases, and the total amount of time needed in completing the transaction need never be more than is usual in dealings of a similar nature among private parties.
The grazing of cattle and horses (loose stock) is permitted in all reserves, and even the grazing of sheep, wherever the character of the reserve ranges appears to justify such grazing, has been allowed free of charge and with as little restriction as to time or season, locality, and the movement of the stock as is compatible with an economic use of the reserve pastures.
All that is required of any person is a proper regard to the safety of the range, and particularly to the protection of the forest cover.
In keeping with this policy and practice, the grazing of 1,197,000 head of sheep and 459,137 head of cattle and horses was allowed during the season of 1902, and thus one of the leading industries of the West was made profitable in many localities where the summer range of these mountain reserves is indispensable to the stockman.
The beneficial effect of a regulated, orderly use of these ranges is well recognized and has made staunch friends for the reserves, so that in several localities reserves have been petitioned for chiefly with a view to protecting the range against a heedless overgrazing, mostly by "tramp" herds whose owners have no interest in the development of the particular section.
The localities covered by many of these forest reserves embrace areas that include the ranges over which large numbers of sheep for years past have grazed, and the wool-growing interests of those sections have insisted that any curtailment of their grazing privilege would be inimical, if not destructive, to that industry.
On the other hand, those engaged in agricultural pursuits purely and who are directly interested in the conservation of the water supply for purposes of irrigation, which is the primary purpose for which these reservations are created, have contended with equal energy that sheep grazing in these reserves destroys the forest cover and so hardens the soil that the melting snows and the rainfall pass off in a flood, thus preventing the conservation of the water supply and defeating the purpose for which said reserves were created.
With these contending interests clamoring before the Department for recognition, and each insisting on the absolute correctness of its theory, the Department has had no little embarrassment in determining upon a poliey that would be fair to both of them.
I recognize fully the vast interests involved in the woolgrowing industry, but I also recognize that the paramount question before the people of the West to-day, especially those in the arid regions, is how to properly conserve and protect the water supply so as to furnish a sufficient amount to answer all the demands for irrigating purposes, and the best solution that has yet been offered to that problem is the creation, the efficient patroling, and the proper administration of forest reserves.
Under these circumstances I have adopted the policy of permitting sheep to graze in that portion of certain reserves where it is shown, after careful examination, that such grazing is in no way injurious to or preventive of the conservation of the water supply, and that policy it is my purpose to continue.
Such a policy, in my judgment, will afford all the encouragement to the woolgrowing industry that it can reasonably ask in this connection from this Department, and is not inconsistent with those vast interests dependent upon irrigation, which demand consideration at my hands.
Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting the egress or ingress of actual settlers residing within the boundaries of such reservations, or from crossing the same to and from their property or homes; and such wagon roads and other improvements may be constructed thereon as may be necessary to reach their homes and to utilize their property under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Secretary of the Interior.
Nor shall anything herein prohibit any person from entering upon such forest reservations for all proper and lawful purposes, including that of prospecting, locating, and developing the mineral resources thereof: Provided, That such persons comply with the rules and regulations covering such forest reservations.
The settlers residing within the exterior boundaries of such forest reservations, or in the vicinity thereof, may maintain schools and churches within such reservation, and for that purpose may occupy any part of the said forest reservation, not exceeding two acres for each schoolhouse and one acre for a church.
All waters on such reservations may be used for domestic, mining, milling, or irrigation purposes, under the laws of the State wherein such forest reservations are situated, or under the laws of the United States and the rules and regulations established thereunder.
That in the form provided by existing law the Secretary of the Interior may file and approve surveys and plats of any right of way for a wagon road, railroad, or other highway over and across any forest reservation or reservoir site when in his judgment the public interests will not be injuriously affected thereby.
And here again it may be stated that as a matter of fact numerous roads and several railway lines have been constructed; extensive canals and pipe lines have been built in forest reserves, and in not a single case has the existence of the forest reserve added materially to the difficulties, either of obtaining the necessary rights or of properly conducting the business.
Similarly, privileges are granted to construct and maintain sawmills, hotels, stores, ferries and steamers on lakes and streams, etc., and in no case where the public needs and other conditions indicated a deserving case has such privilege been refused or the person conducting the business interfered with.
ThiS Statement would seem incomplete without calling attention to the great value of a definite, well-organized system of protection and management.
Small as the number of men may seem (and is) in comparison with the large area to be patrolled and served, yet each year illustrates more clearly the large return which the country obtains from a comparatively small outlay in this direction.
With fires in nearly all parts of the forested areas of Colorado, Wyoming, Washington, and Oregon, the forest reserves have remained during the past summer comparatively unharmed, thanks to the efforts of a few hundred energetic, well-directed men whose business it is to care for these forests.
Thus a small sum well expended has saved a wealth of material, and, what is of more importance, it saved a forest cover worth far more as a protective and regulative body than as a source of timber supply.
In addition, this organized body of men makes the mountain forests truly useful, and readily so, to the people of the West.
While timber on the unreserved lands must go to waste for want of suitable legislation, and while these lands generally are in such a condition that a variety of legitimate uses is almost prevented by the lack of suitable arrangement to carry on business, the forest reserve is in condition such that every kind of legitimate use can be and is promptly attended to, and thus invites the law-abiding citizen to permanent development, while at the same time it prevents fraud and trespass, with all their train of mischief.
If the field force at the present is smaller than it should be in order to give as full a protection and as prompt service as has been clamored for in certain quarters, this defect is one easily regulated and overcome by suitable appropriation, which should grow with the area of these reserves and the amount of the business performed thereon.
There were pending at the beginning of the year 56 petitions for sale of timber in forest reserves, and 144 were presented during the year.
Of these, 77 were granted and sales effected, 38 were refused or abandoned by the applicants, and 85 were pending at the end of the year.
The sums realized from this source during the year and paid into the Treasury amounted to $25,431.87.
Applications received during the year for free use of timber in forest reserves numbered 1,322, being more than four and one-half times the number received during the preceding year.
There were approved by the Department 70 such applications and by the local forest officers 1,289.
Under this head are included the construction of wagon roads, establishing and conducting road houses, public stopping places, hotels, stores, and the privilege of hay cutting, etc.
Such applications were received to the number of 82, being nearly double the number received during the year previous.
Twelve were pending at the beginning of the year.
These 94 applications are accounted for as follows: Allowed, 47; rejected, 28; awaiting final action, 19.
The applications received included 26 for authority to establish hotels, summer resorts, road houses, etc.
19 for authority to cut hay; 13 to build wagon roads, and 13 for stores; also a number for various other privileges.
In my last annual report I called attention to the fact that the abuses'still existing under the act of June 4, 1897 (30 Stat. L., 34–36), authorizing the selection of vacant public lands outside of forest reserves in lieu of those within the limits of·forest reserves held in private ownership and relinquished to the Government, was the chief obstacle to the extension of the forest-reserve system, and I renewed my recommenda tion for the enactment of legislation along the lines suggested by this Department.
I still adhere to the opinion there expressed, that in my judgment such legislation is absolutely essential to correct the abuses in regard to such lieu selections, and I here renew the recommendation there made, that such legislation be passed.
During the past fiscal year 1,200 applications for selections of lands in lieu of holdings within forest reserves and 7 applications based upon unperfected homestead entries and settlement claims, as provided by the act of June 4, 1897, have been received, involving, in the first class, of perfected title an aggregate area of 230,674.70 acres, and in the second 1,097.65 acres.
The applications approved during the past year embrace 69,703.06 acres and those rejected 32,355.98 acres.
The details of the opening of these lands and of the sales of town lots in Anadarko, Hobart, and Lawton, the county seats of Caddo, Kiowa, and Comanche counties, respectively, were fully set forth in my last annual report.
The net amounts derived from said town-lot sales were as follows: At Anadarko, $186,910.47; at Hobart, $130,936; at Lawton, $412,355.38.
Expenditures have been made, as authorized by the act of March 3, 1901 (31 Stat. L., 1093-1094), for various public improvements and for expenses actually necessary to the maintenance of the several county governments, up to and including October 18, 1902, as follows: From the Anadarko fund, $21,891.31; from the Hobart fund, $23,122.52, and from the Lawton fund, $21,387.36.
In accordance with the provisions of the Presidential proclamation of July 4, 1901, eleven other town sites were reserved, ten of which have been entered by the proper officer in trust for the occupants thereof.
There have also been a number of commutations of homestead entries for town-site purposes, and other town-site entries have been made under the provisions of sections 2387 to 2389, United States Revised Statutes.
In my report for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1901, I adverted to the fact that for the past two years I had been endeavoring to reach some arrangement with the owners of the odd-numbered sections adjoining the San Francisco Mountains Forest Reserves, in Arizona, that would enable me to recommend to the President such action as would effect the consolidation of these reserves.
During the past fisçal year such arrangements were reached with the owners of the odd-numbered sections within the exterior limits of said reserves, relative to the exchange of their holdings for public lands elsewhere, as resulted in the proclamation of the President dated April 12, 1902, consolidating said reserves so as to include the oddnumbered sections adjoining them, within the limits of the San Francisco Mountains Forest Reserve, created by said proclamation.
In the arid region it is water, not land, which measures production.
The western half of the United States would sustain a population greater than that of our whole country to-day if the waters that now run to waste were saved and used for irrigation.
As a result of the strong presentation of the importance of water storage, Congress passed the act, which was signed by you on June 17, 1902, setting aside the proceeds of the public lands for the construction of works of reclamation in the thirteen States and three Territories which form the western half of the country.
The amount of money thus set aside in the Treasury amounts to over $8,000,000.
The work is to be carried on under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior.
The surveys, examinations, and making of recommendations have been intrusted to the Geological Survey, whose Director and leading men have spent the greater part of their lives in the arid West studying the problems, measuring the rivers, and preparing estimates of the extent to which arid lands might ultimately be reclaimed.
On the day following the passage of the act plans were submitted by the Director of the Geological Survey for putting it into effect; and these being approved by me, survey parties were at once put in the field to obtain all of the facts concerning the feasibility of various projects.
The act in itself is general, leaving to administrative action most of the details; so that the ultimate success of this great undertaking may be said to rest wholly with the men in charge.
They can not shift this responsibility by laying any blame for nonsuccess upon Congress.
With this responsibility resting upon them, great care is being exercised in selecting the projects which will be of the greatest benefit to the country; which will settle upon the land the greatest number of people; and which will return to the Treasury the cost of the undertaking, keeping intact the fund for new works.
No considerations of expediency or sentiment can be tolerated, but only those of making the working a success from a business standpoint.
The same caution is exercised in selecting men to carry out details.
They are chosen by competitive examination through the civil service, and are impressed with the fact that in their selection and subsequent advancement ability and merit alone are considered.
Most of the men thus obtained are from the arid West, and have spent their professional lives in the surveying and construction of irrigation works.
It is not considered wise to attempt much at the outset, but to proceed as rapidly as possible consistent with knowing fully the work to be undertaken and the men to carry it on, so that no mistake may be made jeopardizing the future.
For further remarks on this subject, attention is called to that part of this report under the head of"The Geological Survey," page 69.
These lands embraced originally about 3,000,000 acres, and constitute the finest body of pine lands east of the Rocky Mountains.
In order to dispose of them for the benefit of the Indians the act of January 14, 1889 (25 Stat. L., 642), was passed.
Under that act about 660,000 acres have been disposed of, for which there has been received, approximately, $1,126,830.18.
In my last two annual reports I adverted to the fact that the experience of this Department in the administration of that act had demonstrated its inadequacy to accomplish the purposes intended.
Said act provided, in brief, that after the cession of the lands they should be examined and classified as "agricultural" lands and "pine" lands.
The pine lands were to be estimated and appraised, and sold, after advertisement, at public auction to the highest bidder, and the agricultural lands were to be opened to disposition under the homestead laws, at $1.25 per acre.
It was soon discovered that the classification of the land was faulty, in that lands were frequently classified as agricultural that were as a matter of fact pine lands, and that the estimated quantity and value of pine on a given tract was frequently very much in excess of that set forth in the reports of the appraisers.
Soon after these discoveries were made, and in order to relieve the situation, the act of June 7, 1897 (30 Stat. L., 90), was passed, authorizing the sale of the dead and down timber on said lands.
As soon became apparent, this was the most convenient vehicle for fraud that had yet been furnished those who were seeking to despoil the Indians, and on March 1, 1899, Congress passed an act (30 Stat. L., 929) under authority of which I, on March 30, 1899, directed the Commissioner of the General Land Office to suspend until further notice as to said lands all estimating, appraising, examining, selling and cutting of timber, the letting of further logging contracts, under said act of June 7, 1897, as well as the sale of said lands.
I also appointed two inspectors of the Indian Office to investigate the frauds reported to have been committed under the dead and down act.
The result of their investigation was the discovery that, in round numbers, 12,000,000 feet of green timber had been unlawfully cut under dead and down contracts, and over 8,000,000 feet cut without authority on individual allotments.
They collected from the parties so offending, without resorting to legal proceedings, over $55 000.
Against one firm, which made repeated efforts to compromise for less than the value of the timber, a judgment of $93,560.60 was finally obtained.
During the summer of 1900, representations were made to the Department by the Senators and Representatives in Congress from Minnesota that it would be to the interest of the Indians that the pine lands in the four ceded townships in the White Earth Reservation in said State be sold and the agricultural lands opened for disposition under the homestead laws.
I accordingly referred the matter to the Commissioners, respectively, of the General Land Office and of Indian Affairs, and upon receipt of their reports that no practical objection existed to the disposition of said lands as provided for under said act of January 14, 1889, and the amendment thereto of February 26, 1896 (29 Stat. L., 17), I, on October 6, 1900, directed that the pine lands in said four townships be offered for sale on November 27, 1900, and that the agricultural lands be opened for disposition under the homestead law on December 4, 1900; and the order of March 30, 1899, suspending all proceedings in relation to said lands, was modified accordingly.
On November 27 the sale of said ceded lands occurred as ordered.
Soon thereafter, authentic and reliable information having reached the Department that the bidders at said sale had colluded and conspired to keep down the price of the lands, I directed the Commissioner of the General Land Office not to approve any of the purchases made at said sale nor to issue any patent thereon until further advised by this Department.
Subsequently in several cases I directed that where purchasers came forward and showed that they had made their purchases in good faith, and had paid a reasonable price for the land, and were not parties to any collusion or conspiracy to keep down the price, said order would be modified, the purchases would be approved and patents ordered issued thereon; such has since been my known attitude regarding the purchases made at said sale, but, notwithstanding that fact, only a few of the purchasers at said sale have come forward and submitted proof as required to enable them to obtain patent to the land.
To correct the evils and abuses outlined above, and to furnish a law that would adequately protect the rights of the Indians and obtain for them the value of their property, the act of June 27, 1902 (Public— No. 175), was passed.
1. The timber and not the land is to be sold, and then only after advertisement for six months in the leading cities of the country and on sealed bids, which will, it is believed, effectually prevent the collusion of purchasers to keep down the price.
2. After the timber is removed, the lands become agricultural in character, and are to be disposed of under the homestead laws at $1.25 per acre.
3. The labor in cutting is to be obtained from the Indians as far as possible, and not a stick of timber is to be remoyed until it has been cut, banked, and scaled where cut as per Scribner's rules, and the quantity as per scale paid for at the bid price per 1,000 feet.
It will thus be seen that every foot of timber cut must be paid for before it is removed, and the Indian must receive the full value of his timber and the price fixed by law for his agricultural lands.
Another feature of the bill is the reservation of 200,000 acres of said land for a forest reserve, to be placed under the control of the For.
Rules and regulations under this act, with blank forms of bid, agreement, and bond, have been prepared, and sealed bids for the sale of the timber on the examined lands in sections 16 and 36 of the Red Lake Reservation and of the four ceded townships of the White Earth Reservation will be opened at the Crookston land office on March 2, 1903.
The timber and débris must be removed before July 1, 1904, when the land will be subject to homestead entry under the acts cited.
The examination of the ceded Chippewa lands will be resumed as soon as a sufficient corps of examiners has been appointed.
When said lands have been examined and classified, and the Indian allotments completed, the agricultural lands will be opened to settlement and entry.
After the timber and débris have been removed from the pine lands, these will also be opened to settlement and entry, except as to the portion selected as "forestry lands."
The total Indian population of the United States is approximately 269,306, of which the New York Indians and those known as the Five Civilized Tribes embrace 89,732, leaving 179,574, occupying 156 reservations, having 55,127,000 acres, outside of New York and the Indian Territory.
During the past year 6,568 allotments were made, the area thereof being approximately 750,000 acres.
Allotments in severalty, embracing in the aggregate 8,612,000 acres, have been made since the passage of the act of February 8, 1887 (24 Stat. L., 388), to approximately 71,421 Indians.
The general condition of the Indians has been fairly satisfactory during the year; no serious trouble has occurred.
Progress toward civilization has been marked, more Indians having engaged in civilized pursuits and in efforts at self-support than ever before.
The management of the Indian service in the field and in the schools has been satisfactory.
The policy of requiring Indian allottees able to do so, to work a fair portion of their allotments, thus contributing by their industry to their own support, has been adopted, as well as the discontinuance of the issue of rations to those determined and known to be able to support themselves; but extending to those entirely or partially disqualified every possible aid for their well-being and encouragement, and the inauguration of industrial training in schools where not previously established, so that Indians of both sexes might be taught the trades or industries best adapted to their circumstances.
The New York Indians are located on eight small reservations, having an area of about 88,000 acres, in the northwestern part of New York.
They number about 5,232, to some of whom small sums of money and annuities are distributed under treaty stipulations.
The Cherokees, Chickasaws, Choctaws, Creeks, and Seminoles comprise the Five Civilized Tribes in Indian Territory.
They are estimated to number, including freedmen, about 84,500.
The lands controlled by said tribes aggregate about 19,475,614 acres.
Non citizen whites numbering about 300,000 are said to be living within the boundaries of the said tribes.
Two thousand two hundred and eleven allotments to members of the Seminole tribe were made during the year, making a total of 4,053 allotments to them, thus practically completing their allotments.
It is reported that about 6,000 deeds of allotments among the Creeks have been written, and are now ready for the signature of the principal chief of the Creek Nation.
Indians to the number of 1,560 were employed during the year in the agency and field service as harness makers, shoemakers, blacksmiths, herders, butchers, teamsters, police, and in kindred occupations, to whom salaries were paid aggregating $319,810, and in the Indian school service 627 Indians were employed as nurses, matrons, clerks, cooks, laundresses, and industrial and other teachers, salaries amounting to $243,083 being paid to them.
AppRoPRIATIoNs.
The aggregate appropriations on account of Indian service for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1902, was $9,815,190.09.
Of this amount $9,736,186.09 was provided for in the Indian appropriation act for the fiscal year 1902, approved March 3, 1901, and $79,004 by the deficiency acts of February 14 and July 1, 1902.
Net decrease.
ExpENDITuREs.
IncomE.
The income of the various Indian tribes from all sources during the year is as follows: Interest on trust funds, $1,510,248.16; treaty and agreement obligations, $2,234,610.26; gratuities, $727,900; Indian moneys, proceeds of leases, labor, etc., $946,347.93; aggregating $5,419,106.35, as against $5,338,880.54 for the previous fiscal year—an increase of $80,225.81, due principally to greater income from proceeds of labor, leases, etc.
The education of Indian youth in Government schools progressed satisfactorily during the current fiscal year.
There were 25 nonreservation schools (the same as last year); 90 reservation, as against 88 last year, and 134 day (4 less than last year)—making a total of 249 schools operated during the year, as against 251 the previous year, having a total average attendance of 20,540, an increase of 1,030.
Besides those in the Government schools, 3,580 were provided for in mission, boarding, and day schools, the Normal and Agricultural Institute at Hampton, Va., and in public schools in different sections of the country, being an excess of 13 over the previous year.
Improvements to school plants have been made during the fiscal year ending June 30, 1902, at the Crow Agency, Mont.
Fort Bidwell School, California; Fort Lapwai, Idaho; Fort Shaw, Mont.
Fort Yuma, Ariz.
Riverside, Okla.
Lac du Flambeau, Wis.
Mescalero, N. Mex.
Navajo, N. Mex.
Winnebago, Nebr.
Kaw, Okla.
Pima, Ariz.
Pawnee, Okla.
Pottawatomie, Kans.
Rice Station, Ariz.
Absentee Shawnee, Okla.
Seneca, Ind.
T.
Siletz, Oreg.
Uintah, Utah; Umatilla, Oreg.
Warm Springs, Oreg.
Western Shoshone, Nev.
Shawnee, Okla.
Yankton, S. Dak.
Fort Berthold, N. Dak.
Cheyenne River, S. Dak.
Cheyenne and Arapaho, Okla.
Standing Rock, N. Dak., and White Earth, Minn.
A new'plant has been contracted for the Moqui School, located near Keams' Canyon, Ariz., at a cost of $70,000, which will furnish accommodations for 150 to 175 pupils.
In my last annual report it was shown that some 1,600 Indians had been dropped from the ration rolls during the previous year.
Since then others have been dropped, so that the total now numbers over 12,000, all of whom are wholly self-supporting.
Instead of rations and clothing, employment has been given them on reservations in building roads, dams, reservoirs for storage of water for irrigation, and other occupations suitable to their conditions.
Thus a beginning at self-support has been made by a respectable number who never worked before, and while progress will doubtless be slow, yet the example of these will eventually have good effect.
In connection with work by Indians of the character above described, especially in those cases where rations had been discontinued, a couponbook method of trading was inaugurated at one of the agencies as a part of the policy under which able-bodied Indians are given employment at fixed daily wages in lieu of rations, being deemed a necessary expedient as a means of affording them an opportunity to obtain necessary provisions before they could draw their pay, which would not be until the end of each month.
None of the Indians had funds with which to supply themselves and families with necessaries to take the place of the rations cut off; so it was absolutely essential for carrying out the scheme to put Indians to work to devise a method by which they could maintain themselves until they could draw their pay for work done.
The system referred to has enabled any Indian, as soon as he had earned two, three, five, or more dollars, to go to the agent with his time report and get a coupon book on any trader he might choose for the amount due him, and then go to the trader to whom the value of the book is charged by the agent and trade on it the same as with cash.
In this manner the Indian has been able to supply his needs pending pay day, when the amount earned by him in the meantime became due and payable, less the sum advanced in coupons, to be deducted by the agent and paid to the trader, thus liquidating the Indian's indebtedness with the latter.
As far as tried the system has worked admirably, and with satisfaction to the Indians using the coupon books, and will be given a trial at other agencies where the Indians are engaged as those at the agency referred to.
1. The general topographical and physical characteristics of the country comprising the agency or school tracts visited.
2. Character of soil; its adaptability to agriculture or grazing; if suitable for the former, its fertility and probable degree of productiveness.
3. The extent, kind, and success or otherwise of farming operations carried or attempted at such agency or school.
4. The attitude of the Indians in the matter of farming pursuits, and the extent to which they are aided and encouraged by officers and employees in the Indian service.
5. The degree of knowledge of their duties possessed by farmers and assistants and industrial teachers where farmers are not employed, and the value of the services performed by such employees; whether their duties and their manner of performing the same are such as to encourage the Indians to engage in farming pursuits where conditions are otherwise favorable.
6. And, finally, any other points which your experience and judgment may dictate.
Mr. Chubbuck immediately left for the Indian country, and has since been constantly engaged at various reservations in North and South Dakota and Oklahoma—having so far visited and reported upon the agricultural conditions and needs of five reservations.
With the practical advice of Mr. Chubbuck, given on the spot, it is expected that great good will grow out of these investigations, and that renewed interest will be evinced in agricultural pursuits by many of the Indians, now that the Department has made it evident to them that they are expected to acquire arts of industry, and aid in their own support.
During the year 352 allotments to the Chippewas of Lake Superior on the Bad River Reservation, Wis., were approved, embracing approximately 28,160 acres.
Schedules of 709 other allotments have been received at the Indian Office, but no action has been taken thereon.
PATENTs.
During the year 7,305 patents were issued and delivered to Indians of various reservations in Nebraska, Oklahoma, and South Dakota.
The work of allotment to the Crow Indians, which was resumed during the past fiscal year, has been continued.
Allotments were also continued during a portion of the year on the Cheyenne River and Rosebud reservations, S. Dak.
Work in the field was, however, suspended before the end of the year, owing to a lack of funds to carry it on.
The work of revising allotments in the Redding and Susanville land districts, California, has been continued.
Allotment work under the fourth section of the general allotment act of February 8, 1887, and the amendatory acts is still being carried on in Oregon and Washington.
No allotments to nonreservation Indians have been approved or trust patents issued for such allotments during the period of this report.
The subject of leasing Indian allotments was very fully considered in my last annual report, and amended rules and regulations to govern such leases under the various acts of Congress (full details of which were set out in said report), were approved March 21, 1902, and the same are now in force.
Three thousand nine hundred and ten leases were approved by the Department during the year, and 588 executed during that period are pending in the Indian office.
During the year 87 leases have been made and 182 permits granted for grazing, agricultural, and mining purposes, from which an approximate income, exclusive of the royalty on the mining leases, of $270,717.35 will be derived for the year, full details of which are set out in the report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
There was derived from leasing privileges on the Kiowa, etc., reservations, under temporary permits, from April 1, 1901, to April 1, 1902, the sum of $69,661.04.
Early in the present calendar year it was determnined to lease reserve pastures numbers 1 and 4 belonging to the Apaches, Kiowas, and Comanches, for grazing purposes and number 3 for agricultural purposes, number 2 having been reserved for the common use of the Indians.
Advertisements inviting proposals for the privileges alluded to were authorized, and in response bids were received and awards made and leases executed covering 16 tracts within said pastures 1 and 4 and 22 within pasture 3, at an annual rental of $124,974.59, or an excess of $55,313.55 over the previous year, thus demonstrating the advantage of leasing upon competitive bids over the non competitive or informal method previously in vogue.
The estimated income from the Kiowa, etc., pastures from April 1, 1902, to July 1, 1903, is $164,833.25.
The rates per acre derived from said grazing leases is from 25 to 431 cents, and from 40 to 50 cents for the agricultural lands.
The average rate derived for 427,557 acres during the year ending April 1, 1902, was about 10 cents per acre, the annual rental amounting to $42,641.52.
These 427,557 acres were controlled last year by six lessees, while under the new system practically the same acreage is under lease to ten firms and individuals at an annual rental of $119,409.49, showing an increased income thereon of nearly $77,000 as the result of substituting the sealed bid and competition for the permit system.
Logging operations on the Lac du Flambeau and Bad River Reservations have progressed satisfactorily, but the operations on these reservations have not been extended or enlarged by the approval of new contracts.
The act of February 12, 1901 (31 Stat. L., 785), authorized the Indians of the Grand Portage Reservation to sell the timber from their allotments.
Rules for cutting the same were formulated and approved, and operations thereunder are understood to have been satisfactorily conducted.
Under Department authority, Menominee Indians were employed to conduct logging on their reservation for the season of 1901-2.
A total of 15,000,000 feet of timber was cut and sold, on sealed bids, at $17.27 per thousand feet, the highest price ever received from timber cut on an Indian reservation.
No timber operations have been carried on during the past year on the lands under the jurisdiction of the Leech Lake or White Earth agencies.
The act of June 27, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 400), specifically repealed the clause of the Indian appropriation act of June 7, 1897 (30 Stat. L., 90), which authorized the Secretary of the Interior to permit the Indians of the diminished reservations in the State of Minnesota to dispose of the dead timber, standing or fallen, thereon; and likewise to permit the Indians of the ceded lands to dispose of such timber on the ceded lands.
The act of June 27, 1902, supra, places the estimating, appraising, and sale of timber on the ceded lands under the jurisdiction of the Commissioner of the General Land Office.
Timber was cut on the ceded lands under the provisions of the aforesaid act of 1897, including the season of 1900-1901, to the extent of $266,321.45 net, of which $72,060.07 was for green timber, leaving $194,261.38 as the value of the dead timber so cut, which amount will be paid per capita to the Chippewa Indians in the State of Minnesota, as provided by the said act of 1897.
It is held that the $72,060.07 derived from the green timber aforesaid is not subject to distribution among said Indians, but that the same belongs to their permanent fund, and it will be deposited in the Treasury of the United States to the credit of that fund.
On the night of July 5, 1902, a large amount of timber on the Red Lake diminished reservation in Minnesota (estimated at 5,000,000 feet) was destroyed by cyclone.
Steps are being taken by the Department to save this timber by having the same cut and banked under the direction of the Indian agent in charge, by employing the Indians of the reservation to do the work, and to then dispose of it on sealed bids, after advertisement, to the highest bidder or bidders, for the benefit of the Indians of the reservation named.
IRRiGATioN.
The work of irrigation on the several reservations reported last year has been continued.
With an appropriation of $100,000 for irrigation, instead of one-half that amount, or less, the scope of the work was enlarged, and expenditures were possible on several reservations that otherwise would have been deferred.
The report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs gives in detail the expenditures for irrigation during the year.
During the latter part of the past year the investigation of the irrigation systems and the planning of new systems on the several reservations was at a practical standstill, owing to the serious indisposition and subsequent resignation of the irrigation engineer.
Another engineer was appointed, who began work just after the commencement of the present fiscal year.
Owing to the suspension of the several projects prior to his appointment, and pending his entry on duty, he has since been kept constantly in the field making necessary investigations of and plans for new work and extending that already begun.
As soon as possible the engineer will be located in this city, whence direction and supervision as to all irrigation matters will be given, the result of which will be taken up in the next annual report of the Department.
Permits have been granted to survey and locate routes for the construction of telephone lines over certain Indian reservations under the provisions of section 3 of the act of March 3, 1901 (31 Stat. L., 1083), which authorizes the Secretary of the Interior to grant right of way "for the construction, operation, and maintenance of telephone and telegraph lines * * * through any Indian reservation, * * through any lands reserved for an Indian agency or Indian school, 兴 兴 兴 or through any lands which have been allotted in severalty to any individual Indian under any law or treaty, but which have not been conveyed to the allottee with ful power of alienation," etc.
As in the case of railroads, many telephone and telegraph lines have been constructed, and are now in the course of construction in the Indian Territory, so that in that Territory there are 748 miles of constructed lines, and 600 miles under construction.
But the rapidity thus displayed is not so marked in other sections.
March 2, 1899 (30 Stat. L., 900), full details of which will be found in the report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
No less than 1,774 miles of road have been constructed and are now in course of construction, in the Indian Territory alone, since July 1 1898, making altogether 2,943 miles of road in that Territory.
Authority has been granted two companies to make preliminary surveys for the location of power lines, under the provisions of an act of Congress approved February 15, 1901, authorizing the Secretary of the Interior to grant such permits—one through the Fort Hall Reservation, in Idaho, and the other through the Cœur d'Alene Reservation, Idaho.
Under section 16 of the Indian appropriation act of March 3, 1893 (27 Stat. L., 645), there was created by Congress a Commission, known as the Dawes Commission, vested with authority to negotiate agreements.
The Commission, as created, consisted of three members, appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
It was contemplated that this commission should in their negotiations seek, first, the allotment of the lands of these tribes in severalty, or at least a sufficient quantity for the needs of each member; and, second, to procure the cession of any surplus lands to the United States.
It soon became evident, however, that in order to accomplish their work it would be necessary for the Commission to make correct rolls of the members of the tribes entitled to lands in severalty, and subsequent legislation was enacted for that purpose, as hereinafter stated.
The Commission thus appointed at once proceeded to Indian Territory and acquainted the chiefs and leading members of these tribes of their presence and the nature of their instructions.
There was found to exist among the several tribes a bitter sentiment against allotment in severalty, encouraged and stimulated to a high degree by those whose personal interests would be adversely affected by a change of régime.
The Commission, however, unceasingly labored to instill a sentiment in favor of the negotiation of agreements and reached its first success on the 23d day of April, 1897, when the accredited representatives of the Choctaws and Chickasaws united with the Commission in the execution of an agreement looking to the allotment of their lands in severalty and other purposes, which agreement was ratified by Congress on June 28, 1898.
On March 2, 1895, the membership of the Commission was increased to five.
This number was subsequently, on July 1, 1898, reduced to four, where it still remains.
In addition to the duty of negotiating agreements, the Commission was empowered by the act of June 10, 1896 (28 Stat. L., 321), to determine questions of disputed membership in the several tribes.
The membership at that time was estimated to be, approximately, 75,000.
Owing to the value of this great estate, many persons whose right to membership was disputed were seeking admission, and reports indicated that the records of the several tribes were exceedingly inaccurate and unreliable.
The Commission's authority was still further extended on June 28, 1898, it at that time having failed to secure agreements with the other tribes which met with the approval of both the tribes and of Congress.
The most important duty enjoined upon it by this act was that of preparing correct rolls of citizens in each of the several nations, a work which was immediately entered upon and which has been vigorously prosecuted continuously since and which has reached proportions wholly unanticipated.
The Commission's report for the year ended June 30, 1902, shows that agreements providing for allotment in severalty in all of the five nations have been made with the Creek, Cherokee, Choctaw, and Chickasaw nations, which were ratified by the act of June 30, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 500), as to the Creeks; by the act of July 1, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 716), as to the Cherokees; and by the act of July 1, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 641), as to the Choctaws and Chickasaws.
The Creeks ratified their agreement on July 26, 1902, the Cherokees ratified their agreement August 7, 1902, and the Choctaws and Chickasaws ratified their agreement on September 25, 1902.
The supplementary agreement with the Choctaws and Chickasaws was especially desirable, because the agreement made with them in 1897 (sec. 29, act of June 28, 1898, 30 Stat. L., 495) proved to be inadequate and ambiguous.
By these agreements one of the most vexatious questions which have arisen in this Department in many years is disposed of.
The title to this territory, which by early treaties was vested in fee in the several tribes, may now be transferred to the individuals and the communal holdings terminated.
These agreements, while not possessing that clearness in terms which legislation should have where such great interests are involved, are very satisfactory in the main, considering the contentions which had to be overcome and the concessions which it was found necessary to make.
Under prior legislation it was found to be impracticable to allot the lands to the members, having regard solely to their value.
The changes made in the subsequent agreements make it possible to give to each member a certain acreage of land according to the standard of value, and also his proportionate share of the tribal funds.
Those who have been holding vast tracts of land will be compelled to relinquish all that in excess of the amount to which they are rightfully entitled.
The individualizing of the homes of the Indians will place the owners in a position to better support themselves and their families, will instill a spirit of patriotism and independence, and materially reduce crime.
It will make possible the establishment and maintenance of better school and religious institutions; will result in the extension of railroads, the building of towns, and the immigration of white persons from the surrounding States, who will be enabled to lease lands from the citizens of the tribes and to purchase in a qualified way, subject to the approval of this Department.
The entire territory of the five tribes has been classified under the supervision of the Commission; allotment has been completed in the Seminole Nation; and in the Creek Nation over 13,000 allotments, embracing in excess of 2,000,000 acres of land, have been made.
The marketable timber has also been estimated preparatory to allotment, and, barring certain legal obstacles involving the determination of citizenship, the work may be aggressively executed.
By the recently ratified agreements dates have been fixed for closing the rolls, after which the membership may not be decreased by deaths or increased by births and intermarriage.
A very large portion of the rolls of the Creek Nation as made by the Commission has been submitted and approved by the Department, and there have also been disposed of in like manner many enrollment cases in the other tribes, including applications for identification as Mississippi Choctaws.
The work of this Commission is believed to be well systematized, and is being carried rapidly forward.
Its report for the year ended June 30, 1902, which is appended hereto (p. 180, Exhibit H), sets forth in great detail the obstacles which are met and the progress which is being made.
Mr. J. George Wright, United States Indian inspector, has been continued in the Indian Territory, with headquarters at Muskogee, under section 27 of the act of Congress approved June 28, 1898 (30 Stat. L., 495), known as the "Curtis Act."
He has general supervision over matters within the jurisdiction of the Department, except questions of citizenship and allotment and other matters committed to the Commission to the Five Civilized Tribes.
The inspector transmits the annual reports of the agent of the Union Agency, the superintendent of schools in the Indian Territory, and the several supervisors; the revenue inspector for the Creek, Cherokee, and Chickasaw Nations; the supervising engineer of town sites, and the mining trustees of the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations, which officials are under the general direction of the inspector and report to the Department through him.
There are no matters of any particular importance which have required the attention of the inspector in the Seminole Nation during the year, there being, however, one lease entered into between the Seminole Nation, with the consent of the allottee, and a company that desired to use stone from certain lands for the purpose of making lime.
As contemplated by the agreement with the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations, practically all of the coal and asphalt mining operations, which have heretofore been carried on under national contracts, are now under formal leases entered into by the mining trustees and approved by the Department, with good and sufficient bonds securing the performance of the stipulations of such leases, payment of royalties, etc.
These leases have been made for a term of thirty years, with a royalty on coal of 8 cents per ton, mine run, and on asphalt 10 cents per ton on crude and 60 cents per ton for the refined material.
But few leases have been made during the year except such as were in the nature of renewals of old national contracts, the policy of the Department being to discourage speculative applications.
The pending supplemental agreement with the Choctaws and Chickasaws, as ratified by Congress on July 1, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 641), and confirmed by the tribes at an election held September 25, 1902, prohibits the making of any additional coal or asphalt lease after the final ratification thereof; therefore, immediately after the close of the fiscal year no further applications were received and all pending ones were rapidly passed upon.
At the close of the year there were 104 coal leases and 6 asphalt leases in effect.
Of the ten companies referred to in the report for the previous year as being operated under national contracts, all but four have since been granted formal leases.
One of these four, the Caston Coal Company, abandoned its operations, while the applications of Messrs. Perona, Sarlls, and Perry Brothers for leases were still pending.
The amount of royalty from coal is reported to be $245,848.01, and from asphalt $1,513.35, or a total of $247,361.36.
A general settling up of all old accounts of back royalty was made during the year, which resulted in a collection of almost $20,000 from this source.
But little progress has been made during the year in the operation of the asphalt mines in the Indian Territory.
The lessees continue to prospect and experiment, but the results are unsatisfactory.
The agreement with the Creek Nation makes no provision for the leasing of mineral lands, and does not reserve any such land from allotment.
It provides, however, that citizens can not dispose of their allotments within five years, except with the consent of the Secretary of the Interior; and as coal, oil, or other minerals in place are considered a part of the realty, the Department has held that Indian citizens can not mine coal or other mineral and dispose of the same without the consent of the Secretary.
Under this ruling a few permits for Indians to continue mining where they had previously operated were granted, with the understanding that royalty was to be held to the credit of the land from which the coal was mined.
The amount of money collected from this source during the year was $2,761.20.
No new applications for leases in the Cherokee Nation under section 13 of the Curtis Act have been received.
Under certain informal permits granted by authority of the Department royalty has been collected on coal amounting to $5,339.57.
Under applications made in 1899, 12 leases were granted the Cherokee Oil and Gas Company, covering certain lands for the purpose of extracting oil and gas near Chelsea, in the Cherokee Nation.
One lease for the same purpose was also granted The Cudahy Oil Company.
They cover a period of 15 years, with a rate of royalty of 10 per centum of the value of all crude oil extracted, each lease being for 640 acres.
They were granted in pursuance of the preference right given by section 13 of the Curtis Act to those who, or whose grantors, have under the customs and laws heretofore existing and prevailing in the Cherokee Nation, obtained leases of land containing oil, taken possession thereof, made improvements and developed and produced oil in commercial quantities.
The town-site surveys have been pushed during the year with a view to early completion.
The exterior limits of practically all towns having been established during the previous year, the work of making the interior surveys and plats has been under way.
The act of Congress approved May 31, 1900 (31 Stat. L., 221), only authorized the surveying and platting of towns having a population of 200 or more, and those towns set apart upon recommendation of the Dawes Commission; therefore the work during the year has been confined to such towns.
In the Choctaw Nation the work was practically completed, the report showing but 1 town yet to survey, and that was under progress, there being 33 of such towns.
The report also shows 12 smaller or new towns along the lines of railroads where the tracts were set aside upon the recommendation of the Commission to the Five Civilized Tribes.
The advices of these segregations were not received in time to commence the work prior to the close of the year.
In the Chickasaw Nation the work of the larger towns was completed with the exception of 7, and 2 of these were under way.
There were also, as in the Choctaw Nation, 2 new town sites which were segregated just at the close of the year, and which are yet to be surveyed.
Including these new town sites there are 56 towns shown by the report.
In the Creek Nation the report shows that all towns, including the smaller ones which were especially authorized by the agreement with that nation, have been surveyed—25 in all.
In the Cherokee Nation all towns having a population of 200 or more were completed with the exception of 2, and these were under way, there being altogether 30 of these towns.
The Indian appropriation act approved May 27, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 245), authorizes the surveying and platting of the small towns in the Cherokee, Choctaw, and Chickasaw nations.
There are about 440 of these smaller towns and post-offices, but investigations that were made as to the conditions at each before the close of the year show that it will not be necessary to establish or survey town sites at more than 60 towns in the Chickasaw Nation, 25 in the Choctaw Nation, and 20 in the Cherokee Nation.
The work of appraising the town sites in the Creek, Choctaw, and Chickasaw nations has been carried on during the year by the commissions appointed for each nation, and the work has progressed satisfactorily, the same being nearly up with the surveys in the Choctaw and Creek nations, and about half done in the Chickasaw Nation.
No town-site commission was appointed for the Cherokee Nation until after the close of the year; therefore, there were no appraisements made in that nation.
Attention is called to the manner of the issuance of deeds to town lots in the several nations, showing that full payments are being made and title passed to a number of these lots.
The same complications exist in the matter of the collection of the tribal revenues as during the previous year.
The laws of the different nations attempt to fix and prescribe certain permit and other taxes to be assessed against noncitizens residing and doing business within the Indian Territory, but the only method of enforcing these tribal taxes, as a general rule, has been by the removal of the parties declining to pay, under the provisions of section 2149 of the Revised Statutes.
In the Creek and Cherokee nations these revenues have been entirely collected by this Department through the United States Indian agent at Union Agency.
The Choctaw and Chickasaw nations are permitted to collect their own revenues as prescribed by their own laws.
The Chickasaw national legislature, however, at the close of the year placed the matter of the collection of their cattle taxes in the hands of the Department, and the revenue inspector for the Creek and Cherokee nations was also assigned to this duty.
The amount collected from that source from June 21 to June 30, 1902, was $1,160.75.
The total amount of revenue collected from all sources in the Creek Nation during the past year was $17,196.79, showing a material decrease from the previous years.
The total amount collected in the Cherokee Nation was $17,060.08.
That it shall hereafter be unlawful to remove or deport any person from the Indian Territory who is in lawful possession of any lot or parcels of land in any town or city in the Indian Territory which has been designated as a town site under existing laws and treaties; and no part of this appropriation shall be used for the deportation or removal of any such person from the Indian Territory.
In the matter of the schools in the Choctaw, Chickasaw, Creek, and Cherokee nations, attention is invited to the report of Superintendent John D. Benedict and the several supervisors, who discuss the details of the work in each nation.
He reports that the past year has been by far the most successful of any since the Department assumed the supervisory control over the schools in the Territory, the tribal oficials, almost without exception, working in harmony with the Federal officials in endeavoring to secure better educational facilities.
There are 5 boarding schools in the Choctaw Nation, 2 of which are orphan academies, 190 day schools, and a number of small neighborhood boarding schools; also several schools where Choctaw pupils reside in the limits of the Chickasaw Nation.
The total enrollment of all these Choctaw schools during the year was 4,788, at a total cost of $113,485.65.
The Chickasaw Nation has maintained 4 boarding schools, one of which is an orphan academy, and 16 day schools, with a total enrollment of 939 pupils, costing $84,257.85.
Nation are only partially under the control of the Federal authorities in the Territory, and the expenses of such schools have been exceptionally large, and the recommendation is therefore made that some radical changes concerning these schools be adopted.
In the Creek Nation the schools are jointly under control of the tribal superintendent and a Federal supervisor, both acting under rules and regulations prescribed by the Department.
This nation has maintained 10 boarding schools, 7 for Indian children and 3 for freedmen or colored children, also 52 day schools.
The total enrollment of these schools for the year has been 2,754, at a cost of $72,102.26.
In the Cherokee Nation the Government has only assumed the supervisory control over their schools, the school supervisor, acting under the direction of the superintendent, inspecting the schoois, assisting in the examination of teachers, and passing upon and approving warrants issued by the principal chief in the payment of expenses of such schools.
The new agreement, ratified since the close of the year, provides for joint control of the Cherokee schools in the same manner as in the Creek Nation.
There have been 4 boarding schools in the Cherokee Nation during the year, 1 being an orphan academy and 1 a colored high school, also 140 day schools; all having a total enrollment of 5,383 pupils, maintained at a total cost of $98,054.
Attention is called to the important provisions of the supplemental agreements with the Creek, Choctaw, and Chickasaw nations, and the act of Congress approved July 1, 1902, providing for the disposition of matters in the Cherokee Nation.
A list of timber contracts entered into in accordance with the provisions of the act of June 6, 1900 (31 Stat. L., 660), is submitted, showing 12 of these contracts in effect during the year, all being for timber to be used in railroad construction or the operation of mines.
The total amount of funds received by the United States Indian agent for the credit of the several tribes is shown by the following statement to be $595,093.94, an increase of $308,579.92 in the collections over the previous year.
Comparing the disbursements, as above shown, with those made for the previous year, it will be noted that there is an increase of $353,756.75.
Attention is invited to the regulations authorizing the issuance by municipal corporations of bonds for the purpose of constructing waterworks, schools, and other public improvements.
The towns of Muskogee and Okmulgee voted bond issues of $175,000 and $20,000, respectively, which met the approval of the Department.
The town of Checotah also provided for the issuance of bonds for school purposes the sum of $10,000, which was not finally passed upon at the close of the year.
The town of Wagoner provided $100,000 for waterworks and $15,000 for schools, but before the matter was finally disposed of Congress passed the act of May 19, 1902, which provided that the judge of the United States court for the judicial district in which the municipality is located should pass upon such bonds, taking it out of the hands of the Department.
Reference is made to the new railroad legislation in the act of Congress approved February 28, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 43), authorizing roads to take and condemn lands in any town sites or allotments or other lands in the Indian Territory.
Under section 8 of the Creek agreement the Indian agent has, under the supervision of the Indian inspector, taken steps to place Creek allottees in unrestricted possession of their allotments and remove parties objectionable to them.
Attention is called to the provision in the supplemental agreement with the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations relative to the reservation of 640 acres at the town of Sulphur in the Chickasaw Nation, to include the mineral springs located at that point.
In conclusion it is stated that the complicated condition of affairs in the Indian Territory will necessarily continue until the present work of allotting lands and disposing of town lots is completed, and the various tribal governments with their laws are extinguished.
The greatest need of the Territory at this time is educational facilities for noncitizens.
In view of the recent supplemental agreements with the several tribes, which have had the careful consideration of the Department before being submitted to and ratified by the last session of Congress, no recommendations for additional legislation are made at this time, the work to be performed being to carry out the provisions of these agreements.
Attention, however, is called to the urgent need for some provision to be made requiring deeds, mortgages, etc., to be recorded.
The bill introduced at the last session of Congress, providing for the protection and preservation of game in the Indian Territory, failed to become a law.
Such a law is needed and desired by all, and it is therefore respectfully recommended that the matter be again submitted for the consideration of Congress.
The official relations of the inspector during the year with the numerous Federal officials of the Indian Territory, as well as with the executives of the Five Civilized Tribes, have been particularly harmonious and pleasant.
An agreement among themselves was made by this tribe early in the year providing for a pro rata division of their tribal lands and funds, and the same was ratified by act of Congress approved July 1, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 636).
An agreement with the Arikara, Grosventre, and Mandan of the above reservation was made by an inspector of the Department June 25, 1902, by which 208,000 acres of land were ceded to the United States, in consideration of $260,000, to be paid to and expended for them in various beneficial ways.
This agreement will be submitted for the.
Agreements made with the Crows and the Yankton Sioux in 1899, and with the Sioux of the Devil's Lake Reservation; Indians of the Grande Ronde Reservation; the Lower Brulé Reservation; and the Rosebud Reservation, made in 1901, are pending before Congress.
Lands amounting to nearly one and three-quarters of a million acres are ceded by these pending agreements, all of them providing for large cessions, except that with the Yankton Sioux, by which the United States acquires title to the well-known red pipestone quarry in Minnesota.
It is hoped that favorable action will be taken in all these cases during the next session of Congress.
The agreement with these ·Indians in 1900, to compensate them for lands in dispute, is also pending before Congress.
The claim for compensation for lands excluded from the Yakima Reservation by alleged erroneous survey, involving some 293,837 acres, is still pending, the Indians having refused to negotiate with an Indian inspector who was sent there for the purpose during the past year.
Efforts will be made during the present year to bring about an arrangement with the Indians.
The inVestigation of "the condition of Indians upon reservations, their degree of civilization, the advisability of reducing the size of their reservations," etc., provided for by the act of March 3, 1901 (31 Stat. L., 1069), has been discontinued, owing to the lack of funds to carry on the work, no appropriation for the purpose for the current fiscal year having been made.
Since my last annual report conveyances have been approved by the Department for 1,077.10 acres of Peoria lands, at a valuation of $14,606, and 60 acres of Miami lands, valued at $600.
Conveyances for 22,946.87 acres of Citizcn Pottawatomie lands, having a value of $124,543.78, and for 5,268.74 acres of Absentee Shawnee lands, valued at $54,572.75, were approved by the Department during the same period.
Lands belonging to Indians in Michigan to the extent of 551 acres, valued at $3,586, were sold and conveyances therefor approved by the Department during the past year.
ConVeyances for 129.50 acres belonging to these Indians have been approved, valued at $2,362.50.
Lands belonging to these Indians have been sold to the extent of 709.95 acres, valued at $3,759.60.
By the act of May 27, 1902 (32 Statutes, 275), provision was made for the sale of allotments of deceased Indians, under certain conditions, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
Rules prescribing the manner of sale have been prepared for the guidance of purchasers.
No deeds have been approved.
But some deeds for sales made before the establishment of the present rules, or before any ·rules at all were made, will be disapproved.
The plan for the allotment of the common lands of these Indians which was submitted to Congress on February 1, 1901, with favorable recommendation and urgent request for speedy action, is still pending before that body.
Attention was again called to the matter on January 4, 1902.
It is hoped that favorable action will be taken at the next session.
By decree of the Supreme Court of the United States, these Indians were rendered homeless, and steps became necessary to provide homes for them.
An Indian inspector was detailed to proceed to the Mission Agency for the purpose of selecting a tract, either on- the public domain or to be obtained by purchase from private parties, upon which to locate them.
A number of places were visited and examined by him, and the inspector recommended the purchase of a tract known as the Monserrate ranch, as possessing greater advantages than any other offered, at a minimum cost ($70,000) to the Government, provided not more than 300 persons were to be cared for.
As the Warner's ranch Indians numbered but 158 souls, the ranch recommended by the inspector was deemed a suitable location by the Department, and the purchase of the same was recommended to Congress.
The matter was favorably acted upon by that body in the Indian appropriation act for the current fiscal year, and provision therein was also made for the appointment of an advisory committee of three, to aid in the selection of a tract for the use of said Indians and such others, not provided with suitable lands elsewhere, as the Secretary of the Interior might locate thereon.
A commission was duly appointed, consisting of Messrs. Charles F. Lummis, Russel C. Allen, and Charles L. Partridge, who reported July 23, 1902, the selection of the "Pala" proposition, covering 3,438 acres, at a cost of $46,250, and which was strongly recommended by them as the most suitable of all the lands visited by the commission.
This selection was duly approved by the Department on August 15, 1902, but as the deeds of conveyance have not been received, the transaction has not been closed.
Since then the commission has recommended the selection of several small tracts for the location of other Indians, in view of the fact that there remains a balance of the fund appropriated for the purpose; but the Department has decided that this can not be legally done, inasmuch as its powers are believed to have been exhausted when the purchase of the tract alluded to was made.
The removal of these Indians to the Colville Reservation was provided for by the Indian appropriation act of May 27, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 260), and the matter is under advisement.
The work of ascertaining the beneficiaries of the judgment of the Court of Claims on the claim of said Indians for lands arising under the treaty of Buffalo Creek of January 15, 1838, is now being carried on in the office of Indian Affairs, and it is hoped that rolls of those entitled to share in the said judgment will soon be completed, so that payment of the claim may be made at the earliest practicable date.
Provision Was made by act of Congress approved March 3, 1901, for the adjustment of the claims of reservation traders against the Osage Indians.
A board was appointed by my direction on December 9, 1901, and examination made of the claims, 2,625 in all, presented by 26 traders and others, which showed the claimed indebtedness of the Indians to be $646,214.40, of which $139,669.43 was interest, leaving face value of the claims $506,544.97.
See House Doc. No. 643, Fifty-seventh Congress, first session.)
Of the face of the claims $429,596.32 was allowed, deductions amounting to·$216,618.08 being made for interest, discount for excess profits charged and certain improper charges in some of the claims, and for claims excluded as not within the class specified by the aforesaid act.
The act provided that the individual shares of the Indians of funds arising from grazing and excess or accumulated interest should be used in paying their indebtedness, and the claims of such individual debtors were paid in July, 1902, to the extent of $207,286.96, leaving $222,309.36 yet due the traders from certain individual members of the tribe.
Other payments are to be made "whenever pasture moneys and accumulations of interest other. than regular annuities shall amount to the sum of $100,000."
The pasture moneys amount to something like $80,000 per annum.
But as the per capita shares of this fund of the members of the tribe can be used only to liquidate each individual's indebtedness, and as many of them are indebted for large sums, greater than their shares of said fund will amount to in a number of years, many years will elapse before final payment can be made.
I am of the opinion that steps should be taken to liquidate this indebtedness at an earlier date, in justice to the traders whose claims were adjusted practically upon a cash basis.
To do this it seems to me that authority might be obtained from the Osages to nationalize these claims, and for their payment as a tribal debt out of the grazing fund, as fast as the same accumulates.
In this way the whole indebtedness could be settled within the next two or three years.
Fifteen tracts of land, from 1 acre to 164 acres in size, on 13 reservations, were set apart during the year for educational and religious work among the Indians.
The report of the Commissioner of Pensions shows that the total number of pensioners on the roll during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1902, was 1,041,687, and the number remaining on the roll at the close of the year was 999,446, a net gain over the previous year of 1,711, and exceeding in number of pensioners any former year.
The gains to the rolls during the year were 40,121 new pensioners and 3,831 renewals and restorations, a total of 43,952.
The losses to the rolls during the year by death were 37,145, and from other causes 5,096, a total of 42,241, leaving a net gain of 1,711 for the year.
The number of claims of all classes adjudicated during the year was 246,353, of which number 118,464 were rejected.
There were 10,441 claims allowed in which no benefit accrued to the claimants for the reason that they were already pensioned under another law at an equal or higher rate.
No certificates issue in this class of cases unless the claimant elects to take such pension in lieu of that which he now receives.
Attention is directed to the fact that the number of rejections does not represent an equal number of separate claimants.
Many of the rejections represent claimants who are drawing pensions under one law or another, while in other cases different and separate applications are often filed by a soldier claiming under different acts of Congress or by and through several separate attorneys.
The number of allowances in which certificates actually issued during the year was 117,268.
Of these, 40,121 were original claims; 3,831 were restorations and renewals; 57,063°were increases, reissues, additionals, and supplementals, and 16,253 were for accrued pension.
The number of pending claims at the beginning of the year was 403,569, and the number of new claims filed during the year was 188,626; at its close there were pending 339,436 of all classes, of which 131,700 were original claims in which no allowance has ever been made.
The total number of males pensioned was 738,809; 288,936 on account of disability; 442,101 on account of service, and 7,732 old war survivors.
The total number of females pensioned is 260,637; 92,171 by reason of death of the soldier of service origin; 155,178 on account of service of soldier; 12,654 on account of service of soldier in old wars, and 634 nurses.
A detailed statement of these classes with the amounts disbursed for each during the last fiscal year is appended hereto, page 218.
Exhibit I.)
The appropriation for the payment of pensions for the fiscal year was $144,000,000.
Repayments to the appropriation made the amount available for payment of pensions $144,004,351.56.
The disbursements for army and navy pensions during the year, including the amount disbursed by Treasury settlements, were $137,504,267.99, leaving an unexpended balance to be covered into the Treasury of $6,500,083.57.
The expenditure for navy pensions was $3,849,022.24.
The disbursements for pensions by the United States from July 1, 1790, to June 30, 1865 were $96,445,444 23.
Since 1865 the disbursements for pensions were $2,804 408,857.22, and for cost of maintenance and expenses $91,654,717.92, or a total of $2,896,063,575.12, making the entire cost of the maintenance of the pension system since the foundation of the Government nearly $3,000,000,000.
Of the amount that has been expended for pensions since the foundation of the Government $70,000,000 was on account of the war of the Revolution; $45,025,297 on account of service in the war of 1812; $5,814,206 on account of service in the Indian wars (1832-1842); $31,861,337 on account of service in the Mexican war; $3,275,184 on account of the war with Spain, and $2,728,878,276 on account of the war of the rebellion.
The foregoing amounts are startling in character, yet they are the results of the disbursements made pursuant to the pension laws.
The annual value of the pension roll (the amount required annually to pay the regular pension certificates outstanding at the close of the fiscal year) was $132,152,800.
The average annual value of each pension was $132.23, a slight increase over that of the former year.
The average annual value of general law pensions has increased to $171.28; of pensions under act of June 27, 1890, to $108.59, while the average annual value of Spanish war pensions has decreased to $140.78.
Over one-half of the pensions are $10 per month and under.
In 97,551 cases allowed there were first payments averaging $88.95 each, amounting to $8,677,548.
Not unfrequently these first payments are over $1,000 and sometimes more when a case has been long pending.
A large increase is shown in the number of pensions and increase of pensions by special acts of Congress, the number being 1,114, causing an increase in the annual expenditures of $182,825.
Since 1861 there have been granted by special acts of Congress 9,296 pensions, including increase of pension.
The number of attorneys on the roll June 30, 1902, was 20,718, and the amount paid as attorney fees during the year was $582,581.
These fees are paid to attorneys direct by the United States from the pensioner's allowance, and attorneys are not permitted to collect fees from claimants.
Four thousand three hundred and fifty-five examining surgeons are employed to make medical examinations of claimants for pension, and the amount appropriated for their payment during the year was $700,000, of which $573,621 had been expended for the first nine months of the fiscal year.
Most of the surgeons are organized into boards of three members each, while 188 designated specialists are distributed throughout the United States.
During the year 4 of the 18 pension agencies occupied leased quarters at a total annual rental of $9,480.
All these agencies are operated by an aggregate force of 432 employees, the cost of maintenance of such agencies for the fiscal year being $526,413.67.
In 1902 there were 10,300 pensioners under guardianship.
Owing to the increase in the number of guardians and the labor and expense involved in scrutinizing and passing upon the accounts of the guardians, it has been necessary to change the rule which heretofore prevailed, requiring guardians to make detailed reports of the items of expenditure concerning the estates of their wards.
Hereafter guardianship accounts will not be required to be filed in the Bureau, but, at the option of the Commissioner, guardians will be required to file a certificate from the judge of the court appointing the guardian showing that he is still duly qualified and acting and has given and maintained proper bonds and made proper report and has complied with the laws of the State in which he resides.
During the year 196 arrests were made, 272 indictments found, and 167 convictions secured on account of violations of the pension laws.
There were 24 acquitals; 23 cases were dismissed; 8 civil suits were instituted, and $11,418 recovered.
The report shows that of the persons convicted only 22 are believed to have had any military service, and that some of the crimes that were punished were undoubtedly committed through ignorance.
The Commissioner recommends the passage of a law providing that any person convicted in court of an infamous crime shall forfeit his pension or his right to one.
I fully concur in the Commissioner's recommendation in this matter; the pension roll is a roll of honor, and its high standard should be ever maintained.
Information was received at the Bureau of the death during the year of 50,128 old soldiers; of that number, however, only 27,043 were on the pension roll.
It is estimated that the death rate among the pensioners for the present year will approximate 40,000, and the losses to the roll from other causes will probably equal 6,000.
The Commissioner expresses the opinion, however, that owing to new legislation enacted by Congress the number on the pension roll at the end of the present year will exceed 1,000,000.
Substantial progress has been made in bringing up the arrears of work in the Bureau, 47,106 more applications having been handled than were received during the year; an excellent record of the industry of the clerks.
In adverting to the condition of the force of his office, the Commissioner, in a supplement to his report, dated October 17, 1902, hereto appended, page 219 (Exhibit J), states, among other things, that there are many worthy employees therein who have served their country and are suffering from disability due both to war and advanced age.
But a short time will elapse before there will be 500 persons of this class who will be practically incapacitated for the performance of the intricate and difficult duties devolving upon them in the adjudication of pension claims.
This class, he states, should be taken care of; to discharge them in large numbers as soon as they become unserviceable would result in hardship and suffering, not only to the clerks but to their dependents.
I concur in his views on the subject and recommend that appropriate legislation be enacted by Congress for the retirement from duty of aged employees.
The act of August 7, 1882, provides that marriages shall be proven in pension cases to be legal marriages, according to the law of the place where the parties resided at the time of marriage or at the time when the right of pension accrued.
The effect of this law has been to deny claimants in many instances the status of legal widowhood, although the equities appear to be in favor of such claimants.
I desire to reiterate the recommendation contained in previous reports, that Congress so amend the act as to provide for the admission of evidence to prove marriages for pensionable purposes by a standard which will be uniform throughout the entire jurisdiction of the United States.
The Commissioner calls attention to the many cases of widows who have married old soldiers after their names have been inscribed on the pension roll, and suggests the passage of a law prohibiting the granting of pensions to widows in such cases.
The present method of examining applicants for pension, the Commissioner states, is uncertain, expensive, and unsatisfactory in its results, the personnel of the various medical boards being liable to outside control and political dictation.
Those who are to be examined for disabilities should appear before persons possessed of the highest degree of medical knowledge and skill, as pathological sequences of many diseases and disabilities are so obscure and remote that they can only be detected by careful examination conducted by physicians of learning and experience, and frequently of those having special facilities for microscopical examination of excretions, etc.
As a substitute for the existing system he suggests a division of the country into districts or circuits; the appointment under civil-service rules of medical experts, to be organized into boards to serve outside of the States of their domiciles, and to go from place to place within their respective circuits on fixed days, making examinations and taking testimony regarding the condition of the applicants for pension.