DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, Washington, D. C., November 30, 1903.
SIR: I have the honor to submit herewith a report of the operations of this Department during the past year, together with such recommendations and suggestions as my experience leads me to believe will, if carried into effect, tend to the betterment of the service and more effectually protect the interests of the Government.
Thc various diversified interests connected with the branches of the public service committed to the supervision of the Secretary of the Interior are herein summarized and set forth in detail in the appended reports of the heads of the several bureaus and offices.
The increase in the public business requiring consideration, to which reference was made in my last annual report, has continued during the past year, notwithstanding the fact that one branch of the service—the Census Office—was by law transferred on July 1, 1903, to the Department of Commerce and Labor.
Through hearty cooperation, however, on the part of the employees, coupled with an extension of the hours of labor where practicable, the work has been expeditiously handled and may be regarded as well in hand.
The accessions to the force which will be necessary during the ensuing fiscal year are indicated in the Departmental estimates for that period, which will be brought to the attention of Congress through the Secretary of the Treasury, as required by the provisions of the act of March 3, 1901 (31 Stat. L., 1009).
Attention has heretofore been called to the inadequacy of the compensation fixed by law for the services of the Assistant Secretary of the Interior and the chiefs of divisions in the Secretary's office, and in again adverting to the subject I have to suggest the early readjustment by Congress of these salaries on a more equitable basis.
Thereafter a reclamation service was organized, surveys made, and various projects considered.
A contract has been let for the construction of diversion works in the Truckee River, Nevada, and also of a canal to carry waters to a reservoir on the Carson River.
Investigations in connection with other projects are rapidly approaching the point where contracts can be let for their construction.
A detailed report of the results of the reclamation work as herein outlined will be submitted to Congress, as required by the provisions of section 2 of the act above mentioned.
Two additional forest reservations have been established and two reserves have been slightly reduced in area.
The management of these reservations during the year has been satisfactory.
I am of the opinion, however, as hereinafter indicated, that the transfer of this service to the Agricultural Department would be productive of better administrative results.
Existing laws relating to the public lands in many instances do not provide adequate protection for the interests of the Government, and remedial legislation in the cases and along the lines as suggested herein should be enacted by Congress at the earliest practicable date.
In my last annual report I adverted to the fact that in carrying into effect the proyisions of the act of June 27, 1902, amending the act of January 14, 1889 (25 Stat., 642), relating to the sale of timber on the Chippewa Indian lands, Minnesota, I stated it was my purpose to solicit bids therefor and not to sell the land at public auction.
This course was pursued.
The first sale under the act took place on the 2d of March, 1903, at Crookston, Minn., and the results therefrom were eminently satisfactory, and it is my purpose to apply this method to all sales of public timber made hereafter where it is at all permissible under existing law.
The method adopted three years ago (January, 1901) for the leasing of Osage Indian tribal lands for grazing purposes (act February 28, 1891, sec. 3, 26 Stat. L., 795) upon competitive bids after public advertisement inviting sealed proposals was attended with gratifying results; two years ago (January, 1902) it was extended to the agricultural and grazing lands of the Apache, Kiowa, and Comanche Indians, with equally if not more satisfying results and has since been applied in the cases of other Indians' tribal lands; in every case the revenue was greatly increased over that obtained under the old method of indiscriminate leasing by informal or noncompetitive bids.
This method will be continued in the future in similar cases, and has been most satisfactorily enforced in the Indian Territory.
The rules and regulations made under the provisions of the act of May 27, 1902, to govern sales of allotments of deceased Indians, known as "inherited" lands, which have brought about very satisfactory results, both to the Department and the heirs, have been extended to the cases of certain living Indians whose lands, by special legislative enactment, may be sold for their benefit.
It is expected that greatly increased prices will be obtained in these latter cases over those formerly realized.
I acknowledge with pleasure the valuable aid cheerfully rendered in the conduct of the business of the Department by the Assistant Secretaries, the Assistant Attorney-General, the heads of the various bureaus, the chief clerk of the Department, and the chiefs of division of the Secretary's office.
The force of this Office is occupied in greater measure with the consideration of legal problems and claims arising under the laws of the United States relating to public lands and Indian affairs, and in lesser measure with the disposition of matters arising under the pension, patent, and other laws, the administration of which is committed to this Department.
The work is practically up to date—that is, as nearly so as may be and allow the time provided by the rules for the presentation of arguments pro and con in litigated cases.
The matters at this time awaiting consideration and action are: Two hundred and twenty-nine appeals from decisions of the Commissioner of the General Land Office; 56 motions for review of decisions heretofore rendered on such appeals; 10 references with request for law opinions, to be given by the Assistant Attorney-General, and 47 miscellaneous matters.
The matters considered and disposed of during the last year are as follows: Twelve hundred decisions receiving the approval and signature of the Secretary of the Interior in appeals from decisions of the Commissioner of the General Land Office; 265 decisions receiving the approval and signature of the Secretary of the Interior upon motions for review; 513 decisions, regulations, orders, etc., receiving the approval and signature of the Secretary of the Interior in miscellaneous matters; 87 law opinions receiving the signature of the Assistant Attorney-General and the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
The more important of the land decisions and opinions are, as a matter of ready reference, for use as precedents, published in book form in volumes known as the "Decisions of the Department of the Interior Relating to the Public Lands."
Decisions of this character for the past year are to be found in volume 31 of said Land Decisions, already out, and in volume 32, now in course of publication.
In addition to the work performed immediately in office, as above outlined, the Assistant Attorney-General and his assistants have also been occupied in presenting and arguing in the courts of the District of Columbia and the Supreme Court of the United States cases, in which the Government, through the Interior Department, is interested.
The number of such cases during the past year has been unusually large, and some of them of great importance, because of the magnitude of the questions involved and of the fact that they furnish a rule of action for a large class of similar cases.
Notably among these are Cherokee Nation v. Hitchcock (187 U. S., 294); United States v. Rickert (188 U. S., 432); Northern Pacific Ry.
Co. v. Soderberg (188 U. S., 526); Kirwan v. Murphy (189 U. S., 35); Phillips v. Ware and Hitchcock (four cases) (189 U. S., 507), and Riverside Oil Co. v. Hitchcock (190 U. S., 316).
In all of the above cases the contentions of the Department were sustained.
There are now pending before the Supreme Court the cases of Morris v. Hitchcock, and Humbird et al. v. Avery et al.
The Humbird case was recently argued, but a decision has not yet been handed down.
Brief and argument are now in course of preparation in the Morris case, which will not come up in its order on the docket for some weeks.
The able manner in which the very difficult public business intrusted to this office has been dispatched merits the highest commendation, and it affords me pleasure to so state.
There were disposed of during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1903, public lands aggregating 22,824,299.65 acres, classified as follows: Cash sales, 3,073,896.99 acres; miscellaneous entries, embracing homesteads, land warrants, scrip locations, State selections, swamp lands, railroad and wagon-road selections, Indian allotments, etc., 19,577,031.10 acres, and Indian lands, 173,371.56 acres, showing an increase of 3,335,764.35 acres as compared with the aggregate disposals for the preceding fiscal year.
The total cash receipts during the fiscal year from various sources, including disposal of public land, $10,557,618.66, and Indian land, $308,939.14; from depredations on public lands, $95,251.31; from sales of timber on forest reserves, $31,966.24; from sales of Government property, $849.82, and for furnishing copies of records and plats, $30,118.48; aggregate, $11,024,743.65, an increase of $4,762,816.47 over the preceding fiscal year.
The total expenses of district land offices for salaries and commissions of registers and receivers, incidental expenses, and expenses of depositing public moneys during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1903, were $828,862.62, an increase, as compared with the fiscal year ended June 30, 1902, of $10,364.02.
There were 54,365 patents of all classes issued during the year.
Of this number, 47,654 are classed as agricultural, 4,904 are Indian allotments, 1,104 are mineral patents, 200 coal patents, 276 private land claims, 187 railroad patents, and 40 swamp-land patents.
This is an increase of 6,663 over the agricultural patents issued during the preceding year.
During the fiScal year there have been certified or patented on account of railroad and wagonroad grants 5,816,957.04 acres, as against 5,008,131.66 acres last year, an increase of 808,825.38 acres.
ApJusTMENTs.
Land Office shows that material progress has been made in the examinations necessary to the adjustment of railroad and wagon-road land grants, including the administration of the acts of July 1, 1898 (30 Stat. L., 597–620), March 2, 1899 (30 Stat. L., 994), and March 2, 1901 (31 Stat. L., 950), relating to grants to the Northern Pacific Railroad Company.
A detailed statement of the progress made in the adjustment of these grants will be found in said report.
Swamp lands in place were patented to the amount of 47,467.88 acres, as against 68,744.97 acres patented the previous year, being a decrease of 21,277.09 acres.
But there were reapproved and also patented, in addition to the above, 2,862,280 acres, covering the Everglades and Mangrove Swamp of Florida.
The whole amount patented during the year was, therefore, 2,909,747.88 acres, a great increase over the acreage patented during the previous year.
No swamp-land indemnity patents were issued during the year.
Indemnity, school, and other selections were made and certified during the year, under their several grants to the various States and Territories, to the amount of 644,790.02 acres.
By section 4 of the act of August 18, 1894 (28 Stat. L., 372–422), as amended by the act of June 11, 1896 (29 Stat. L., 413–434), and act of March 3, 1901 (31 Stat. L., 1133-1188), provision is made for the donation to each of the desertland States of not more than 1,000,000 acres of such lands.
Under the act of January 13, 1897 (29 Stat. L., 484), the number of declaratory statements on hand at the beginning of the fiscal year was 7,728.
There were received during the year 1,383, making the total requiring action 9,111.
Of this number, 8,132 were acted upon, of which 3,038 were canceled or relinquished, and the remainder, 979, were found to be in proper form and await further action under the law by the declarants.
There were, accordingly, pending for action at the end of the fiscal year 4,073.
Under the act of March 3, 1875 (18 Stat. L., 482), providing for rights of way over public lands; the act of May 14, 1898 (30 Stat. L., 409), providing for rights of way in Alaska, and various special acts, 629 companies have filed articles of incorporation which have been accepted, 31 of which were accepted during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1903.
Right of way has been approved for 464 companies, 17 of whom received their first approval during the same period.
There were received during the year 463 maps of location of railroads, which, with those already pending, made a total of 518 maps on hand for action during the year.
Of these, 120 have been approved; 12, not requiring approval, have been filed; 2 were pending before the Secretary, and 265 were otherwise disposed of, a few having been rejected and the rest returned for correction, leaving 119 awaiting action June 30, 1903.
Under the provisions of sections 18 to 21, inclusive, of the act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat. L., 1095), as amended by section 2 of the act of May 11, 1898 (30 Stat. L., 404), the right of way has been approved to 414 companies, individuals, and associations of individuals, of which 82 received their first approval during the past year.
There have been received during the year 451 maps, and 96 have been approved, 19 have been filed not requiring approval, 11 pending before the Secretary, and 255 rejected or returned for correction.
Under the act of February 15, 1901 (31 Stat. L., 790), authorizing the Secretary of the Interior to permit the use of rights of way through public lands, reservations, or national parks for telegraph and telephone lines, electrical and water plants, canals, reservoirs, etc., for the storage and conveyance of water, and all beñeficial uses, applications have been approved for 26 companies, individuals, and associations of individuals.
Under the provisions of this act there were 3 maps pending in the General Land Office July 1, 1902, and 98 were received during the year, of which 11 were approved and 57 otherwise disposed of, most of them being returned for correction.
Under the provisions of the tramroad act of January 21, 1895 (28 Stat. L., 635), as amended by the act of May 11, 1898 (30 Stat. L., 404), 2 maps were received during the year, 3 were acted on, leaving 2 waiting action June 30, 1903.
The annual report of the Commissioner of the General Land Office again calls attention to the necessity for remedial legislation relating to the existing laws for granting rights of way for the various purposes above referred to, and urges the passage of the bill transmitted to Congress by the Department on April 4, 1902, with favorable recommendation.
In my report of last year attention was called to the fact that the above-designated acts constituted a group of statutes, the administration of which has been the source of much embarrassment because of the unnecessarily large number of acts and the confusing amendments, while they do not, after all, cover the whole subject in a satisfactory manner, failing to provide for certain important uses of right of way and being otherwise too limited in scope.
Attention was also called to the necessity for legislation that would empower the Secretary of the Interior to declare a forfeiture of a lapsed right of way for railroads, canals, reservoirs, etc., over the public lands and reservations of the United States, after notice to grantee.
With the purpose in view of securing legislation along the lines indicated, the Department, on April 4, 1902, transmitted to Congress such a bill as in its judgment would meet the requirements of the case, with the recommendation that it receive the approval of Congress and be introduced as a substitute for Senate bills 3374 and 3711, relating to the same subject.
On June 4, 1902, the Committee on Claims submitted a report on Senate bill 3374, in which it was recommended that the title of the bill be amended by striking out the same and inserting in lieu thereof the following: "A bilt providing for rights of way in and through public lands, reservations, and certain national parks, and for other purposes,"and it was further recommended that the bill be amended by striking out all after the enacting clause and inserting in lieu thereof practically the provisions of the bill transmitted to Congress by my letter of April 4, supra.
In view of the importance of this proposed legislation, I earnestly urge the passage of Senate bill 3374, as amended.
By the act of Congress approved June 28, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 453), making appropriations for the sundry civil expenses of the Government for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1903, and for other purposes, there was appropriated “"for surveys and resurveys of public lands"the sum of $325,000, of which amount the Commissioner of the General Land Office was authorized to expend as much as he might deem necessary for examinations in the field, etc.
The sum of $75,000 was set aside to cover the cost of field examinations, and the sum of $10,000 was reserved for emergencies, leaving $240,000 to be apportioned among the several surveying districts.
Further apportionments were made from time to time to several surveying districts from the fund of $10,000 held in reserve.
By the act of March 3, 1899 (30 Stat. L., 1097), the rectangular system of surveys was extended to the district of Alaska, but no surveys under that system have as yet been executed in that district, nor has the proposed establishment of a principal meridian and several parallels referred to in my last annual report been executed, the successful bidder for the work having failed to enter the field.
Invitations for proposals were again issued, but it was found that no competent surveyor would undertake the task at the rates per mile allowed by the statute.
Thereupon the surveyorgeneral was authorized to invite bids for the execution of these basic surveys at a per diem rate.
At the close of the last fiscal year bids from a number of well-known surveyors were received, but none were acceptable to the General Land Office, owing to failure to limit the liability.
The surveyor-general was then directed to notify the bidders to amend their proposals and submit new bids.
It is believed that by another season the survey will be under way.
Reports from the region to be traversed by these lines indicate a country which will present very formidable obstacles to rapid progress in surveying.
There have been few applications for surveys in Alaska under the act of March 3, 1891, as amended by the act of May 14, 1898, and nearly all the surveys executed in the last fiscal year have been fragmentary and isolated tracts applied for under the said act of May 14, 1898, which extends the homestead act to that district.
The survey of mission lands bas been in preparation and applications have been received from a number of religious societies designating the lands occupied by them.
Invitations for proposals to execute these surveys were issued June 30, 1903, but no contracts for the surveys have yet been let.
Congress at its last session increased the appropriation for surveys and resurveys of public lands, and two-thirds of this increase ($50,000) was set apart by the General Land Office, with the approval of the Department, for surveys in Alaska.
Four-fifths of this sum will be consumed, it is estimated, by the mission surveys alone.
An examiner of surveys is now engaged in making an investigation of the conditions in Alaska respecting all classes of surveys, including surveys of mission lands.
His report, it is expected, will enable the General Land Office to deal intelligently with the various problems involved in the survey and disposal of Alaska lands.
There Were 312 caseS of depredations upon public timbered lands reported during the year, involving timber to the value of $622,099.11, a decrease of $770,907.72 from last year.
In 96 cases recommendation was made for civil suit, the damages involved aggregating $325,293.17.
Propositions of settlement to the number of 164 were accepted, their amounts aggregating $87,104.39.
From sales of timber cut unlawfully from public lands there were received $8,837.28; from compromises under section 3469, United States Revised Statutes, $34,400.29; from fines imposed and judgments rendered, $64,092.74; making a total of $194,434.70 accruing to the Government through depredations upon public lands.
On June 30, 1903, there were pending in the United States courts 168 civil suits for the recovery of a total amount of $2,976,238.66, the value of timber alleged to have been taken unlawfully from public lands, and 310 criminal prosecutions for cutting or removing timber in violation of law.
The decrease in the number of trespass cases reported last year and in the amount involved therein, as compared with the previous year, is accounted for by the fact that during the last year the time of the special agents has been taken up to a much greater extent than heretofore in investigating alleged fraudulent entries.
It seems to be true also that fewer depredations are committed, timber now being secured from lands entered under the timber and stone or other acts and by purchase from lands within forest reserves.
An average of 58 special agents of the General Land Office were employed during the year in investigating alleged fraudulent land entries and otherwise in protecting the public lands from timber trespass or illegal appropriation.
Entries to the number of 7,031, in which fraud was charged, were referred to these special agents for investigation; 1,257 were held for cancellation or suspended on special agents' reports, and in 414 cases hearings were ordered; 955 entries were canceled; 663 were examined and found free from fraud; leaving 18,341 cases pending July 1, 1903.
The act of January 31, 1903 (32 Stat. L., 790), which provides a means by which the attendance of witnesses may be compelled in matters requiring a hearing before registers and receivers will, in the opinion of the Commissioner of the General Land Office, assist his office materially in establishing the fraudulent character of entries made in violation of law, proper instructions thereunder having been issued in circular approved by the Department March 20, 1903.
Its beneficial effects, however, are thought to have been offset in a great measure by the facilities for making entries in violation of law afforded by the act of March 11, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 163), which permits the affidavits, proofs, and oaths required of applicants under the homestead, preemption, timberculture, desert-land, and timber and stone acts to be made before any United States commissioner or commissioner of the court exercising Federal jurisdiction in the Territory, or before the judge or clerk of any court of record in the land district in which the land is situated, in addition to those officers who were theretofore authorized to take such affidavits, proofs, and oaths.
The privilege thereby gained has been greatly abused, particularly by certain United States commissioners who have been parties to wholesale frauds in connection with entries allowed on affidavits made before them, some of which cases have been reported for proper proceedings against the guilty parties.
Pursuant to the recommendation of the Commissioner of the General Land Office, approved by the Department February 21, 1903 (32 L. D., 17), there is now in progress an examination by the Office of Indian Affairs and the General Land Office, jointly, of all allotments remaining intact, as made to Indians under the fourth section of the general allotment law of February 8, 1887 (24 Stat. L., 388), and amendatory act of February 28, 1891 (26 Stat. L., 794), the purpose of the examination being to ascertain whether the lands included in such allotments are suitable for homes for the Indians, whether the requirements of the law as to settlement have been complied with, and generally so to adjust the allotments as to accomplish the purpose for which the law was enacted.
The allotments in the State of Nevada are now being examined by agents of the General Land Office and of the Office of Indian Affairs.
Other districts will be taken up as fast as practicable.
Those tracts which are not of a character subject to allotment will be restored to the public domain, and an earnest effort will be made to adjust the allotments in a way that will be of the greatest benefit to the Indians and to the public generally.
FOurteen COnvictions have been secured during the year for frauds committed in connection with soldiers' additional assignments.The maximum penalties inflicted were imprisonment for seven years and a fine of $1,400.
A great reduction is noticeable in the percentage of fraudulent cases of soldiers' additional homestead locations.
During the past year there have been indicted and arrested in the State of Oregon, charged with forgery and conspiracy to defraud the Government, a United States commissioner and three others, the first being a woman.
The United States commissioner has been removed from her office, and all are awaiting trial by the court.
It is alleged that several hundred entries and final proofs were made before this commissioner under the act of March 11, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 790), all of which have been or are being examined by officers of this Department.
Forged entry papers of fictitious entrymen, alleged to have been executed before the United States commissioner, alleging settlement on a tract of land within the limits of a forest reserve prior to the creation of such reserve, would be transmitted to the local land office.
Within a month thereafter, probably, final proof notices on said entry would issue, and after the period of publication required, forged proofs, alleged to have been executed before this commissioner, would be transmitted to the local land office, where, everything on the face of the papers being regular, they would be forwarded by the register and receiver to the General Land Office at Washington, where, no intimation of fraud appearing, the proof was approved and patent on the entry issued.
Thereafter, forged deeds alleged to have been executed by the fictitious entrymen before this commissioner or a notary public, conveying the land to one of the parties to the conspiracy, would be duly filed fcr record, and thereafter the land would be transferred by one of said parties to some other person, or else made a basis for a lieu selection under the act of June 4, 1897.
Suits have been brought in a number of instances in the Federal courts to vacate patents and to restore to the public domain the lands acquired by these alleged fictitious entrymen.
The labor involved in obtaining the evidence of these forgeries and conspiracies and in presenting the same to the Federal grand jury has covered a period of many months and has occupied almost the entire time of one of the most competent inspectors of this Department, who has received invaluable cooperation from the United States attorney for Oregon.
It is believed that the outcome of the matter will go far toward putting an end in that section to the fraudulent practices that seem to have heretofore been much in vogue in securing title to public lands.
Information has also been received from the Department of Justice of the conviction, by the Federal court in the northern district of California, of three persons for subornation of perjury in connection with the entry of land under the timber and stone act.
These convictions, it is alleged, are the first of their kind for fifteen years in that section, and it is believed they will have a wholesome moral effect toward stopping the fraudulent transactions of this character.
At any rate, it is the purpose of the Department to pursue with unflagging zeal, until justice is meted out to them, all persons shown to have committed frauds against the Government by unlawfully acquiring any portion of the public domain.
Nearly a year ago information reached the Department which strongly indicated that frauds of a serious nature had been and were being perpetrated against the Government under what is known as the forest reserve lieu land act of June 4, 1897, by a combination of land speculators on the Pacific coast.
The information and indicated frauds were of so grave a character that I at once directed a thorough investigation to be made.
This investigation was commenced last January, and has been conducted by those having charge of the actual work with great care and with all possible expedition consistent with thoroughness.
The investigation has proceeded step by step, without intermission, under my personal direction, and every clew to wrongdoing has been quietly followed to its source, with the result that it is the confident belief of those in charge of the inquiry that the guilty parties will be apprehended and speedily brought to justice.
It has been my determination from the beginning that the matter should be probed to the bottom regardless of the apparent influential character of some of the men involved, and the inquiry has been conducted throughout along these lines.
The work is now nearing completion, and the whole matter will at an early date be in shape for definite and appropriate action against the offenders.
While several hundred thousand acres of public lands are involved in the illegal transactions brought to light, the number of acres to which patents have been obtained by the perpetrators of the frauds is comparatively small.
It is proper to say also that some of the statement's in regard to the matter which have recently appeared in newspapers, both in the East and in the West, are more or less exaggerated and others are mere surmises.
The statements widely circulated to the effect that five United States Senators and a large number of Representatives were implicated, and that the lands involved would reach in value $15,000,000 or $20,000,000, are without foundation in fact.
It can be positively stated that they did not originate in this Department.
The details and results of the investigation are known only to a few, and sensational stories based upon statements which have heretofore appeared in the press must be received with due allowance.
At the proper time a full statement will be made covering the results of the entire investigation, and the whole matter will be given to the public; but for obvious reasons it is not deemed expedient that a detailed statement of the facts should be given at the present time.
The work of the investigation has been conducted by Arthur B. Pugh, assistant attorney in this Department, and William J. Burns, of the Secret Service of the Treasury Department.
Mr. Burns was called into the case last May, and since that time has had entire charge of the Secret Service features of the work, while Mr. Pugh has attended to its legal phases.
I am highly gratified with the efficient services rendered by these officers in this matter.
For several years this Department has been urging the enactment of legislation to regulate the sale and use of timber on the unappropriated and unreserved public lands.
The experience of this Department has been that the act of June 3, 1878, which authorizes residents of certain States and Territories therein named to cut and remove for building, agricultural, mining, and other domestic purposes any timber growing on mineral lands, under rules and regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Interior and the act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat. L., 1093) , as extended by the acts of February 13, 1893 (27 Stat. L., 444) , and March 3, 1901 (31 Stat. L., 1436), authorizing the residents of the States and Territories therein named to take timber from nonmineral public lands in such States and Territories for use therein for agricultural, mining, manufacturing, or domestic purposes, under rules and regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Interior and the act of June 3, 1878 (20 Stat. L., 89), known as the timber and stone act, will, if not repealed or radically amended, result ultimately in the complete destruction of the timber on the unappropriated and unreserved public lands.
The rapidity with which the unreserved and unappropriated public timbered lands are being denuded of their timber under the acts above mentioned, and the opportunity offered under the timber and stone act for the fraudulent acquisition of title to public timbered lands at the uniform price of $2.50 per acre when they are in many instances worth forty times that, has been heretofore set forth in the pages of my annual reports and those of my predecessors.
In order to put an end to such an undesirable system of disposing of the public timber and the public timbered lands, I, on March 2, 1900, transmitted to both branches of Congress a bill embodying the views of the Commissioner of the General Land Office and this Department on this subject.
Said bill was subsequently introduced in the Senate and House, respectively, but was never enacted into law, and on the 4th of February, 1901, I again urged the passage of said proposed legislation, with an amendment thereto recommended by the Acting Attorney-General.
Repeating my efforts along that line, on February 8, 1902, I transmitted to the chairman of the Committee on Public Lands of the House of Representatives a report on H. R. 4371, "To authorize and regulate the sale and use of timber on the unappropriated and unreserved public lands, and prevent depredations thereon," and recommended certain amendments thereto.
Said bill is almost identical with that recommended by me on March 2, 1900.
The need of the passage of such an act is so imperative that I earnestly recommend that the pending bill, H. R. 4371, with the amendments suggested by this Department, be enacted into law at the earliest possible date.
The provisions of said bill deal with every possible interest that could be affected by a measure of that character.
Its terms are fair and equitable and meet every reasonable demand that could be made by those requiring the use of timber from the unappropriated public timbered lands.
A copy of said bill, with the amendments recommended by this Department, will be found at page 199 of the Appendix to this report, marked "Exhibit A."
In this connection and for the purpose of emphasizing the above recommendation, attention is called to the fact that the reports from one public land State alone for the quarter ending June 30, 1902, show that the number of timber and stone entries was 331 during that quarter, embracing 48,585.50 acres; that during the quarter ending September 30, 1902, the numker of entries had increased to 1,183, embracing 181,052.02 acres, an increase during the last over the preceding quarter of 852 entries and 132,466.52 acres, and in another State during the same period there was an increase of 294 entries and 45,086.28 acres.
Should this rate of entry continue during the entire year in that one State it would mean the acquisition, in round numbers, of 600,000 acres of timber lands under the timber and stone act, and if the same activity in that class of entries were extended to the other public-land States, then before the expiration of two years practically every acre of unappropriated public timbered lands would have been absorbed and the successful operation of the reclamation act of June 17 last rendered doubtful, if its failure be'not absolutely assured, for the reservation of public timbered lands that must of necessity be made to assist in conserving the waters to be impounded by the irrigation systems to be established under that act, will be defeated or made so expensive by the purchase of said lands from private owners as to greatly delay the completion of the irrigation systems contemplated by that act.
The reports of the special agents of this Department in the field show that at some of the local land offices carloads of entrymen arrive at a time, every one of whom makes entry under the timber and stone act.
The cost of 160 acres of land under that act, and the accompanying commissions, is $415.
As many as five members of a family, who, it can be readily shown, never had $2,075 in their lives, walk up cheerfully and pay the price of the land and the commissions.
Under such circumstances there is only one conclusion to be drawn, and that is that where a whole carload of such people make entry under that act, the unanimity of sentiment and the cash to exploit it must have originated in some source other than themselves.
In all such cases a rigid inquiry will be instituted.
Another method resorted to by unscrupulous speculators to obtain timber upon the unreserved timbered lands, and to which the attention of the Department has been called by its special agents, is the location of so-called mining claims under the placermining laws.
Quite a number of such claims have been located in fine bodies of timber in a number of the Western States.
So far as the records of the Land Department show, these lands are unappropriated public lands, and there is nothing to call the Department's attention to them, and it would never know of these locations unless reported by a special agent or the locator should apply.for a patent.
Assuming the land to be really mineral, so long as the locator does the annual assessment work required by law he will be entitled to maintain possession of the tract embraced in his mineral location.
If it be made for speculative purposes only, and for the purpose of acquiring the timber within the limits of the location, the only way by which the Government can reach him will be by a careful inyestigation of the character of the land upon which the location is made, and if, after such investigation, it be determined that the land is not mineral in character and that the location is made for speculative purposes, to arrest the locator as soon as he begins to cut the timber.
The only defense he can make will be to show that the land is mineral in character and that he is cutting the timber to develop his claim as allowed by law.
Should he fail in that, he will have to pay the penalty.
From the foregoing it will be seen that the duty of protecting the public domain from the inroads of those who seek to despoil it is an onerous one, and is a matter that should receive the early and careful consideration of the Congress.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 1902, there were 4,022 entries under the timber and stone act, embracing 545,253.98 acres, while during the last fiscal year there were 12,249 such entries, embracing 1,765,222.43 acres, an increase over the previous year of 8,227 entries and 1,219,968.45 acres.
The increase in the activity of this class of entries affords food for serious reflection.
In the fall of 1902 reports of irregularities in the making of entries under this act, on the Pacific coast, were so numerous and persistent, that on November 18 of that year I directed the Commissioner of the General Land Office to suspend action on all entries made under said act in the La Grande, Lake View, Oregon City, and The Dalles land offices in Oregon, the Eureka, Redding, and Sacramento offices in California, and the Seattle and Vancouver offices in Washington, until proper investigation thereof could be made and their bona fides determined.
The reports of special agents detailed for that work are now being received by the General Land Office and this Department, and such action taken thereon as the facts appear to warrant.
Where the entries are shown to be bona fide in character, and covered by the letter and spirit of the act, they are promptly passed to patent.
Where it appears that they have been made for speculative purposes or in the interests of some person or persons other than the entrymen, a hearing is ordered under the departmental circular of August 18, 1889 (29 L. D., 141), and the entrymen cited to show cause why the entry should not be canceled.
Notwithstanding the extreme care exercised by this Department to protect the public timbered lands from unlawful acquisition under this act, the entries thereunder have, nevertheless, as stated, increased vastly in number.
The act, when legitimately observed and followed, affords such facilities for the acquisition by individuals and corporations of vast podies of the public timbered lands, that it is one of the greatest menaces on the statute books to-day against the avowed policy of the Government to preserve the remaining public lands for homes for actual settlers.
Further experience in the administration of this law confirms the opinion heretofore expressed as to the necessity for remedial legislation and causes me to renew with earnestness the recommendations above mentioned on this subject.
The COMmutation clause of the homestead law does not present the same serious objections as the law above mentioned, for the reason that the timber and stone act requires no residence whatever on the land; this does, but the brevity of the residence.required does not tend to carry out the purpose of Congress in the enactment of the homestead law, namely, the acquisition of homes and the building up of communities, but tends rather to encourage speculation in the public lands under cover of that law.
After fourteen months'residence and cultivation and the payment for his land, the entryman is entitled to his patent, and is at liberty to leave the community, abandon his homestead, and allow it to remain unimproved for years—an impediment to the progress of the community in which it may be located.
The Commissioner of the General Land Office in his report calls attention to the fact that it is only in exceptional cases that the homesteader who has settled upon a tract of public land with the bona fide intention of making it his actual and permanent home finds it necessary to abandon it before the expiration of five years from the date of his settlement, and he recommends, for reasons stated, the repeal of the timber and stone act and the commutation clause of the homestead act.
This act, unless amended as recommended by the Commissioner in his report, by eliminating from said act the provision that permits the assignment of entries before final proof, should be repealed.
The right of assignment as shown by the Commissioner in his report is contrary to the fundamental principle underlying the public land laws, that entries should be made for the exclusive benefit of the entrymen and not for the benefit of any other person, and practically abrogates the restriction of the act limiting one person to one entry in a compact form, the actual limitation being 320 acres, which might embrace a number of noncontiguous tracts taken by assignment.
Without being so amended the law bears on its face its own condemnation in the facility it affords for the acquisition by individuals, associations, and corporations, of vast bodies of the public domain, and is another menace to the avowed policy of the Government of preserving the remaining public lands for homes for actual settlers.
In my last annual report, beginning at page 11 thereof, I set forth at length and in detail the difficulties with which this Department has to contend in its efforts to prevent the unlawful fencing of public lands by that class that seeks to occupy them for grazing purposes.
Without a repetition of the matters set forth in that report, the summary showed 153 cases of unlawful fencing of public lands, embracing 3,952,844 acres, for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1902.
Of that number, 9 inclosures, embracing 24,564 acres, were removed, and 144 cases, embracing 3,928,280 acres, were reported as in process of removal or as having been laid before the United States attorneys of the various States and Territories for action under the act of February 25, 1885 (23 Stat. L., 321).
The vigorous policy pursued by the Department during the past year has resulted in the diminution of the number of cases reported and of the acreage embraced within such unlawful inclosures, the total number of cases reported during the year, as shown by the records of the General Land Office, being 135, embracing 2,605,390 acres.
Seventy-nine of these fences, inclosing 1,975,450 acres, have been reported removed, in compliance with notices given by special agents.
Proceedings are pending to compel the removal of 56, inclosing 629,940 acres.
It is hardly probable, however, that the reported cases include all of the inclosures maintained in violation of law.
There are doubtless many others to which the insufficient force of special agents with their multitude of other duties have not yet been able to give attention.
The trespassers, however, are beginning to show a gratifying disposition to remove their fences without compelling the Department to resort to the courts.
The Department is active in preventing or removing the unlawful inclosure of public lands, and has instructed its special agents to render all possible aid to United States attorneys having charge of any of these cases.
During the year the Department of Justice, on the recommendation of this Department, directed the United States attorney for New Mexico to institute proceedings under the act of February 25, 1885 (supra), against the San Vincente Cattle Company, of that Territory, to secure the removal of its unlawful inclosure, embracing 9,080 acres.
The Acting Attorney-General, in a letter dated November 10, 1903, informs me that this suit was filed September 29, 1902; that in April, 1903, a special agent of the General Land Office, having investigated the fences, furnished his own and several other affidavits to tho effect that the fences had been removed.
A judgment of dismissal of the case was entered at the April term of court, with costs against the defendant company.
End Ranch, in Cheyenne County, Kans., owned by the Dewey Cattle Company and managed by Chauncy Dewey, the latter being a son of C. P. Dewey, said to be the principal stockholder in the Dewey .
Cattle Company.
Within the past three years 62 miles of fence have been erected by said company in townships 4 and 5 south, ranges 35, 36, and 37 west, which, connecting with 18 miles of fence owned by others, makes a total length of 80 miles.
This fence inclosed an area, all told, of 51,040 acres, of which 3,240 acres are State lands, 1,200 are embraced in eight homestead entries, and 7,440 acres are vacant public lands subject to entry under public land laws.
The inclosure of homesteads by the unlawful fences of that company was the primary cause of the trouble which resulted in the killing, on or about June 3 last, by Chauncy Dewey and his employees, of three members of the Berry family at the home of Alpheus Berry, near the Dewey ranch.
It appears to have been the policy of Dewey and his agents and employees to gain complete and exclusive control of all the lands inclosed by their fences, and to adopt whatever measures were found necessary to accomplish that purpose, sparing neither life nor property.
Their attitude toward settlers and homesteaders without, as well as within, their inclosure is shown by reports of agents of this Department and by individual complaints to have been extremely hostile and oppressive.
Not only have the crops of these bona fide homesteaders and settlers been destroyed by this company's cattle, but the people themselves harassed and intimidated by threats of violence made by its agents and employees, their fences cut and dwellings deliberately moved off their homesteads, and a number of them have been compelled by this outlawry to abandon their entries and seek residence elsewhere.
Promptly upon hearing of these unlawful acts the Department instituted an investigation, as a result of which proceedings were begun, through the Department of Justice, under the act of February 25, 1885 (supra), to cause the removal of these illegal fences and to punish those guilty of erecting and maintaining them.
At the October, 1903, term of the United States district court at Leaven worth, Kans., the grand jury, then and there in session, indicted C. P. Dewey, Chauncy Dewey, W. J. Ratcliffe, William J. McBride, and Louis McBride for violation of sections 5440 and 5508 of the Revised Statutes, in conspiring to threaten, intimidate, and injure Alpheus Berry, a bona fide homestead settler upon lands unlawfully inclosed by their fences, and for taking the life of said Berry.
Six other counts were found against the defendants for their molestation of other settlers.
An indictment was also found against Chauncy Dewey, as the agent of C. P. Dewey, for erecting and maintaining an unlawful inclosure of public lands in violation of the act of February 25, 1885 (supra).
There are now 53 forest reserves, created by Presidential proclamations under section 24 of the act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat. L., 1095), embracing 62,354,965 acres.
This is an increase over last year of 2,179,200 acres.
Two additional forest reserves have been established; two have been slightly reduced in area.
The following consolidations have been made: The Yellowstone and Teton forest reserves, in Wyoming, and the Absaroka Forest Reserve, in Montana, have been consolidated under the name of the Yellowstone Forest Reserve; the Lewis and Clarke and Flathead forest reserves, in Montana, have been consolidated under the name of the Lewis and Clarke Forest Reserve.
In both of these consolidations additional areas were included.
In the last-named case there'was also an elimination of certain lands.
During the last fiscal year there were 597 camp and other small fires discovered in the forest réserves by the forest force and extinguished while in the incipient stage and 279 fires which had passed beyond that stage.
Some few of these larger fires got beyond control and burned over a considerable area before being put out.
In August and September, 1902, there were many devastating forest fires throughout the western country, the forest reserves being, of course, subject to the conditions that made these great fires possible.
The forest reserves, however, protected by watchful officers well equipped for discovering or attacking fires, were to a notable degree exempt from the large fires prevailing at that time.
The total area burned over, however, for the year was larger in the total than during the preceding year.
The most extensive forest-reserve fires occurred in August and September in the Cascade Range in Oregon, Mount Rainier in Washington, and Teton in Wyoming, and before the appointment of the forest force there, in the Medicine Bow, Wyoming, where a total area of 240,497 acres was burned over during those months.
Aside from these areas but 39,245 acres of forest-reserve lands were burned over during the fiscal year.
The good effect of the forest-fire law, and of the education of the people by the forest force, is shown in the decreasing number of camp and other small fires discovered by the forest rangers.
In 1901 there were discovered 1,335 such fires; in 1902 there were 1,083, and in 1903 there were 597, although there was a material increase each year in the area reserved and for which fire reports were made.
There were pending at the beginning of the year 85 petitions for sale of timber in forest reserves, and 248 were presented during the year.
Of these 156 were granted and sales effected, 59 were refused or abandoned by the applicants, and 118 were pending at the end of the year.
The sums realized from this source during the year and paid into the Treasury amounted to $45,838.08.
The applications received during the year for free use of timber in forest reserves numbered 2,166, nearly double the number received during the preceding year.
There were approved 2,135 applications, involving timber to the amount of 2,738,567 board feet and 35,838 cords.
Of this quantity more than one-half was dead timber, the removal of which has been of benefit to the reserve.
The Department recognizes that sawmills are necessary to the utilization, for many purposes, of the timber in forest reserves which is sold or given away, and that a sawmill operated within the reserve under a proper contract with the Department and guaranteed by a good and sufficient bond is much less likely to prove injurious to the reserve than is a mill located outside the line and operated without these restrictions.
Permits have therefore been granted in all cases where the applicants were shown to be reliable and of good repute, and the interests of the people to be thereby served.
The sawmills operated under such permits are at all times subject to the careful supervision of the forest officers.
Under this head are included the construction of wagon roads, establishing and conducting of road houses, public stopping places, hotels, stores, and the privilege of hay cutting, etc.
Such applications were received to the number of 166, being more than double the number received during the year previous.
About one-half of these applications have been allowed, one-fourth rejected, and the rest returned for amendment or supplemental report, or are yet awaiting action.
Of forest reserve lieu selections there were pending July 1, 1902, 4,163 cases, involving an approximate area of 892,558.93 acres.
There were received during the last fiscal year 2,159 cases, involving an approximate area of 734,651 acres.
Of this number, 729 cases were approved for patent and 189 rejected, making 918 finally disposed of, and embracing an area of 363,973 acres.
There were pending June 30, 1903, 5,504 cases, involving an approximate area of 1,263,236.93 acres.
The Commissioner of the General Land Office recommends that the act of June 4, 1897 (30 Stat. L., 36), as amended by the act of June 6, 1900 (31 Stat. L., 614), be further amended so that only nontimbered land may be taken in lieu of land within a forest reserve, for the reason that in the exchange of land within a forest reserve for other public land it frequently occurs that land from which the timber has been cut is exchanged for land heavily timbered.
This is manifestly unfair to the Government, but can not be prevented under the law.
While it is considered to be impracticable to require that only land of like value shall be taken in exchange for land in a reserve, it might be provided that timber land should not be selected in lieu of such land, just as mineral land is now excepted from such selection.
There would be no hardship in this restriction, as the timber can be taken off the land in the reserve before the exchange is made, and in fact this is generally done.
In addition to this is the fact that these exchanges are optional as to the owner of land in a reserve.
He is not obliged to make the exchange.
I concur in the Commissioner's recommendation, as above, for legislation that will do away with the present unfair privilege by which untimbered lands in forest reserves, held in private ownership, may be exchanged for an equal area of public timbered lands outside the reserves.
The work of establishing a forest service for the care and administration of the reserves, which was begun in the summer of 1898, has been developed along such practical lines as fall within the province of the Interior Department.
The experience of these five years abundantly testifies to the need for efficient work of a scientific character.
The dangers to which the reserves are exposed from fires, timber depredations, and other sources, make the establishment of an efficient protective force a matter of great importance.
Following closely upon that, however, must come the application of scientific methods in dealing with the many and varied forest problems in connection with the various industries affected thereby.
The magnitude of the interests affected and the intricacies of the problems involved make it evident that the development of forestry in the United States, in connection with our Federal forest reserves, calls for the application of a system of scientific forestry upon a scale in proportion to the work to be performed.
Elementary efforts need to give way in the course of development of such a system.
It would seem, therefore, that the stage had been reached when the work should be committed to the care of men who have had the scientific and practical training needed to fit them to cope with work involving such far-reaching issues.
The Bureau of Forestry of the Department of Agriculture is properly organized and equipped to carry on this branch of the work.
The administrative features of forest reserves also are at present in a very unsatisfactory condition.
In the creation of a new reserve three separate bureaus must act before a definite recommendation is made—the Bureau of Forestry of the Department of Agriculture, the Geological Survey of the Interior Department, and this office.
Such a division of jurisdiction and responsibility is not conducive to the best results.
I think it would be very much better to have the matter of the location and control of forest reserves all in one bureau.
I therefore recommend that all business in the General Land Office pertaining to forest reserves, except lieu-land selections and other matters pertaining to or affecting titles, be transferred to the Bureau of Forestry of the Department of Agriculture.
Forestry, dealing as it does with a source of wealth produced by the soil, is properly an agricultural subject.
The presence of properly trained foresters in the Agricultural Department, as well as the nature of the subject itself, makes the ultimate transfer, if found to be practicable, of the administration of the forest reserves to that Department essential to the best interests, both of the reserves and of the people who use them.
I am still of the opinion therein expressed, and concur, therefore, in the recommendation of the Commissioner, as above set forth.
For the grazing season of 1901 there were 1,926 permits issued to graze 277,621 head of horses and cattle in 32 reserves; for 1902 there were 2,642 permits issued to graze 357,552 head in 37 reserves; and for 1903 there were 4,121 permits to graze 529,973 head in 44 reserves.
The grazing of a moderate number of horses and cattle is not regarded as injurious to the reserves, and as a rule the number permitted each season is sufficiently liberal to accommodate all of such stock that had grazed on the lands before they were included in the reserve.
The forest officers, however, have been instructed that the enlargement of herds and the shipping in of cattle for the purpose of filling the quota allowed any reserve will not be permitted; that the liberal allowance is for the purpose of accommodating the stock that has naturally grazed on the reserve lands in the past, and if this stock does not fill the quota the same is to remain unfilled.
For the grazing season of 1901 the Department authorized the grazing of 1,400,000 head of sheep in all or parts of 8 reserves; 391 permits were issued, covering 1,214,- 418 head.
For the season of 1902 these same reserves were opened to 1,197,000 head, and 484 permits were issued, covering 1,151,513 head, and in 1903 they were opened to 877,000 head, when 320 permits, covering 812,328 head, were issued.
In addition to these 8 reserves, parts of newly created reserves were, for the season of 1903, opened to the grazing of 601,400 head of sheep, and 113 permits were issued, covering 600,239 head.
The Secretary of the Interior shall make provisions against destruction by fire and depredations upon the * * * forest reservations, * * * and he may make such rules and regulations and establish such service as will insure the objects of such reservations, namely, to regulate their occupancy and use and to preserve the forests thereon from destruction; and any violation of the provisions of this act or of such rules and regulations shall be punished as is provided for in the act of June fourth, eighteen hundred and eighty-eight, amending section fifty-three hundred and eighty-eight of the Revised Statutes of the United States.
That section fifty-three hundred and eighty-eight of the Revised Statutes of the United States be amended so to read as follows: "Every person who unlawfully cuts, or aids or is employed in unlawfully cutting, or wantonly destroys or procures to be wantonly destroyed, any timber standing upon the land of the United States which, in pursuance of law, may be reserved or purchased for military or other purposes, or upon any Indian reservation, or lands belonging to or occupied by any tribe of Indians under authority of the United States, shall pay a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or be imprisoned not more than twelve months, or both, in the discretion of the court."
Under the authority of the said act of June 4, 1897, the Secretary of the Interior formulated and promulgated rules and regulations "to insure the objects of such reservations" and “"to regulate their occupancy and use," among which was one prohibiting the grazing of sheep and goats in all reserves or parts of reserves in which it appeared after due investigation that grazing of such animals worked an injury to the reserve and the interests depending thereon, preventing a proper protection and improvement of the forests for the purpose of insuring a permanent supply of timber, and adversely affecting the conditions favorable to a continuous water flow and the water supply of the people.
In some instances forest reserves are created for the sole purpose of conserving the water supply of communities, having in view the rules which prohibited the grazing, which pollutes such waters.
In other cases large areas are under irrigation, the water for which came from the reserves.
In still other cases the young growth of trees need protecting from destruction.
In no case does the Department prohibit grazing where material injury will not be done by live stock.
In view of these facts it is very essential that the most effective means possible for the enforcement of the rules and regulations be provided, and no doubt Congress had this in mind when it provided in said act of June 4, 1897, that any violation thereof should be punished as provided in the said act of June 4, 1888.
The courts, however, have held that a criminal prosecution will not lie to punish a person for such violation.
In the case of the United States v. Blasingame (116 Fed. Rep., 654), and in the case of the United States v. Camou in the United States district court for northern California, the courts held that 'in so far as" the act of June 4, 1897, "declares to be a crime any violation of the rules and regulations thereafter to be made by the Secretary of the Interior for the protection of the forest reservations is in substance and effect a delegation of legislative power to an administrative officer," and, therefore, unconstitutional.
As the result of said decision the orders of the Secretary prohibiting grazing have repeatedly been defied and great injury has been done to the reserves by sheep grazing therein.
Whether or not the said decisions would stand the test of trial in a higher court need not, and should not, be considered, because there is no right of appeal in such cases.
The honorable Attorney-General in his annual reports for 1899 and 1900 urged upon Congress the necessity for providing, by suitable legislation, for an appeal on the part of the Government in cases of decision adverse to the United States by the courts upon demurrers interposed to indictments.
Proceedings by injunction are not effective because the damage is done before the injunction can be obtained.
In a letter to Hon.
Before the rangers were placed on duty forty-three bands of sheep passed through or trespassed on the reserve, the total amounting to about 100,000 sheep.
They trespassed all the way across.
In a list of twenty-three trespassing sheep men, which I have in my possession, but one was an American.
The remainder were French, Basques, and Portuguese, most of them wanderers with their bands.
This was during the year 1901.
About the middle of July sheep began to enter the reserve, and within three days thereafter ten bands, numbering about 20,000, were in the southwestern division of the Sierra Reserve.
The owners were all Basque French, and each was in possession of a letter from the Wool Growers' Association of San Francisco, advising them that under the recent decisions of Judges De Haven and Welborn they had the right to graze their sheep on the reserve; they also had letters from a branch of said organization located at Bakersfield, Cal., advising them to take their sheep to the reserve and keep them there, as no one had the right to remove them.
The owners claimed that these letters gave them the right to remain, and that they would resist any attempt to remove them.
Fully four-fifths of the owners are not citizens—are transitory, owning no property except sheep, and have no fixed place of abode.
But very few are making an effort to, or expect to, become citizens of this country.
During the season of 1902 about 60,000 sheep trespassed in the Sierra Reserve in open violation of the Department rules, and, as expressed by Superintendent Newhall, the Stanislaus Reserve was overrun with trespassing sheep.
Similar trespasses have also occurred in other reserves, and there appears to be a disposition in many quarters to disregard the forest reserve rules and regulations, now that the courts have held that violators thereof can not be held criminally.
The courts have, however, issued injunctions against persons committing or attempting to commit trespass with sheep, the leading case being that of the United States v. Dastervigne, decided by the circuit court of appeals in California and reported in 122 Fed.
Rep.
30.
Proceeding by injunction, however, is of but little avail in most cases in the protection of the forest reserves.
Early in May three sheep owners acting together, and later two others, took their sheep into the Sierra Forest Reserve * * * regardless of the repeated warnings of the rangers.
On May 25 I reported the cases to the United States district attorney.
Under date of June 19 Mr. Flint wrote me that he had "filed five bills in equity" against the parties, but that "Judge Wellborn declines to issue an injunction without a hearing, which has been fixed for July 1."
The hearing was continued to July 10, and on July 31 the court issued an order of injunction against the parties, so that the sheep of these five parties were illegally, and in violation of the rules, in the reserve three months.
In May, 1903, there were seventeen bands (about 40,000 head) of sheep trespassing in the Sierra Reserve.
The forest superintendent advised the United States attorney thereof.
In order to reach the defendants to serve papers on them, the marshal would be obliged to travel a very great distance, * * * either going by way of Sacramento, Cal., and Reno, Nev., thence to Independence, Inyo County, a distance of 619 miles, or by way of Mohave and to Independence by stage, a distance of about 400 miles from Fresno, there being no deputy marshal east of the mountains to whom the papers could be sent.
Owing to repeated complaints of sheep trespass in the Big Horn Forest Reserve in Wyoming, a special inspector was detailed to investigate the same and report thereon.
During the ·past season there have been a number of willful trespassers on the Big Horn Reserve, and in several instances the parties in question have been old offenders, having been persistent in causing trouble for several seasons past.
Various conditions have combined to make it difficult for the forest officers to remove these trespassers from the reserve, and of this fact no one apparently was more cognizant than the trespassers themselves, who took every advantage of these conditions.
Exclusion of sheep from the Shoshone Division of the Yellowstone Reserve and the vigorous manner in which this restriction was carried out there, drove many of the transient sheep men to seek other ranges, and there appears to have been a general exodus to this reserve.
In these cases the supervisor did his best to remove the trespassers from the reserve, but was cautioned to use no violence, and consequently was unsuccessful in keeping any of them off the reserve, as they were apparently well informed as to all the instructions he received from time to time, made fun of him at various times, and refused to leave when ordered to do so by forest officers.
In many cases unavoidable delays were occasioned, because it was often a difficult matter to secure the names of owners of the sheep that were trespassing on the reserve.
These sheep men seem to have the happy faculty of changing owners every season, or when there is danger of getting into trouble on account of trespasses, and although it is the same sheep that have been on the reserve the past three summers, the owners have changed with due regularity each season.
This is done so that when brought before the court it is always possible to plead a first offense and receive a minimum fine.
Another cause of delay in securing injunctions against trespassers is the time consumed in procuring affidavits from rangers in the field and the length of time consumed in sending papers back and forth from the United States attorney at Cheyenne to the supervisor at Big Horn.
In some instances rangers had to travel 75 miles to swear to affidavits before a notary public, while, as a general rule, they had to go at least 40 miles for such service.
It is always a difficult matter to secure accurate information in regard to these trespassers, yet such information is necessary before any action can be taken in the courts.
The owners of these sheep could seldom be found, the herders, who were usually Mormons or Mexicans, had just forgotten all they knew, and the forest officers were obliged in many cases to acquire their information from settlers who were acquainted with the facts in the case.
All these delays combined to give the forest officers much trouble and allowed the trespassers to get summer grazing for their flocks, and I do not see how this can be remedied in the future unless the supervisor has authority to remove at once all trespassers who come on the reserve.
So far trespassers here have been so successful in getting out of these cases with a light fine that they will undoubtedly be back next year unless some more stringent regulations are enforced.
The trespassers this year, with one exception, are Mormons, who give their address as either Cowley or Lovell, Wyo.
The parties who handle the sheep do live here, but the real owners live in Salt Lake City, Utah, although Wyoming is claimed as their residence, probably to give them a better excuse for using the grazing lands on the Wyoming Forest reserves.
Six different bands, aggregating 12,400 head, entered the reserve from June 5 to 15, and injunction notices were not served on the owners until September 3.
These parties all ignored the injunctions that were served on them, and remained on the reserve until they were ready to leave, which was not until October in some instances.
Two other parties, with 12,000 head, entered the reserve between July 1 and 10, and injunction notices were not served on them until October 9.
Here, then, were 24,400 sheep which trespassed for between three and four months because of the necessarily slow proceedings in obtaining injunctions.
These are but a few illustrations of the difficulty of protecting the reserves by injunction proceedings and showing the necessity for legislation prohibiting the grazing of stock in the reserves without a permit so to do.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That every person who knowingly pastures or causes to be pastured any live stock upon public lands of the United States situated within a forest reserve without first having obtained a permit so to do under rules and regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Interior shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment for not longer than one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
The examination of ceded Chippewa lands in Minnesota under the act of January 14, 1889 (25 Stat. L., 642), as amended by the act of June 27, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 400), was resumed by a corps of examiners in the employ of the General Land Office on December 15 last.
The first examination completed was that of lands in the former Chippewa of the Mississippi and Winnibigoshish Indian reservations, including 159,313.18 acres, of which 96,196.44 acres were classified as "pine" lands, on which there were estimated to be 127,512,000 feet of pine timber.
The examiners then moved to the Red Lake Reservation, where they examined to September 21, 1903, an area of 775,135.90 acres, of which 24,245.34 acres are reported as "pine"lands, estimated to contain 26,878 feet of timber.
On March 2, 1903, the first sale of pine timber under the acts cited was held at the district land office at Crookston, Minn., there being offered 20,678,000 feet of pine, described as being on 12,210.77 acres in sections 16 and 36 on the Red Lake and four ceded townships on the White Earth Indian reservations.
Sealed bids were received for 14,771,000 feet of timber, estimated to be on 7,737.18 acres, the bids ranging from $5 to $6.05 for white pine and $4 to $4.75 for Norway, and aggregating $68,674.70.
There were no bids received on 5,907,000 feet of timber, described as being on 4,474.59 acres, doubtless due to the fact that more than the amount of timber mentioned had been removed by authority of the State and settlement made therefor.
Lake and Chippewa of the Mississippi reservations selected for the Minnesota National Forest Reserve.
On September 22, 1903, I approved a schedule of 687,321.13 acres of agricultural ceded lands in the Red Lake Reservation in Minnesota, and authorized and directed that said lands, together with 81,525.07 acres of agricultural lands in sections 16 and 36, in the Red Lake, and 4 ceded townships of the White Earth reservations in said State, be opened at 9 o'clock a.
It is believed that the revenue inuring to the Indians from the sale of the timber from these lands, under the provisions of the act of June 27, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 400–404), known as the Morris Act, amend.
Congress, by act of July 1, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 574), appropriated $31,500 for the resurvey and reestablishment, on the line of the thirty-seventh parallel of north latitude, of the boundary line between the State of Colorado and the Territories of New Mexico and Oklahoma, and under date of July 7, 1902, the Commissioner of the General Land Office, with the approval of the Department, entered into contract for the resurvey of said boundary, the estimated liability of the contract being $29,000.
While the returns of this survey are not yet at hand, the work in the field, I am informed, has been carried to the point of completion and the maps and field notes are now in course of preparation.
The entire line has been conspicuously monumented and an inspection of the work has been made by an experienced astronomer and examiner of surveys connected with the General Land Office.
The field notes and report of this inspection have been filed with the Commissioner of the General Land Office, who will take final action upon receiving the surveyor's maps, field notes, and astronomical observations.
From the report of the examiner it would appear that this boundary has now been correctly established, and it is hoped that there will be no further doubt as to the position of the line dividing the State of Colorado from the Territories of New Mexico and Oklahoma.
The total Indian population of the United States remains about the same as last year, approximately about 270,000, of which the Five Civilized Tribes and New York Indians embrace about 90,000, leaving about 180,000 occupying 156 reservations, containing 55,127,000 acres outside of the Indian Territory and the State of New York.
One thousand six hundred and nineteen allotments were made during the year, the area thereof being approximately 211,326 acres.
Allotments in severalty aggregating 8,823,000 acres have been made since the passage of the general allotment act (February 8, 1887, 24 Stat. L., 388) to approximately 73,040 Indians.
General conditions among the Indians have been satisfactory during the year, no serious trouble having occurred.
The marked progress toward civilization noted in recent years still continues, more Indians than ever before having engaged in industrial pursuits and in earning a livelihood for themselves and families.
In pursuance of the policy adopted by the Department under authority of law, the abolishment of Indian agencies, and the devolving of the duties appertaining thereto upon bonded superintendents in charge of Indian training schools located at such agencies, has been continued, with the result that the number of agencies provided for in the appropriation for the present fiscal year is 33, as against 43 for the past year.
Great emphasis is placed upon this policy by the Indian Department (see report of Commissioner of Indian Affairs), and it is claimed that it meets the conditions which will best enable the Indian to break away from ancient tribal traditions and influences, and to become selfsupporting.
The policy of requiring Indian allottees to work portions of their allotments has been continued during the year, thus, by their industry, largely contributing to their support.
The New York Indians number 5,232, and occupy eight small reservations of about 88,000 acres in the northwestern part of the State of New York.
These Indians receive small annuities in money and goods under treaty stipulations.
The Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw, Creek, and Seminole, known as the Five Civilized Tribes, located in Indian Territory, including freedmen, number about 84,500, and occupy reservations whose aggregate area is 19,475,614 acres.
More than 300,000 noncitizen whites are said to be living on the lands of the said tribes.
Allotments to the Creeks have been practically completed, and allotment work in the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations and the Cherokee Nation is progressing.
Indians were largely employed during the year in the agency and field service, as harnessmakers, shoemakers, blacksmiths, herders, butchers, teamsters, police, and in like occupations, and in the school service as nurses, matrons, clerks, cooks, laundresses, and as industrial and other teachers, whose salaries aggregated nearly $600,000.
AppRoPRIATIoNs.
The amount appropriated by the Indian appro priation act for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1904, is $8,521,306.77.
For the fiscal year ending June 30, 1903, the sum of $9,132,028.10 was appropriated, and in the general deficiency act of March 3, 1903, the additional amount of $40,245 was appropriated, making the total appropriation for the fiscal year 1903 $9,172,273.10.
ExPENDITUREs.
INcomE.
The following was the income of the various Indian tribes from all sources during the fiscal year 1903: Interest on trust funds, $1,525,171.39; treaty and agreement obligations, $2,118,304.95; gratuities, $799,900; Indian moneys, proceeds of leases, labor, etc., $1,698,- 639.01; aggregating $6,142,015.35, as against $5,419,106.35 for the fiscal year 1902, an increase of $722,909.
During the fiscal year 1903 there were in operation 257 Indian schools, as against 249 the previous year.
Of these, 26 were nonreservation boarding schools (one more than last year); 91 reservation boarding schools (one more than last year); and 140 day schools (six more than last year), with a total enrollment of 24,357 pupils and an average attendance of 20,876, against a total average attendance for 1902 of 20,540, or an increased average attendance for 1903 of 336.
In addition to those in Government schools, there was an average attendance of 3,506 in mission boarding and day schools, the Normal and Agricultural Institute at Hampton, Va., and in public schools, against an average attendance of 3,580 in 1902, a decrease of 74.
The appropriation for the construction, purchase, lease, and repairs of school buildings, for sewerage, water supply, and lighting plants, etc., made under the general school appropriation for the fiscal year 1903, was $250,000, nearly half of which was used for repair work, and from the balance several new plants were erected.
In addition to this appropriation, Congress provided for the use of the 26 nonreservation schools $389,450 for the erection of new buildings, water, sewer, and lighting systems, purchase of land, etc., and $76,600 for repairs and minor improvements.
For purchase of land and the erection of buildings to establish a school plant at Elko, Nev., $40,000 were appropriated, and $30,000 were given for school buildings at Tulalip Reservation to replace those destroyed by fire.
The advice of those who are sincerely interested in the welfare of these people, who have no "ax to grind,"and who have had opportunity to study the difficulties of the situation from a practical standpoint, is always of value and carefully considered.
All wisdom relative to the management of the red man is not by any means assumed by the Indian Office.
By reason of the increased appropriation for the fiscal year 1903 ($150,000) the irrigation work on the various reservations has been considerably extended.
The force of irrigation experts under the charge of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs has been kept busy in the field during the whole of the fiscal year, completing work already begun, making plans for and inaugurating new systems, and in making repairs and extensions to irrigation works in various localities.
The irrigation engineer of the Department, Inspector W. H. Code, has been almost continuously in the field, inspecting and reporting upon work already done or under way, consulting with and advising the irrigation engineers in the field, and giving his personal supervision to the execution of several important projects already approved by the Department.
Among these may be mentioned two cases in which, after careful investigation, gravity canals were found to be impracticable, viz: The.Pima Reservation in Arizona and the Mission reservations in California.
In both cases efforts are being made, with a reasonable show of success in each, to establish a permanent water supply for irrigation purposes by means of a series of artesian wells, from which the water will be stored in reservoirs and conducted thence, as needed, into distributing ditches.
For several years efforts have been made by the Department to provide adequate irrigation facilities for the Indians residing upon the Southern Ute Reservation, in Colorado; but, though the subject has been most carefully studied by the Geological Survey and investigations and reports made by capable irrigation experts attached to the Department, no solution of the problem has yet been found, owing to the lack of a suitable and available source of water supply.
During the year a very important system of irrigation, conservatively estimated to cover about 20,000 acres of land on the Yakima Reservation, in Washington, was authorized by the Department, and the same is now being constructed under the personal supervision of the irrigation inspector.
A detailed account of the expenditures for irrigation during the year will be found in the report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
Schedules of 429 other allotments have been received in the Indian Office, but have not yet been acted upon.
PATENTs.
Four thousand six hundred and eighty-seven patents have been issued and delivered to Indians in Idaho, Michigan, Minnesota, Nebraska, Oklahoma, and South Dakota.
The condition of the allotment work in the field is given in detail in the Commissioner's report.
Under the amended rules approved March 21, 1902 (mention of which was made in my last annual report), 3,600 leases for farming, grazing, business, and residence purposes were approved during the year, and 732 more are in the Indian Office for proper action.
During the year 204 leases and permits were granted, from which an approximate income of $125,582.02 will be derived.
By the act of May 27, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 275), provision was made for the sale of allotments of deceased Indians under certain conditions, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
Under the provisions of said act, rules governing such sales were approved by the Department June 26, 1902, but it was found that these rules did not fully protect the interests of the heirs of the deceased Indians, and all sales reported in accordance therewith were rejected and the deeds disapproved.
Amendments were then formulated and the rules, as amended, were approved October 4, 1902; among other things, the amendments providing that a list of such land as was to be offered for sale should be posted in the office of the Indian agent or other officer in charge for ninety days from the first Monday after a petition for the sale of the land had been filed.
Sealed bids were then to be received by such officer for any land so listed, at any time before the day on which bids were to be opened.
Affairs shows that under these rules there have been sold, to and including September 15, 1903, 44,493.99 acres of inherited lands, amounting to $757,173.25, being an average of $17.01 per acre.
Other amendments of an explanatory nature rather than amendatory were approved September 18, 1903, which provide that bids for inherited lands will be received up to 12 o'clock noon of the day upon which bids are advertised to be opened; that the envelopes containing bids should have noted thereon the dates upon which the same are to be opened, and not a description of the land, as formerly, and that a list of the lands offered for sale shall be published in the weekly edition of the newspaper of widest circulation in the county in which the lands are located.
Copies of these rules, with amendments, are hereto appended, page 202, exhibit B.
A comparison of the prices agreed to be paid for inherited land under the original rules and the prices realized for the same land under the amended rules shows that the latter will average from 10 to 50 per cent higher than the former, and in a few cases a much higher rate of gain has been noted.
The increase in the price referred to is doubtless largely due to the fact that at the second offering it was more generally known that such lands were for sale and the public had become better acquainted with the manner in which the sales were to be conducted, and partly to the fact that lands of the character in question, situated as these were in available localities, were in great demand.
Enough land has been disposed of to thoroughly test the practicability of the rules, and it is believed that the interests of the heirs are as fully protected thereby as can be under the law without further experience; at the same time the rules are in no way complex, and leave to the heirs the free exercise of their discretion in determining whether or not they shall sell their inherited land.
The sales thus far perfected have been accomplished without evidence of dissatisfaction or criticism on the part of those interested, and but few sales rejected since the amended rules have been in force.
From the number of petitions reported as being received at the various agencies it seems evident that the sale of inherited lands will continue active at least until the large number of such tracts has been disposed of, when the sales will necessarily diminish and in future depend upon the death rate from year to year among the allottees of the several tribes.
As hereinbefore indicated, the rules promulgated for the sale of allotments of deceased Indians, known as "inherited" lands (act of May 27, 1902, 32 Stat. L., 275), having proved of such a beneficial character, being especially advantageous to the interests of the heirs in that lands sold thereunder have brought better prices and yielded larger returns than by any other method, the same, as far as applicable, have been extended to the sale of the allotted lands of certain living Indians whose allotments by special enactment of law may be sold for their benefit, as follows: Citizen Pottawatomies and Absentee Shawnees (acts of August 15, 1894, 28 Stat. L., 295, and May 31, 1900, 31 Stat. L., 247); of Wyandottes (act of June 10, 1896, 29 Stat. L., 343), and Peorias and Miamies (act of June 7, 1897, 30 Stat. L., 72), and of certain Chippewas, who hold patents containing restrictions as to alienation (treaty of September 30, 1854, 10 Stat. L., 1109).
The lands of the last-named Indians are understood to be chiefly valuable for their timber, and as timber is each year becoming scarcer, it is believed that by sales under the rules in question much better prices will be obtained than have heretofore been realized.
On the Lac du Flambeau Reservation 13 timber contracts were approved during the year.
About 70 of the contracts already entered into with Cushway & Co. have expired and the timber has not been cut.
The Department has fixed a scale of prices under which these contracts may be renewed, but the same has not been finally accepted by the contractors.
On this reservation contracts were made by Justus S. Stearns with 350 allottees before authority was granted by the President for the sale of the timber on their allotments.
New regulations having been approved (December 29, 1902) to govern the sale of the timber on these allotments, and notice of the willingness of Department to permit the Indians to sell the same having been given, the Department on April 6 received bids from Mr. Stearns and four other bidders.
These bids, however, were rejected April 11, 1903.
Later the Department decided that in view of certain equitable considerations, the contracts theretofore made by Mr. Stearns with the Indians might be approved, with certain modifications, and they were so approved May 23, 1903.
Rules to govern the cutting and sale of the timber on allotted lands of this reservation were approved December 11, 1902, and authority was granted for the allottees to enter into contract with the successful bidders, Signor, Crisler & Co., but no contracts under said authority have yet been received for consideration.
Timber operations on the Grand Portage Reservation have been carried on under the regulations approved October 2, 1901, the same having been extended July 27, 1903, so as to expire October 2, 1904.
Under amended rules approved by the Department December 15, 1902, the cutting and banking of saw logs by Menominee Indians were carried on.
Department also granted authority for cutting and banking 15,000,000 feet of green pine and hemlock during the season.
The total amount covered by the authority was cut and banked, and the logs were sold by bank scale to the highest bidder, after due advertisement, for $16.30 per 1,000 feet.
Authority was granted February 12, 1903, for the cutting and banking of 5,000,000 feet of dead pine and hemlock during the year.
As stated in my last annual report, one of the four special inspectors for this Department provided by the act of April 28, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 156), Mr. Levi Chubbuck, was assigned to duty to investigate the agricultural conditions on the various Indian reservations.
Since July 7, 1902, Mr. Chubbuck has visited and reported upon the agricultural conditions and needs of 33 reservations.
It is believed that great good will result to the service from the work of this inspector, inasmuch as his reports keep the Department in closer touch with the agricultural conditions prevailing on the different reservations than would be practicable without such expert inspection, thus making it possible for the Department to take proper steps to improve those conditions when necessary, and stimulating the industrial teachers and farmers to greater and more intelligent efforts in behalf of the Indians under their charge.
Under section 16 of the Indian appropriation act of March 3, 1893 (27 Stat. L., 645), there was created by Congress the Five Civilized Tribes Commission.
This Commission, commonly known as the "Dawes Commission," was during the first five years of its existence, save for a limited duty relating to the determination of citizenship rights, clothed only with authority to negotiate agreements with the Five Civilized Tribes, namely, the Choctaws, Chickasaws, Cherokees, Creeks, and Seminoles, looking to the dissolution of their tribal governments and the establishment of a State or Territorial government in their stead.
After five years of fruitless negotiation, however, it was apparent that the accomplishment of such a purpose by agreement alone was a practical impossibility, owing to the unfavorable attitude of the Indians.
Congress was therefore confronted with the alternative of abandoning its policy and abolishing the Commission, or else converting the Commission into an executive and semijudicial body and proceeding with the work, regardless, to a large extent, of the will of the tribes.
The latter course was adopted and by the Curtis Act, approved June 28, 1898 (30 Stat. L., 495), the Commission was charged with the administration of the five great estates embraced in Indian Territory, aggregating nearly 20,000,000 acres.
The plan being to dissolve the system of tribal land tenure in vogue and vest the title to the lands in the individual members of the tribes, two great preliminary duties devolved upon the Commission: (1) To determine who were the bona fide citizens or heirs entitled to share in the distribution of the tribal property; (2) to take an inventory of the properties to be distributed.
The first involved the hearing and determination of the applications of more than 200,000 claimants.
The second consisted in surveying, platting, and appraising each 40- acre tract embraced in the territory to be allotted, making some 500,000 separate items of property to be dealt with.
These preparatory steps having been taken it remained for the Commission to distribute the property among the rightful heirs, approximately 90,000 in number.
The territory to be allotted was not a wild, uncivilized, and sparsely inhabited country, but on the contrary a populous domain, dotted with modern towns and cities, traversed by a network of railroads, and resounding with the hum of industry.
The undertaking was therefore a vast and difficult one, unprecedented in the history of civilization.
By recent legislation which gave Congressional approval to the supplemental agreements with the Creeks, Choctaws, and Chickasaws, and the agreement with the Cherokees, the Commission has been enabled to make rapid progress during the past year in the execution of the trust imposed upon it, and the work now begins to assume the aspect of completion.
The location and valuation of the lands have been completed, and the enrollment work is practically finished, only a few fragments remaining to be disposed of.
In the Seminole Nation allotment has been finished and in the Creek Nation allotment is practically completed.
During the past year allotment offices have been established in the Choctaw, Chickasaw, and Cherokee nations and the work of allotting the lands of these tribes is well under way.
In its report for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1903, which is appended hereto, page 214, Exhibit D, the Commission sets forth in detail the progress of its work and recommends that the following legislation be enacted: (1) Provision for the sale of surplus lands of the Creek Nation under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior and for the benefit of the tribe; (2) provision for the sale, in a similar manner, of the surplus lands of the Seminole Nation; (3) provision requiring that plats of lands sought to be acquired by railroads under the provisions of the act of Congress approved February 28, 1902, be filed with the Dawes Commission; (4) provision for the sale, under sealed bids, of standing pine timber in the Choctaw Nation heretofore estimated by the Commission; (5) provision for the sale of coal and asphalt lands in the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations under sealed bids, rather than at public auction as provided by the agreement now in force with the Choctaws and Chickasaws; (6) provision for the recording of leases, contracts, and instruments of conveyance executed by citizens of the Cherokee and Creek nations affecting the title of their lands; (7) provision for public highways in the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations.
Sections 56 to 63, inclusive, of the act of July 1, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 641), provide for the segregation and sale of coal and asphalt deposits within the limits of town sites, and also lands outside of town sites, principally valuable on account of their deposits of coal and asphalt, and also for the distribution of the proceeds to be paid out per capita to the members of the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations, except the freedmen.
An investigation was made by the Dawes Commission, with the aid of an expert geologist, of the lands coming within the provisions of said act, and on March 24, 1903, an order was made designating, by legal subdivision, tracts of land in said nations containing 444,983.03 acres, and reserving the same from allotment.
Subsequently it was ascertained that there were certain errors in the total footing of the areas of the particular tracts, and that the exact number of acres should be 445,052.23.
Section 59 of said act requires that the lands segregated shall be sold at public auction for cash under the direction of the President, by a commission composed of three persons to be appointed by the President, one a Choctaw by blood, to be recommended by the principal chief of the Choctaw Nation, and one, a Chickasaw by blood, to be recommended by the governor of the Chickasaw Nation.
The experience of the Department in the sale of Creek lands has demonstrated beyond question that it is much more advantageous to dispose of the lands by sealed bids, after advertisement that the particular tracts are listed for sale; regulations on this subject are hereto appended, page 206, Exhibit C.
It is believed that a similar course should be taken in the sale of the coal and asphalt lands and deposits in the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations.
Additional legislation will be recommended with a view of securing a modification of said section, so that the lands may be sold under the direction of the Department under sealed bids, without entailing the large expense necessary for the sale of the lands by the Commission, as provided by said act.
Under existing law this Department has no supervisory control over the sale or leasing for agricultural purposes of lands in the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations.
Recommendation will be made to Congress for legislation conferring upon the Secretary of the Interior authority to supervise and control the sales and the leasing of lands in the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations.
It is estimated that in the event no unforeseen obstacles are encountered the bulk of the work will have been completed by the close of the year 1904, and at a cost of little more than 5 cents for each acre of land involved.
It is believed that when the Commission's work is finished, affairs in Indian Territory will be well shaped and the time ripe for the establishment of a State or Territorial form of government.
The Commission refers to the great loss it sustained by the death, on February 5, 1903, of Hon.
Henry L. Dawes, its honored chairman and the last in service of its original members, and transmits a copy of the resolutions passed by the Commission expressive of its just appreciation of this venerable and distinguished officer.
Mr. J. George Wright, United States inspector, has been continued on detailed duty in the Indian Territory, with headquarters at Muskogee, under section 27 of the act of Congress approved June 28, 1898 (30 Stat. L., 495), known as the "Curtis Act;" sickness, however, necessitated his absence from the Territory from September, 1902, to June, 1903.
The duties of his office therefore devolved for a short time upon the United States Indian agent, Union Agency, and the remainder of the time were under the supervision and direction of Mr. J. W. Zevely, special inspector of the Department.
The inspector has general supervision over matters within the jurisdiction of the Department except questions of citizenship and allotment and other matters committed to the Commission to the Five Civilized Tribes.
He transmits the annual reports of the Indian agent at Union Agency, the superintendent of schools in Indian Territory, the several school supervisors, the supervising engineer of town sites, and the mining trustees of the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations, all of which officials are under the general direction of the inspector and report to the Department through him.
The reports submitted by the inspector state the conditions existing and the work accomplished during the year, as shown by the records of his office.
During the year the inspector has not been required to give particular attention to matters in the Seminole Nation.
The supplemental agreement with the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations, as ratified by the act of Congress approved July 1, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 641), and by the tribes on September 25, 1902, made radical changes in the conditions with respect to the leasing of mineral lands.
Prior to that time the coal and asphalt leases were made by the mining trustees under direction of and approved by the Secretary of the Interior, with a royalty on coal of 8 cents per ton, mine run, and on asphalt of 10 cents per ton on crude and 60 cents per ton on the refined material.
The supplemental agreement referred to provided that such lands, including the deposits only where underlying town sites, not to exceed a total of 500,000 acres, be segregated and sold at auction, under the direction of the President, and further provided that no lease of any coal or asphalt land should be made after the final ratification of such supplemental agreement, which was on September 25, 1902.
There were on September 25, 1902, the date of the final ratification of such supplemental agreement, 124 coal and asphalt leases in effect 114 coal and 10 asphalt.
Fourteen new leases were made during the year.
The amount of royalty from coal is reported to be $259,686.58 and from asphalt $2,243.26, making a total of $261,929.84 during the year.
The existing agreements with the Creek and Cherokee nations provide that allottees may lease allotted lands for mineral purposes, with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, but no leases were approved during the fiscal year.
There was collected from operators mining coal under permits for local consumption in the Creek Nation $1,505.29 and in the Cherokee Nation $2,813.66.
The town-site surveys commenced during previous years were practically completed during the past fiscal year, and would have been entirely completed had it not been necessary to furlough the force in March, 1903, owing to lack of funds.
A large number of towns having each a population of less than 200 persons was surveyed.
The supplemental agreement with the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations provided that the limits of such towns should be defined not later than ninety days after the final ratification of said agreement, which was September 25, 1902.
In these two nations there were about 320 small towns and post-offices, and it was necessary to visit each and make a report as to the conditions.
Upon these reports the Department directed that 68 towns in the Chickasaw Nation and 32 in the Choctaw Nation, a total of 100, be surveyed and platted, which has been done, the conditions at other places not warranting the setting apart of a town site; such lands are to be allotted.
In the Cherokee Nation the conditions at 115 of these small towns and post-offices were examined, and upon the reports made the Department instructed that 21 be surveyed and platted, the remainder to be allotted.
After the completion of the small town work, nearly all of the larger towns having been surveyed, several surveying forces were relieved, and at the time of the furlough of the town-site employees on March 13, 1903, but three surveying parties were in the field.
The total number of regularly established town sites in the Territory is 297.
The status of the work of surveying is shown to be: Choctaw Nation—surveyed, 84; to be surveyed, 5; Chickasaw Nation—surveyed, 127; to be surveyed, 3; Creek Nation—surveyed, 25; Cherokee Nation—surveyed, 44; to be surveyed, 9; total, 297.
Four town-site commissions were in the field making appraisement of town sites, one in each of the Choctaw, Chickasaw, Creek, and Cherokee nations up to March 13, 1903, when work was suspended.
The Choctaw Commission at the close of the year had 40 towns to appraise, the Chickasaw Commission 89, the Cherokee Commission 47, many of which are small towns.
The appraisement work in the Creek Nation was complete.
In addition to the appraisement work of the Choctaw and Chickasaw Commissions, they have also sold the vacant lots in practically all of the larger towns, and the inspector, by direction of the Department, since the furlough of the Creek Commission, has sold the vacant lots in that nation.
As payments for lots are made in full to the Indian agent, deeds to same are executed by the tribal executives of the respective nations and titles passed.
The tribal laws of the different nations prescribe certain permit taxes to be assessed against noncitizens residing and doing business in the Indian Territory.
Since the passage of the Indian appropriation act of May 27, 1902, prohibiting the removal of any pérson who is in lawful possession of any lot or parcels of land in any town or city in the Indian Territory which has been designated as a town site, the tribal authorities have practically been unable to enforce the collection of revenues and permits assessed against noncitizens.
When an attempt was made to close stores in South McAlester, Choctaw Nation, the merchants applied to the judge of the United States court for the central district, who granted a temporary restraining order which was made perpetual on August 16, 1903, but the case has been appealed.
An effort was made by the owners of cattle in the Chickasaw Nation to enjoin the collection of the tribal cattle tax, but the applications were denied by the courts in the District of Columbia and also in the southern district of Indian Territory.
The amount of money collected by the Indian agent on account of live stock introduced into the Chickasaw Nation during the year was $30,511.65.
The total amount of revenue collected from all sources in the Creek Nation, not including payments on town lots, was $26,350.49, the largest item being on account of pasture and cattle revenues.
The total amount collected in the Cherokee Nation was $37,534.48, not including payments on town lots.
Attention is invited to the act approved January 21, 1903 (32 Stat. L., 774), amending the timber and stone act of June 6, 1900, and authorizing citizens of the Five Civilized Tribes to dispose of their timber from and after allotment by the Commission to the Five Civilized Tribes.
The Assistant Attorney-General for the Interior Department rendered an opinion, which was approved by the Department, upon this act, holding that Seminole allottees may dispose of their timber at this time, as the allotments are complete in that nation, and that Cherokee, Choctaw, and Chickasaw citizens may sell and dispose of their timber after they have selected their allotments and received certificate of selection from the Commission to the Five Civilized Tribes.
The original Creek agreement authorizes Indian citizens to sell and dispose of their timber after they have selected their allotments.
A list of contracts entered into by the Department during the year is submitted, and the inspector refers to the action taken where pine timber was being cut in violation of law, which timber was seized by the Indian agent and in mostinstances, by direction of the Department, sold at public auction.
In some cases, however, the claimants applied to the courts and after giving bond replevied the timber.
From the reports of the superintendent of schools and his several supervisors, it appears that the schools in the Choctaw, Creek, and Cherokee nations are being conducted satisfactorily under the joint control of the Government and a representative of the tribes.
In the Chickasaw Nation the funds controlled by the Department are insufficient to pay the expenses of the schools, and therefore the Government has not taken full charge of the schools in this nation.
The superintendent states the finances in the Chickasaw Nation are in a deplorable condition.
There are four regular boarding schools or academies in the Choctaw Nation, in addition to one mission school or academy at Atoka.
There are also 9 small boarding schools and 175 day schools, the total enrollment of all these Cho*aw schools being 3,998, at a total cost of $119,561.
The Chickasaw Nation maintained 5 boarding schools, one of which is an orphan academy, and 15 day schools, with a total enrollment of 1,193 pupils, costing $110,750.
Ten boarding schools and 58 day schools have been maintained in the Creek Nation during the year, the total enrollment being 2,557, at a cost of $73,358.
In the Cherokee Nation there have been 4 boarding schools and 150 day schools, all having a total enrollment of 6,187 pupils, maintained at an expense of $110,818.
The total amount disbursed by the Indian agent, according to his report, is $2,618,480.41, leaving an unexpended balance deposited of $85,157.87.
Attention is invited to the fact that the outstanding warrants of the Cherokee Nation, evidencing an indebtedness of $1,140,352.04, were paid by the Indian agent and retired during the year, and other warrant payments were made for the several tribes, as shown in the statement of disbursements.
The Indian agent also made a payment to Chickasaw citizens of $40 per capita, a total of $155,680.
Action is being taken looking to the payment of the so-called "loyal Creek claim," in accordance with the provisions of the Indian appropriation act of March 3, 1903.
In a number of cases towns in the Choctaw, Chickasaw, and Creek nations requested the Department to authorize the issuance of municipal bonds for public improvements under the provisions of the legislation applicable to the respective nations, and three applications were allowed.
The agreements with the Creek, Cherokee, Choctaw, and Chickasaw nations providing that Indian citizens be placed in possession of their allotments are quoted, and it is stated that the Indian agent, by direction of the Department, has taken steps to place allottees in unrestricted possession of their land when so requested.
Provision is made in the Cherokee and Creek nations for public roads.
While the duty of enforcing the laws evidently devolves upon the Department, the machinery to carry out the work is lacking at this time, there being no funds available or adequate force for that purpose, but public notice has been issued looking to the establishment of these roads throughout the Creek and Cherokee nations.
Reference is made to the rules and regulations governing the leasing and sale of Creek allotments and the leasing of Cherokee allotments.
In each nation citizens may lease their allotments for agricultural purposes for a term not longer than five years, and for grazing purposes for one year, without the approval of the Department, but longerterm leases and leases for mineral purposes may be made with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, and not otherwise.
Regulations to carry out this law were adopted near the close of the fiscal year.
In the matter of the sales of Creek lands, the regulations now require the same to be advertised and bids received therefor, and that no bid for less than the appraised value will be considered.
There being considerable controversy over the election of principal chief in the Choctaw Nation, in order to preserve the peace the Department requested the Secretary of War to dispatch troops to the scene, which was done, two companies of infantry, under the command of Major Starr, being sent from Fort Reno, Okla.
Upon the report submitted by the Indian agent as to the result of the election, the Department recognized Green McCurtain as principal chief.
During the year Congress provided for the recording of deeds and other conveyances and instruments of writing in Indian Territory, making chapter 27 of Mansfield's Digest of the Statutes of Arkansas applicable so far as possible, and providing that the clerks and deputy clerks of the United States courts should be ex-officio recorders, and establishing 25 recording districts and places of record.
Reference is made to the laws authorizing Indians to lease their lands for certain periods without supervision or approval of the Department, and to the opinion of the Assistant Attorney-General, which was approved by the Department, to the effect that if the lease is one that the allottee was authorized to make, it can not be disregarded solely upon the ground that the rental provided is inadequate or that it was improvidently made or obtained by fraud or deception; that these are matters properly cognizable by the courts and redress must be sought there.
The inspector states there is no doubt that many Indians, especially full bloods, have been and are being imposed upon in the matter of leasing their lands; and if legislation were enacted making it an offense to enter into leases with minors, full bloods, or adult incompetents, without first submitting the same for the consideration and approval of some proper authority, it would have the desired effect and protect the interests of all concerned.
Provision should be made for public roads in the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations, and to pay the expenses of enforcing the road laws, determining the necessity therefor, and the payment of damages resulting from their establishment, etc.
An appropriation is also necessary to carry on the work of placing allottees in unrestricted possession of their land, and it is suggested that some legislation be enacted providing for Government supervision of Chickasaw schools.
By authority of the Curtis Act, the Delaware Indians brought suit against the Cherokee Nation in the Court of Claims for the purpose of determining the rights of the former in the lands and funds of the Cherokee Nation.
In view of the claim of the Delawares, the act required the Dawes Commission to segregate 157,600 acres from the lands of the Cherokees before making allotments in the Cherokee Nation, such segregation to be subject to the judicial determination of the rights of the parties.
This provision was incorporated in the subsequent act of July 1, 1902 (32 Stats., 716), but no action was taken by the Commission in the matter until the following December, due to the fact that it did not deem it necessary or advisable to make the segregation until prepared to enter upon the work of allotting the Cherokee lands.
In a report received April 20, 1903, the Dawes Commission advised the Department that on the previous December 17 the Commission had ordered 157,600 acres, as described in a certain schedule submitted by representatives of the Delawares, to be segregated as required by the act referred to, but subsequently discovered that the schedule was erroneous in that some of the lands described therein were claimed by Cherokee Indians as their homes, upon which they had long resided, while certain other lands occupied by Delawares in the Cherokee Nation were not scheduled at all, although the law requires that the lands, so occupied by Delawares should be included in the segregation.
Has been informally advised of cases of numerous other Delaware citizens whose improved lands are not included within the segregation, and the statement has been frequently made that the representatives of the Delawares, or their business committee, refused to schedule for segregation the lands of any Delaware citizen who failed to pay the pro rata share of the fee which said representatives or committee demanded.
The Delawares whose property rights are thus unprotected are, for the most part, in moderate circumstances, and the improvements on the lands occupied by them represent, in most instances, the efforts of a lifetime.
Pending the consideration of this report, the Secretary of the Interior and the Dawes Commission were temporarily enjoined by the supreme court of the District of Columbia from changing said schedule in any manner, which injunction was dissolved October 6 last, the court holding that the segregation was incomplete in law because it had not been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.
The Secretary could not approve a segregation reported by the Commission itself to be so flagrantly a deviation from the requirements of the law, and therefore the Department, upon receiving official notice of the dissolution of the injunction, instructed the Dawes Commission to make and report a corrected schedule for segregation that would be free from such objections.
It is hoped and presumed that the Commission will be ready to report such a schedule at an early day, since delay in completing the segregation is embarrassing the work of allotting the Cherokee lands.
The action, above referred to as having been brought by the Delaware Indians against the Cherokee Nation, was decided adversely to the Delawares in the Court of Claims last February, and an appeal was taken to the Supreme Court of the United States, where it is now pending.
In August last, an attack was made in the public press by the representative in this city of the Indian Rights Association of Philadelphia, upon certain Presidential appointees confirmed by the Senate, and located in Indian Territory, affecting their integrity in the discharge of their public duties.
No previous charges had been made against these gentlemen, nor an opportunity for reply given to them, nor to the Department, before such publication.
The attention of the president of the Indian Rights' Association was called to this matter, as will be seen by correspondence had with him as per appendix, page 262, Exhibit E.
Upon the demand of these officials, and in justice to them thus publicly accused, a thorough and impartial investigation is now being made under the direction of the Hon.
Charles J. Bonaparte, of Baltimore, and Mr. C. R. Woodruff, of the firm of Neilson & Woodruff, of Philadelphia, whose duty it will also be to investigate the motives and methods of the accuser in order that full justice may be done in prosecuting the inquiry, the result of which will be made known in due course.
By the provisions of section 64 of the act of July 1, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 641), confirming the agreement with the Choctaw and·Chickasaw tribes of Indians, there was ceded by said tribes to the United States a tract or tracts of land in the vicinity of the village of Sulphur in the Chickasaw Nation, not exceeding 640 acres, to be selected under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior within four months after the final ratification of said agreement (which was September 25, 1902), to embrace all of the natural springs in and about said village, and 'so much of Sulphur Creek, Rock Creek, Buckhorn Creek, and the lands adjacent to said natural springs and creeks as may be deemed necessary by the Secretary of the Interior for the proper utilization and control of said springs and the waters of said creeks, said lands to be selected so as to cause the least interference with the contemplated town site at that place consistent with the purposes for which said cession was made, and when selected and ceded the lands were to be held, owned, and controlled by the United States absolutely and without any restriction, save that no part thereof should be platted or disposed of for town-site purposes during the existence of the two tribal governments.
Said section fixes the price of said lands at $20 per acre and declares that the same should be deposited in the Treasury of the United States, to the credit of the two tribes, from the unappropriated public moneys of the United States, and that said payment shall be in full compensation for said lands.
It was further provided that all improvements upon the lands so selected, which were lawfully there at the time of the ratification of said agreement by Congress, July 1, 1902, shall be appraised under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior at the true value at the time of the selection of said lands, and shall be paid for by warrants drawn by the Secretary of the Interior upon the Treasurer of the United States; that until otherwise provided by law the Secretary of the Interior may, under rules prescribed for that purpose, regulate and control the use of the water of said springs and creeks and the temporary use and occupation of the lands so ceded; that no person shall occupy any portion of the lands so ceded or carry on any business thereon except as provided by said rules, and until otherwise provided by Congress the laws of the United States relating to the introduction, possession, sale, and giving away of liquor or intoxicants within the Indian country, or Indian reservation, shall be applicable to the lands so ceded, and said lands shall remain within the jurisdiction of the United States court for the southern district of Indian Territory.
On November 19, 1902, there were selected and reserved for said reservation 629.33 acres.
On the same date action was taken looking to the appraisements of the improvements on said segregated lands.
No specific appropriation was made in said section for carrying out its provision except as to payment for the land, but on October 9, 1902, the Comptroller of the Treasury, upon the request of the Department, rendered an opinion holding that payment for improvements owned by persons at the date of the ratification of the act might be paid for out of the funds of the United States in the Treasury not otherwise provided for.
The improvements were appraised at $87,462.85.
Some delay was occasioned on account of the failure of the owners to furnish evidence that the taxes on said improvements had been duly paid.
These were subsequently furnished and there have been paid for the improvements $86,981.05.
There remains, however, one additional claim amounting to $380, filed by the mayor of the town, which is awaiting further information in the premises.
On January 15, 1903, the Department requested the Secretary of the Treasury to place to the credit of said tribes $12,586.60, of which the Chickasaws were entitled to $3,146.65 and the Choctaws $9,439.95.
A controversy having arisen over the area which ought to be included in the town site of Sulphur, and information having been received tending to show that an additional tract of land ought to be added to the Sulphur Springs Reservation in order to protect it from contamination and secure the benefits intended by said section, in May, 1903, I visited the Indian Territory and personally made a careful inspection of the reservation of the land and improvements within the proposed town site of Sulphur.
From the results of my own observations as well as from information which I deem reliable, I came to the conclusion that it was absolutely essential to exclude from the town site limits a certain tract of land adjoining Sulphur Springs Reservation, with a view of securing, if possible, legislative enactment for the purpose of enlarging the reservation covering the same.
Accordingly, on October 20, 1903, I approved the exterior limits of the town site of Sulphur, excluding therefrom the tract above indicated for the benefit of Sulphur Springs Reservation, in order that proper action might be taken looking to the acquisition of title thereto and payment for improvements of lawful owners thereon.
Notice was duly given that parties making improvements upon said tract excluded from the town site would not acquire any rights by reason of improvements subsequently made, and that said land was reserved from allotment to the members of said tribes.
In order that there may be no question as to the desirability of securing said additional tract for the Sulphur Springs Reservation, on November 12, 1903, I instructed the Director of the Geological Survey to cause a full and complete investigation to be made concerning the sanitary conditions of the springs and waters included in the Sulphur Springs Reservation, and to specially investigate and report whether the reservation of said reserved tract of land, or any part thereof, is necessary in order to preserve the springs and waters in the Sulphur Creek Reservation from pollution.
Upon receipt of said report additional legislation will be recommended as the Department is advised may be necessary in the premises.
A special Indian inspector has been appointed and detailed to care for and protect the reservation, and to secure payment of the rentals under temporary leases with the occupants under rules prescribed by the Secretary.
As stated in my last annual report, the agreement of the Kansas or Kaw Indians among themselves for an equal division of their tribal lands was ratified by act of Congress approved July 1, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 636).
Under the provisions of section 1 of this agreement each member was entitled to select a homestead of 160 acres, the remainder of the lands to be divided among them by a committee appointed for that purpose.
In accordance with this provision 247 Indians have selected homesteads.
The schedules of homestead and additional allotments have both been approved.
The homestead deeds have been executed and delivered, and the additional allotment deeds have been executed, but not yet delivered.
Under section 7 of the agreement the selection of a tract of land for town-site purposes was made, and the town of Washunga, named for the principal chief, was established.
Five hundred and twentyfour lots have been sold, to the highest bidder in each case, and deeds for said lots have been executed, but not yet delivered.
Mention was also made in my last annual report of an agreement which had-been made with the Indians residing on the Fort Berthold Reservation.
This agreement was submitted to Congress at its last session, but was not ratified.
Agreements made with the Crows and the Yankton Sioux in 1899 and with the Indians of the Devils Lake, Grand Ronde, Lower Brule, and Rosebud reservations in 1901 are still pending before Congress.
October 22, 1892, by the terms of which the said Indians relinquished all title or claim to about nine million acres of land, was forwarded to Congress, with draft of a bill to ratify the same, on February 6, 1893.
This agreement is still pending before Congress, although the Department, believing that its terms and provisions would prove to be for the best interests of both the Indians and the Government, has repeatedly made favorable reports thereon and recommended its ratification.
On February 14, 1903, the Department decided that the provision in the act of March 3, 1893, forbidding the Puyallup Indians from alienating their allotments for the period of ten years from that date, would become inoperative on and after March 3, 1903, and that after that date the said Indians would have the power to"lease, encumber, grant, and alienate their lands without restrictriction, as any other person might do under the laws of the State of Washington."
The Puyallup Indian Commission was instructed accordingly.
The 80-acre tract known as the "Boyd claim," embraced in the old Camp Independence military reservation, has been subdivided and assigned to 16 heads of Indian families living in the vicinity.
The question of allotting these tracts in severalty to the Indians, under section 4 of the general allotment act, is being considered by the Indian Office.
In accordance with a provision contained in the Indian appropriation act approved May 27, 1902, a tract of land located in San Diego County, Cal., comprising 3,353 acres, and known as the "Pala Ranch," was purchased, and certain public lands adjoining the same were withdrawn from settlement and entry, with a view to their addition to the purchased tract.
To the lands so acquired, now designated as the "Pala Reservation,"a majority of the Indians from "Warners Ranch," and those located at San Felipe and Puerta Chiquita were removed, under the supervision of United States Indian Inspector James E. Jenkins, and their immediate needs in the shape of subsistence, houses, farming implements, etc., are being provided for by the Department.
The bill (S. 5311) introduced in the last Congress for the relief of Joseph's band was, by resolution of the Senate, referred to the Court of Claims, in pursuance of the provisions of the act of March 3, 1887.
The court is authorized to report to the Senate what amount, or amounts, if any, are legally and equitably due Joseph's band of Nez Perce Indians under the various items of the bill.
During the period covered by this report there was set apart for the use of religious societies for missionary and educational purposes on Indian reservations 591.37 acres of land.
During the year authority was granted for the survey and location of thirteen lines of railroad through Indian lands other than those of Oklahoma and Indian Territory, under the provisions of the act of Congress approved March 2, 1899 (30 Stat. L., 990); and under the act of February 28, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 43), maps were filed by several companies covering rights of way and additional grounds in Oklahoma.and Indian Territories.
Full details as to both the above are given in the report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, and attention is invited to the views of that officer as the result of a careful observation of the operation of railroads under the last-named act.
Permission to engage Indians for exhibition purposes in shows, traveling theatrical parties, and the like has been consistently denied.
Several requests from State or county officials for Indians to be allowed to participate in fairs, etc., as an attraction, have also been denied; but one exception was made in the case of the annual carnival and festival at Denver, Colo., upon the application of the mayor, for certain Arapahoes and Shoshones to visit that city on that occasion.
Inspectors, special agents, and school supervisors in the Indian service have been active during the year in their efforts to suppress the liquor traffic among the Indians, and in apprehending and prosecuting persons charged with violations of the law.
Numerous requests have been made upon the Department of Justice for investigation, by special agents of that Department, of cases of liquor selling to Indians, and a number of convictions have been secured; but owing to the difficulty of obtaining proper evidence against the offenders the general results have not been as good as was hoped for.
Recently a decision was rendered by the United States circuit court for the district of Washington, southern division, dismissing the bill filed July 11, 1895, to enjoin Winans Brothers from interfering with the fishery and other rights claimed by the Yakima Indians under their treaty.
The Attorney-General, on June 25, 1903, stated that, as then advised, he was inclined to think an appeal should be taken from the decision, but he asked to have the views of this Department as to the advisability of such action before issuing instructions to the United States attorney.
After consideration of the subject by the Department and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, the Attorney-General was advised that, in view of the importance of the matter to the Indians, the Department desired that the case should be appealed to a higher court for a final decree which will govern the Department and the Indian Bureau, not only in this case hereafter, but in other cases of a similar nature that have already arisen or that may arise in the future.
He was therefore asked to issue the proper instructions to the United States attorney.
Since my last annual report, the Supreme Court of the United States has dismissed the suit brought by Lone Wolf and others to enjoin the Secretary of the Interior from carrying into execution the act of Congress of June 6, 1900, providing for the opening of the Kiowa, Comanche, and Apache Indian Reservation in Oklahoma.
The excitement this litigation caused among the members of the three tribes concerned, and the factional spirit aroused by it, bore fruit last spring in a memorial to Congress purporting to come from a council of disaffected Indians, and supported by affidavits from other persons living in the opened reservation, making a number of charges against the Indian agent and the Indian inspector acting as the allotting agent, and suggesting that further particulars of wrongdoing by both officers could be obtained by a competent investigator on the spot.
An appeal was, at the same time, made direct!
In pursuance of this request, Francis E. Leupp, of Washington, D. C., in whose experience, integrity, and ability in ·Indian matters, the Department has the greatest confidence, was designated to make the investigation.
His report, based on a service of seven weeks in the field and the examination of every witness the accusers were prepare to produce, exonerates both the accused officers of the offences charged against them, stating each case as presented to him, and side by side with it his findings.
He also, however, procured evidence to enable the United States grand jury to indict several persons for perjury and fraud.
Incidentally to a payment made under his supervision to the Kiowas, Comanches, and Apaches, Mr. Leupp explained to Lone Wolf's faction the force of the Supreme Court's decision dismissing their injunction suit.
On the strength of their better understanding of the situation these Indians, who had up to that time refused to accept their share of the fund Congress had appropriated for the purchase of their surplus lands, bowed to the authority of the Government and made application for their money.
This disposes of the whole matter, as far as the Department of the Interior is concerned.
The report of the Commissioner of Pensions shows that during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1903, the total number of pensioners on the roll was 1,043,933, and the number remaining on the roll at the close of the year was 996,545, a net loss of 2,901 from the previous year.
The gains to the rolls during the year were 40,086 new pensioners and 4,401 restorations and renewals, a total of 44,487; of this number 231 were pensioned by special acts of Congress.
The losses to the rolls during the same time by death were 40,907 and from other causes 6,481, a total of 47,388, a net loss for the year of 2,901.
The number of deaths of soldier pensioners for the year was 29,123 and of this number 27,842 were volunteers of the civil war.