Washington, D. C., November 30, 1906.
Sir: I have the honor to submit for your consideration my eighth annual report of the operations of the Department of the Interior, together with the reports of the Bureaus, offices, institutions, etc., under its supervision.
There has been no diminution in the volume of work coming into the Department during the period covered by this report.
On the contrary, the past year has been characterized by an increase—notably so in the Patent Office, the Geological Survey, the Reclamation Service, the General Land Office, and the Secretary's Office—necessitating in some instances the extension of the hours of labor, as well as an increase in the number of employees.
The work, however, I am gratified to be able to state, has been expeditiously dispatched, and the public business may be regarded as well in hand.
Of the several branches of the Interior Department in this city, all are provided for in quarters in Government buildings, except the Geological Survey, the Reclamation Service, the Bureau of Education, and a portion of the General Land Office and of the Patent Office.
For these last named, including also quarters for the storage of documents, the Department now expends annually $62,440, this sum representing the interest at 3 per cent on a principal of $2,081,333.34, at which rate the Government can very readily borrow money.
The buildings now rented by the Department, though selected with reasonable care, are unfit to be the depositories of the valuable archives and papers belonging to the Government which they contain; and though it is claimed that some of them are of fireproof construction, in all likelihood there would be considerable loss of life in case of fire occurring therein, aside from the loss to the Government by the destruction of valuable and irreplaceable records.
The building known as the Patent Office building is not sufficient to properly provide for the Secretary's Office and the Patent Office, now accommodated therein.
Especially is this true of the Patent Office, and additional rooms for the examining and clerical forces, as well as for the housing of tons of documents and records belonging to that Office, now stored in the upper portion of the Patent Office building, are a matter of necessity.
In the interest, therefore, of economy and efficiency of the service, provision, in my judgment, should be made by Congress at the earliest practicable date for the erection of a fireproof building for the accommodation of the Bureaus now occupying rented buildings; and provision should also at once be made for the additional room necessary for the proper consideration and dispatch of the business of the Patent Office.
Attention has heretofore been called in prior annual reports to the fact that the compensation fixed by law for the chiefs of division in the Secretary's Office is inadequate, and in again adverting to the subject I most earnestly recommend an early readjustment of these salaries by Congress on a more equitable basis.
The unusual activity in the public-land service referred to in my last annual report has not abated.
The prosecution of all persons conspiring to defraud the Government of its public lands is being continued with vigor, as is shown by the fact that 490 persons have been indicted in the various land States and Territories for the violation of the public-land laws, 89 have been convicted, and indictments are still pending against 401.
The zeal with which the officers of this Department and the Department of Justice are looking into these matters is constantly uncovering new cases that are startling in character, and it is the policy of the administration to continue these investigations and prosecutions until a proper respect for the property rights of the Government, and a regard for the law are established throughout those sections of the country in which such laws apply.
The importance of our great public domain to the people can not be overestimated.
It is the nation's heritage, and every available rod thereof should be regarded as sacredly dedicated to the purpose of providing homes for the homeless.
The laws enacted for the protection of the lands should therefore be rigidly enforced, and this has been the cardinal principle of my administration.
It is to be regretted, however, that the efforts made to release it from the grip of its despoilers have been met by every embarrassment that human ingenuity could devise; powerful influences have been concerned, and have not hesitated to aggressively exert every agency that could be commanded to weaken the hand of the law; even local land-office officials have been subservient to such influences, and the punishment imposed by the courts has, in many cases, been so conspicuously inadequate as to encourage rather than deter violations of the law.
Whether this official stagnation is due in any degree to local political influences to which these officials are more or less indebted for their commissions and the retention of their positions, is not important to discuss at this time, it being sufficient to state that it is a deplorable fact that such action, or rather inaction, is bringing reproach upon the public service, besides enhancing the difficulties which beset the administration in any efforts that it may make to rescue the public domain from serious peril.
In the discharge of my duty under the law I have proceeded without the slightest prejudice for or against any person or persons interested.
In such efforts as have been made to protect the service under my supervision from the ravages of inordinate greed, I have not considered either the station or the power of the guilty.
Apparently they are all on the same footing; in my judgment, however, the higher the offender the greater the crime against society and law, because of the force and influence of the higher example.
It is not possible for persons and corporations of great influence and power to maintain inclosures of the public lands in open disregard of a criminal statute, without thereby encouraging others to do likewise; and here it may be properly noted that reports on file in the Department indicate that approximately 500,000 acres and more of the public domain in certain States and Territories are by unlawful means appropriated to the exclusive use of private interests for private gain.
Until, therefore, the opportunities afforded for the fraudulent acquisition of public lands by the timber and stone act (act of June 3, 1878, 20 Stat. L., 89), the desert land acts (act of March 3, 1877, 19 Stat. L., 377, as amended by the act of March 3, 1891, 26 Stat. L., 1095), and the commutation clause of the homestead law (section 2301 of the Revised Statutes, as amended by section 6 of the act of March 3, 1891, 26 Stat. L., 1098, and the act of June 3, 1896, 29 Stat. L., 197), are removed by the repeal or modification of those measures, the Government may expect to expend its money and energy in apprehending and convicting those seeking to defraud it out of its public lands.
I accordingly renew the recommendations that I have consistently made for the past five years, that the above-mentioned laws be repealed or modified.
My official influence in this matter will soon terminate, but I shall have the comfort in retiring from the public service of a well-founded conviction that the action of the President relative to this class of lawlessness will be so rigorous as to enable my successor to successfully administer the law.
In my last annual report twelve irrigation projects were reported as under construction, under the act of June 17, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 388), known as the "Reclamation act."
Such progress has been made during the past year that there are now twenty-three of such projects in process of construction, and one, the Hondo Project, in New Mexico, is practically completed, and it is believed will be in operation in a short time.
Twenty-two additional forest reservations have been established by Presidential proclamation, under the act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat. L., 1095), the areas of 3 have been reduced, 17 have been enlarged, and 2 have been consolidated.
In effecting the consolidation referred to, several small areas were excluded and a large quantity of land was added to the reserves.
The increase in the area of forest reserves during the year was 21,306,001 acres.
The total number of forest reservations created under the act above mentioned is 106, aggregating 106,999,423 acres.
In my last annual report I stated that the matter of the further continuance of the office of receiver of public moneys for United States land offices was one of questioñable propriety, and approved the recommendation of the Commissioner of the General Land Office that such office be abolished.
I desire to renew such recommendation, believing that its effectuation will result in a more economical as well as a more efficient administration of the land service.
The opening to settlement and entry of the Crow Indian lands in Montana, and the Shoshone or Wind River lands in Wyoming, under the acts of April 27, 1904 (33 Stat. L., 352), and March 3, 1905 (33 Stat. L., 1016), was successfully accomplished.
The acreage involved in the Crow Indian Reservation was 969,656.58.
Up to and including August 31, 1906, a total of 263 persons had made filings and entries out of a possible 5,125.
In the Shoshone or Wind River Reservation the acreage was 1,438,633.66.
Up to and including August 31, 1906, 388 persons had made filings out of a possible 1,600.
Under the act of June 27, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 400), known as the "Morris Act," upwards of 173,000,000 feet of timber was cut from the ceded Chippewa Indian lands in Minnesota.
The price paid was in excess of a million dollars and the expense to the Indians was less than 31 per cent.
During the three years that logging on these lands has been carried on under said act the expenses have been less than 31 per cent.
Under the acts of March 3, 1901 (31 Stat. L., 1094), and June 30, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 516), all contracts for municipal improvements contemplated by said acts in the counties of Kiowa, Caddo, and Comanche, in the Territory of Oklahoma, have been completed, and final payment thereon will be made before the end of the current calendar year, leaving balance in every one of the funds.
In the Indian Service the policy of inducing able-bodied Indians to seek employment outside of their reservations, where they have no profitable work at home, and to endeavor to earn a living for themselves, as white men do, in the open labor market, has been made a prominent feature of Indian civilization during the past year.
An employment bureau, for the purpose of finding Indians who want work, and of providing work for those who desire it, was established last year in the Southwest, under the care of Mr. Charles E. Dagenett, at Albuquerque, N. Mex., and the results so far have been most encouraging.
Indians, 250 of whom are at work outside of the reservation on railroads, irrigation ditches, and on farms or herding sheep.
During the year three important changes have been made in the method of letting contracts for supplies for the Indian Service, namely: (1) all bids are now opened in Washington; (2) bids for clothing, dry goods, etc., are opened early in April instead of the middle of May; and (3) contracts for cereals, dried fruits, etc., are opened in the early fall instead of in the spring.
This change in policy is clearly in the interest of the Government.
Allotments of land in severalty are being made as rapidly as possible, the full force of allotting agents being constantly at work in the field.
The leasing of allotted and unallotted lands is conducted under the supervision of the Department and continues to be a source of considerable revenue to the Indians.
Logging operations on several of the reservations in the Northwest have been carried on under regulations approved by the Secretary of the Interior with increasing profit to the Indians.
The irrigation of Indian reservations and allotments in the arid sections has been vigorously prosecuted during the year with very gratifying results.
After an existence extending over a period of about twelve years, the Commission to the Five Civilized Tribes, created by the act of Congress approved March 3, 1893, for the purpose of negotiating agreements with the Five Civilized Tribes in the Indian Territory, looking to the ultimate dissolution of their tribal government and the formation of a Territory or State out of their domain, ceased to exist by operation of law on the 1st of July, 1905.
By the act of March 3, 1905, the work intrusted to the Commission was placed under the immediate supervision of the Secretary of the Interior, and the then chairman of the Commission, Mr. Tams Bixby, was appointed Commissioner to the Five Civilized Tribes to represent the Secretary in the field.
The work left over by the Commission, as well as additional duties subsequently imposed by Congress, and the progress made in the disposition thereof by the Commissioner, is fully set forth on pages 256-317of this report.
The force of this Office is chiefly occupied with the consideration of claims and legal problems arising under the laws of the United States relating to public lands and to Indian affairs, although a large part of its time is devoted to legal questions arising under the pension, patent, and other laws, the administration of which is committed to the Department.
The work of the past year on questions coming from the Indian Territory division (relative to the Five Civilized Tribes), as well as that from the Reclamation Service, has largely increased.
With regard to the Reclamation Service, the increase is accounted for by the fact that the Office is now charged with the responsibility of passing upon titles to lands needed in connection with the construction of irrigation projects.
At the close of the preceding year there were pending 687 appeals from the General Land Office.
During the year 1,910 appeals were received and 1,674 were disposed of, leaving unacted upon at the date of the report 923 cases.
Three hundred and thirty-four motions for review were acted upon, leaving pending at the close of the year 64 of said motions.
There were also received during the year 422 references for opinion, of which 24 are still pending.
Three hundred and ninety-eight miscellaneous matters, including applications for writ of certiorari, were received and disposed of during the year.
The more important of the decisions and opinions affecting public lands are published, for use as precedents, in volumes entitled "Decisions of the Department of the Interior Relating to the Public Lands."
During the past year volume 34 of the Land Decisions, containing 750 pages, has been completed, as well as about 100 pages of volume 35.
In addition to the work done immediately in the office, the Assistant Attorney-General and the attorneys in his office have devoted considerable time to representing the Government in cases in which the Department is interested, both in the courts of the District of Columbia and in the Supreme Court of the United States.
Some of these cases are of considerable importance in their effect upon the future administration of the Department and the status of its officers.
In the last report reference was made to the case of Joseph Naganab v. Hitchcock, which was pending at the time in the United States Supreme Court on appeal.
The decision in this case, which was rendered May 21, 1906 (202 U. S., 473), sustained the contention of the Department, following in this respect the decision in the original case of Oregon v. Hitchcock (202 U. S., 60).
The effect of these decisions will be to prevent suits from being nominally brought against the Secretary of the Interior where they are in fact brought against the Government.
Another original suit in the Supreme Court which was mentioned in the last report is that of Wisconsin v. Hitchcock, involving the claim of the State to certain alleged school lands within an Indian reservation.
In this suit a decision favorable to the Department was handed down by the Supreme Court, April 2, 1906 (201 U. S., 202).
The case of United States ex rel Willis C. West v. Hitchcock since the last report, has been decided in favor of the contentions of the Department by the court of appeals of the District of Columbia.
An appeal has been taken by the relator to the United States Supreme Court, but a decision is not expected for some time.
In the suit of United States ex rel Leonard Roche v. Hitchcock an application for mandamus was made to the supreme court of the District of Columbia to compel the Secretary of the Interior to deliver certain certificates of location issued by the surveyor-general of Louisiana.
The writ was denied, and an appeal has been taken to the court of appeals for the District of Columbia, where the matter is now pending.
There is also pending on appeal before the court of appeals the case of Irrigation Land and Improvement Company v. Hitchcock.
This is a suit brought in the supreme court of the District of Columbia to restrain the Department from prosecuting an irrigation project in Yuma County, Ariz.
The bill was dismissed and an appeal was taken.
Another original suit in the United States Supreme Court is that of State of Kansas v. State of Colorado, the United States, intervenor.
This case involves the control of interstate waters in connection with irrigation projects, and much time and attention has been given by the Assistant Attorney-General and his assistants to the preparation of the case on behalf of the Government.
All the parties are now ready to submit the case to the court, but the importance of the questions involved led the court to direct that the case should not be submitted until there was a full bench.
During the year the Office suffered a serious loss in the death of two valuable members of its legal staff—Mr.
Vivian Brent and Mr. J. L. McCreery.
The death of the first named occurred in June, and that of the second in September, 1906.
These gentlemen had been for twenty-five years identified with the Assistant Attorney-General's office, and had to a great extent contributed to the successful disposition of legal questions intrusted to that office.
I desire to commend the able manner in which the important business intrusted to this Office has been dispatched.
There were disposed of during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1906, public lands aggregating 19,431,187.47 acres, classified as follows: Cash sales, 1,774,341.63; miscellaneous entries, embracing homesteads, land warrants, scrip locations, State selections, swamp lands, railroad and wagon-road selections, Indian allotments, etc., 17,571,102.53 acres, and Indian lands, 85,743.31 acres, showing an increase of 2,374,565.20 acres as compared with the aggregate disposals for the preceding fiscal year.
The total cash receipts during the fiscal year from various sources, including disposal of public land, amounted to $6,528,477.38; and Indian lands, $967,532.50; from depredations on public lands, $47,740.23; from depredations on Indian lands, $880.94; from sales of timber, $125; from sales of Government property, $10,542.85, and for furnishing copies of records and plats, $30,225; aggregate, $7,585,523.90; an increase of $567,712.52, as compared with the preceding fiscal year.
The total expenses of district land offices, for salaries and commissions of registers and receivers, incidental expenses, and expenses of depositing public moneys during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1906, were $780,417.80, a decrease of $37,921.52, as compared with the fiscal year ended June 30, 1905.
The aggregate expenditures and estimated liabilities of the publicland service, including expenses of district land offices, as stated, were $1,690,641.20, leaving a net surplus in the United States Treasury of $5,894,882.70.
By section 4 of the act of August 18, 1894 (28 Stat. L., 372–422), as amended by the act of June 11, 1896 (29 Stat. L., 413–434), and act of March 3, 1901 (31 Stat L., 1133-1188), provision is made for the donation to each of the desertland States of not more than 1,000,000 acres of such lands.
Under these acts six lists were approved, aggregating 215,119.70 acres, and three lists were patented, aggregating 46,533.80 acres.
During the past fiscal year 1,238 desertland entries were approved for patenting and 79 canceled, leaving 3,006 entries pending June 30, 1906.
There were also examined during the year 4,646 original desert-land entries, 8,338 yearly proofs, and 760 assignments.
Under the act of January 13, 1897 (29 Stat. L., 484), the number of declaratory statements on hand at the beginning of the fiscal year was 2,970.
There were received during the year 1,040, making the total requiring action 4,010.
Of this number 1,297 were canceled or relinquished and 53 were approved, leaving 2,660 not acted upon, of which 80 have been held for amendment or cancellation.
There were 61,361 patents of all classes issued during the year.
Of this number 56,138 are classed as agricultural, 3,591 are Indian allotments, 1,239 are mineral patents, 58 coal patents, 221 private land claims, 37 swamp patents, and 77 railroad patents.
This is a decrease of 29,366 as compared with the number of agricultural patents issued during the preceding year.
Swamp lands in place were patented to the amount of 92,901.94 acres, a decrease of 492,605.17 acres from the preceding fiscal year, which was inordinately large.
Of all classes of selections under the various grants to States and Territories (except under the "Carey Act"), there were received during the fiscal year selections covering 807,629.82 acres, and there were disposed of by approval and certification 160,463.06 acres, and by cancellation 187,252.04 acres.
Of the selections received during the year, 728,232.10 acres were under the grants of indemnity school lands, mainly as indemnity for school sections included within the limits of forest reserves.
During the fiscal year there were certified or patented on account of railroad and wagon-road grants 1,980,812.02 acres, as against 1,435,326.68 acres last year, an increase of 545,485.34 acres.
On June 30, 1905, there were 20,578 final entries pending and 49,291 were received during the year.
There were disposed of during the year 55,998 final entries, of which 51,516 were approved for patenting, leaving a total pending of 13,871.
There were pending June 30, 1905, 693 Indian allotments.
During the year 4,337 were received and 3,692 disposed of, leaving 1,338 pending June 30, 1906.
The allotments now pending are chiefly Turtle Mountain selections, for the patenting of which no provision was made by Congress, and allotments on the public domain, which were approved, but later suspended for purposes of investigation, and allotments of unsurveyed lands now awaiting survey.
Under the provisions of the act of April 27, 1904 (33 Stat., 352), 16,923 persons registered as applicants to make homestead entries within the ceded portion of the Crow Indian Reservation, Mont., of whom 6,500 were allotted the right to make entry during the first sixty days in the order established by drawings held at Billings, Mont., July 2, 3, and 5, 1906.
The lands were opened July 16, 1906, and during the first week 185 entries and filings were made out of 750 who were entitled, and up to and including August 31, 1906, a total of 263 persons made filings and entries out of a possible 5,125.
Under the provisions of the act of March 3, 1905 (33 Stat. L., 1016), 10,559 persons registered as applicants to make homestead entries for the ceded portion of the Shoshone Indian lands in Wyoming, of whom 7,240 were allotted the right to make entry during the first sixty days in the order established by the drawing held at Lander, Wyo., August 4, 6, and 7, 1906.
The lands were opened on August 15, 1906, and up to and including August 31, 1906, 388 persons made filings out of a possible 1,600.
During the past logging season there were cut from ceded Chippewa lands 173,560,998 feet of timber.
The price paid was $1,122,918.93, and the expense to the Indians $35,592.84, or less than 31 per cent.
For the three years during which logging has been carried on the expenses have been less than 31 per cent.
Under the act of March 3, 1875 (18 Stat. L., 482), providing for rights of way over public lands, the act of May 14, 1898 (30 Stat. L., 409), providing for rights of way in Alaska, and various special acts, 760 companies have filed articles of incorporation which have been accepted, 62 of which were accepted during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1906.
Right of way has been approved to 543 companies, 30 of which received their first approval during the same period.
There were received during the year 610 maps of locations of railroads, which, with those already pending, make a total of 677 maps on hand for action during the year.
Of these 180 have been approved, 20 have been filed (not requiring approval), and 395 have been otherwise disposed of, 11 of which were rejected and the rest returned for correction, leaving 82 awaiting action June 30, 1906.
Under the provisions of sections 18 to 21, inclusive, of the act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat. L., 1095), as amended by section 2 of the act of May 11, 1898 (30 Stat. L., 404), right of way has been approved to 764 companies, individuals, and associations of individuals, of which 114 received their first approval during the past year.
There have been received during the year 470 maps which, with those already pending, made a total of 606 maps on hand for action during the year; of these 116 have been approved, 28 have been filed (not requiring approval), and 308 have been otherwise disposed of, 29 being rejected and the rest returned for correction, leaving 154 pending June 30, 1906.
Under the act of February 15, 1901 (31 Stat. L., 790), authorizing the Secretary of the Interior to permit the use of rights of way through public lands, reservations, or national parks for telegraph and telephone lines, electrical and water plants, canals, reservoirs, etc., for the storage and conveyance of water and all beneficial uses, applications have been approved for 60 companies, individuals, and associations of individuals.
Under the provisions of this act there were 52 maps pending in the General Land Office July 1, 1905, and 124 were received during the year, of which 17 were approved and 108 otherwise disposed of, most of the latter class being returned for correction.
By the act of February 1, 1905 (33 Stat. L., 1296), authority for granting permission to use rights of way within forest reserves, under the act of February 15, 1901 (31 Stat. L., 790), was transferred to the Department of Agriculture, and all such applications now receive consideration in that Department.
Under the provisions of the tramroad act of January 21, 1895 (28 Stat. L., 635), as amended by the act of May 11, 1898 (30 Stat.
L.
404), three maps were received during the year, one of which has been approved and two otherwise disposed of, leaving none awaiting action.
Under section 4 of the act of February 1, 1905 (33 Stat. L., 1296), providing for rights of way through forest reserves for municipal or mining purposes and for purposes of the milling and reduction of ores, 11 applications were filed during the year, 1 of which has been approved, 2 filed (not requiring approval), and 2 otherwise disposed of, leaving 6 pending June 30, 1906.
In each annual report for several years I have called attention to the necessity for remedial legislation relating to the existing laws concerning right of way for the various purposes above referred to, and urged the passage of the bill transmitted to Congress by the Department April 4, 1902, with favorable recommendation.
In my report of last year attention was called to the fact that the above-designated acts constituted a group of statutes the administration of which has been the source of much embarrassment because of the unnecessarily large number of acts and the confusing amendments, while they do not, after all, cover the whole subject in a satisfactory manner, failing to provide for certain important uses of right of way and being otherwise too limited in scope.
Attention was also called to the necessity for legislation that would empower the Secretary of the Interior to declare a forfeiture of a lapsed right of way for railroads, canals, reservoirs, etc., over the public lands and reservations of the United States after notice to grantee.
With the purpose in view of securing legislation along the lines indicated, the Department, on April 4, 1902, transmitted to Congress such a bill as in its judgment would meet the requirements of the case, with the recommendation that it receive the approval of Congress and be introduced as a substitute for Senate bills 3374 and 3711, relating to the same subject.
On June 4, 1902, the Committee on Claims submitted a report on Senate bill 3374, in which it was recommended that the title of the bill be amended by striking out the same and by inserting in lieu thereof the following: 'A bill providing for rights of way in and through public lands, reservations, and certain national parks, and for other purposes," and it was further recommended that the bill be amended by striking out all after the enacting clause and inserting in lieu thereof practically the provisions of the bill transmitted to Congress by my letter of April 4, supra.
The time within which final proof could be made under the timber-culture law expired March 3, 1904.
Under acts of March 3, 1873 (17 Stat. L., 605), March 18, 1874 (18 Stat. L., 21), and June 14, 1878 (20 Stat. L., 113), repealed by act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat. L., 1095), there have been made 65,543 final and commuted entries, aggregating approximately 9,785,594 acres.
Of such entries there were still pending on July 1, 1906, unadjudicated about 569 cases.
During the year 18 town-site and 19 town-lot entries were approved, leaving pending 23 of the former and 284 of the latter.
Two Oklahoma municipal reservation entries were received and approved.
Three town sites have been reserved during the year by the President's proclamation under section 2380, to be disposed of under section 2381, United States Revised Statutes.
There are three town sites, about 40 acres in another, and the reappraisement of the unsold suburban lots in Port Angeles town site, Washington, awaiting appraisement and sale under said sections, but no appropriation has been made or is available for the survey, appraisement, and sale of town sites thereunder.
On July 1, 1905, there were pending 1,275 mineral entries; 1,512 entries have been received during the year, 1,298 have been approved for patent, and 122 canceled, leaving 1,367 pending June 30, 1906.
During the year 921 applications for patent for mining claims were rejected for laches in failing to make proof and payment within a reasonable time, thereby restoring approximately 23,000 acres to the public domain.
AdJusTmENTs.
The reexaminations to determine the present status of the entire grants to the Northern Pacific Railroad (now railway) Company were completed, and a statement of the progress made in adjusting these grants will be found beginning at page 37 of the report of the Commissioner of the General Land Office.
The grants for the Corvallis and Yaquina Bay Wagon Road Company in Oregon, and for the Ontonagon and Brule River Railroad Company in Michigan, have been reexamined with a view to their final closing.
Under the act of February 24, 1905 (33 Stat. L., 813), for the relief of certain homestead settlers in the State of Alabama, all of the cases of the 75 entrymen entitled to relief have been disposed of except one, which is awaiting supplementary proof.
The report of the Commissioner of the General Land Office, with the accompanying papers, upon the question of instituting suits by the United States for the recovery of title to certain lands, situated in Dickinson and O'Brien counties, Iowa, in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Knepper v. Sands (194 U. S., 476), has been submitted to the Attorney-General for consideration.
In the cases of the Southern Pacific Railroad Company v. United States (200 U. S., 341 and 354), the right of the Government to recover from a railroad company the amount it received from bona fide purchasers, not to exceed the Government minimum of such lands, has been finally established affirmatively after several years litigation.
By the act of Congress approved March 3, 1905 (34 Stat. L., 725), making appropriations for sundry civil expenses of the Government for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1906, and for other purposes, there was appropriated "for surveys and resurveys of public lands"the sum of $400,000, of which amount the Commissioner of the General Land Office was authorized to expend so much as he might deem necessary for examinations in the field, etc.
Out of said appropriation the sum of $80,000 was set apart to cover the cost of examinations in the field.
Further apportionments were made from time to time to several districts from the reserve fund, and toward the end of the fiscal year, it having been ascertained that the entire apportionments to certain districts would not be contracted for, transfers from the uncontracted funds were made to other surveying districts where the demand for surveys exceeded the area which could be surveyed under their original apportionments.
The transactions in the several surveying districts are set forth by the Commissioner of the General Land Office in his report for the past fiscal year.
No report of business transacted at the San Francisco office, however, can be expected, on account of the total destruction by fire of the building and all the records of surveys in thatState, as well as of the records of public land matters in the San Francisco district.
The plats and field notes of all former surveys will in time be fully reproduced from the duplicate records in Washington and in some of the local land offices, and some of the records of Spanish titles may be similarly supplied, but the correspondence of over fifty years and the early history of many important cases are irremediably lost.
A large force of clerks has been employed under a special appropriation to reproduce as much as possible from the departmental files.
No regular subdivision of the lands under the rectangular system has yet been projected.
The Copper River base and meridian have been surveyed, but no returns have been submitted.
Under the general law affecting coal lands it seemed necessary in order to dispose of the reported coal and oil lands at Kayak or Katalla to make a survey of certain township lines in that valley as a basis for disposal of claims, but on account of the high bids submitted the surveys are proceeding under a special act which makes the rectangular township surveys unnecessary, and titles will be secured under practice similar to that prevailing in regular mineral claims.
Under the law by which the boundary of a new town site on public land may be surveyed at the cost of the Government, several town-site projects have been carried out and others are under way.
The work of surveying and marking out the lands held and used on June 6, 1900, in the various mission establishments of Alaska for the benefit and education of the aboriginal population has been going on under several contracts.
The priests, clergy, and teachers interested in benevolent and religious work among the natives filed their applications according to the special act approved June 6, 1900, by which they petitioned for the survey of 207 tracts, located in 105 different places throughout the district.
These mission tracts were separated into 12 groups as a basis for soliciting proposals for 12 separate contracts of survey under an estimate and appropriation of $50,000 for the compensation.
In 3 cases the successful bidder failed to proceed with his contract, and the work was re-let to another.
Two groups are not yet under contract, 1 haying been declined by approved bidders twice.
Another of these contracts was awarded to a deputy whose time for filing returns has long ago expired without his even reporting progress in his work, and his bondsmen are required to remedy his default or respond to a suit upon the bond.
The Surveyor-General has received returns of survey of 6 of these mission contracts, 5 of which have been suspended by him for explanation of defects or for correction in the field.
In the 1 transmitted with his approval, however, the examiner has found defective field work, which has resulted in the rejection of that also.
On account of the hazards attending the execution of some of these groups of mission surveys the contract plan may be abandoned and the work completed at some future time by surveyors under salary as examiners.
During the year 36 surveys were suspended on account of errors, defects, and failure to comply with contracts and instructions.
Walker River, Nevada.
Subdivisional surveys executed and plats delivered to Indian Office.
Coeur d' Alene, Idaho.
Subdivisional surveys completed in the field; acceptance of surveys awaiting the resurvey of townships surveyed many years ago.
Yakima, Washington.
Contractors at work in the field.
Spokane, Washington.
Surveys executed with the exception of one township, which requires correction.
Turtle Mountain, North Dakota.
Surveys executed, but not yet-accepted.
Hoopa Valley, California.
Surveys in progress.
Fort Peck, Montana.
Survey being executed.
The survey of three town sites within the former Uintah Indian Reservation, Utah, and of two under the Minidoka irrigation project, Idaho, have been executed by examiners of surveys and detailed clerks, and the plats have been approved.
The recent disaster in San Francisco which destroyed the entire records in the office of the surveyor-general of California has retarded the arrangements for the completion of the resurveys in the "imperial"district in California.
The sum of $20,000 was appropriated by the urgent deficiency bill to complete the resurveys in the entire tract, and the necessary orders and instructions to the surveyor-general are now in his hands.
Under the act of April 28, 1904 (33 Stat. L., 519), the resurvey of the largest block of townships yet authorized in Colorado was entered upon and is progressing rapidly under the annual apportionment to that State.
Resurveys in Wyoming are being contracted for to such an extent as the apportionment will permit.
The "continuous"appropriation for surveys within railroad limits has been found available for resurveys of such lands, and Congress having by law authorized the resurvey of 159 townships, contracts for their resurvey have been entered into by the surveyor-general.
Under the act of March 3, 1905 (33 Stat. L., 1037), the resurvey of 32 full and fractional townships in Rock and Brown counties, Nebr., was authorized, and after competitive bids a contract was entered into in accordance with the provisions of the act.
The act of June 30, 1906 (34 Stat. L., 726), having appropriated the further sum of $15,000 for the completion of the survey and marking of the unsurveyed portion of the boundary between the States of Idaho and Montana, and the original surveyor having submitted a proposal to continue and finish the survey for such a compensation per mile as would insure its completion within the sum appropriated, his proposal was accepted, and it is expected that the field work will be executed during the present surveying season.
Instructions have been issued for the public sale on the grounds on November 1, 1906, of 2,560 acres in the Fort Elliott abandoned military reservation in Wheeler County, Tex., and also for the public sale at the land office in Dodge City, Kans., on November 14, 1906, of 1,882.93 acres in the Fort Dodge abandoned military reservation.
During the year completed editions of the United States maps of.1904 and 1905 were received from the contracting lithographers.
The engraving of the copperplate base for the United States map of 1906 is now being done in the drafting division of the General Land Office.
Complete editions of 3,000 copies each of the maps of Alaska, Colorado, Idaho, Oregon, and Washington were received during the year, and the compilations of the maps of California, Montana, and Nebraska are now in hand, and a completed tracing for a map of the proposed new State of Oklahoma is in the hands of the contracting photolithographers for reproduction.
Maps to accompany the reports of the governors of the Territories were edited and revised.
During the year there were furnished for official use for surveyorsgeneral, local officers, and bureaus connected with the Department, 1,023 drawing paner and other diagrams, 542 tracings of maps, plats, and diagrams, auu ,' photolithographic copies of plats of survey.
There were sold to unofficial persons and fees collected therefor, 140 diagrams, $393.47; 582 tracings, $1,707.16; and 9,413 photolithographic copies of plats of survey, $2,588.37.
Through mutual agreement as to the base maps to be used in the calculations of areas of States, Territories, and insular possessions, between the geographer of the Geological Survey, the geographer of the Census Bureau, and the chief of the drafting division of the General Land Office, the recalculation of many areas heretofore in disagreement has been accomplished, and these areas and the small differences shown have been easily harmonized.
The result is a new table, in which the total area of the United States is not materially changed from that heretofore published.
Decisions have been rendered by the General Land Office in 1,260 appealed cases, and 4,735 unappealed cases have been examined and closed.
An average of about 75 special agents of the General Land Office were employed during the year in investigating alleged fraudulent land entries, and otherwise in protecting the public lands from timber trespass or illegal appropriation.
On July 1, 1905, there were 16,552 entries and filings awaiting reports from special agents or action upon reports already received or hearings had under such reports.
During the past fiscal year there were received 8,517 entries and filings requiring investigation.
Of the total number, 2,070 were canceled, 3,289 approved for patent, and 1,569 were relieved from suspension and otherwise disposed of, leaving 18,141 entries and filings pending June 30, 1906.
During the year 2,360 entries were held for cancellation or suspended on special agents' reports, and 469 hearings were ordered on such reports.
DEPREDATIONS UPON PUBLIC TIMBER:—There were 324 cases of depredations upon public timbered lands reported during the year involving timber to the value of $397,178.77, an increase of $213,395.73 over last year.
In 63 cases recommendation was made for civil suit to recover damages.
Propositions of settlement to the number of 172 were accepted, their amounts aggregating $49,273.94.
From sales of timber cut unlawfully from public lands there were received $7,781.45, and 63 criminal prosecutions were recommended for cutting and removing timber in violation of law.
With respect to unlawful inclosures, 193 reports of special agents were received during the year, showing an area of 2,091,275 acres of public land unlawfully inclosed.
Through the efforts of the special agents 66 unlawful inclosures, embracing 338,530 acres of public land, have been removed, and proceedings in the remaining cases are pending.
United States v. Samuel Butler.
Timber trespass.
April 12, 1906, indicted.
April 20, 1906, found guilty, sentenced to imprisonment for one hour, and fined $8.25.
Fine paid.
United States v. Charles T. McKimmey.
Perjury, section 5392, U.S. R.S. June 15, 1906, plea of guilty entered.
Sentenced to six months in jail at Fort Smith, Ark., and fined $100.
Fine not paid.
United States v. Benjamin E. Harlow.
Perjury, section 5392, U.S. R.S. June 15, 1906, plea of guilty entered.
Sentenced to six months in jail at Fort Smith, Ark., at hard labor, and fined $100.
Fine not paid and defendant committed to United States jail at Fort Smith July 15, 1906.
United States v. George W. Johnson.
Timber trespass.
June 12, 1906, plea of guilty entered.
June 13, 1906, fined $100 and costs.
June 13, 1906, fine and costs, amounting to $139.40, paid.
United States v. Steve A. Winters.
Timber trespass.
February 12, 1906, plea of guilty entered.
Sentenced to jail at Fort Smith, Ark., and fined $360.
Fine not paid.
United States v. Robert Wilson.
Timber trespass.
Plea of guilty entered.
Fined $100 and costs, and committed for nonpayment.
United States v. John Rose.
Timber trespass.
February 12, 1906, plea of guilty entered.
Sentenced to thirty days in jail at Fort Smith, Ark., and fined $135.
Fine not paid.
United States v. John Teems.
Timber trespass.
February 6, 1906, plea of guilty entered.
Sentenced to fifteen days' imprisonment in jail at Fort Smith, Ark., and fined $100.
Fine not paid.
United States v. William Kuykendall.
Timber trespass.
February 12, 1906, plea of guilty entered.
Sentenced to thirty days' imprisonment in jail at Fort Smith, Ark., and fined $150.
Fine not paid.
United States v. John Daniels.
Timber trespass.
February 7, 1906, plea of guilty entered.
Sentenced to thirty days' imprisonment in jail at Fort Smith, Ark., and fined $240.
Fine not paid.
United States v. James Webb, Ike Henderson.
Timber trespass.
June 12, 1906, plea of guilty entered.
Fined $100 and costs each.
Fines paid.
United States v. Willis Chandler.
Timber trespass.
November 24, 1905, plea of guilty entered.
November 30, 1905, sentenced to penitentiary at Fort Leavenworth, Kans., at hard labor for a year and a day.
United States v. William B. Bearden.
Timber trespass.
Found guilty and sentenced to the penitentiary at Fort Leavenworth, Kans., at hard labor for eighteen months.
Three indictments are pending in the State of California: For subornation of perjury, W. R. Graham; for perjury, John R. Moore; for unlawful fencing, S. C. Lillis.
The following indictments are pending in Colorado: For timber trespass, Scott H. Pope, Joseph M. Taylor, William J. Hill, and Alvin A. Rust.
For forging timber culture proofs: Peter Campbell.
Complaint filed March 21, 1906, against Frank W. Barnes to recover $5,440, for timber cut in trespass from public lands, is still pending.
Complaint filed January 9, 1906, against the Colorado Telephone Company to recover $102 for timber cut from public lands resulted in judgment for $75.
Judgment satisfied.
Reports received from special agents of the General·Land Office indicate 31,462 acres unlawfully inclosed.
Five cases have been reported to the district attorney during the year, two dismissed, one closed in favor of the Government, and two are pending.
Indictments are pending in the State of Idaho as follows: For conspiracy to defraud the United States out of title to timber lands, Wm.
F. Kettenbach, three indictments; George H. Kester, two indictments; William Dwyer, William B. Benton, Clarence W. Robinette, Fred Emery, and C. W. Colby; for subornation of perjury, William Dwyer, Clarence W. Robinette, two indictments, and William B. Benton; for perjury, Edward L. Knight; for timber trespass, J. L. McClintock, bench warrant issued.
All of the cases in connection with the so-called Lewiston land frauds were continued at the May, 1906, term of court.
A recent special investigation in the State of Kansas revealed the inclosure of about 200,000 acres of public lands in Stevens and Morton counties in that State.
It is alleged that 16 men and corporations in Morton County alone had 78,540 acres of public land inclosed, and that in Stevens County an organization known as the Stevens County Live Stock Association was formed for the purpose of dividing the public lands in the county on the basis of the number of cattle owned by each member.
The total area embraced in inclosures of persons under indictment in this State is 403,000 acres, of which 135,000 acres are public lands.
As a result of information received at the Department I suspended in December last all commuted homestead proofs in the State of Kansas.
As an investigation of 13 of these cases has revealed fraud in connection with 12, the adoption of this course seems to have been fully justified.
The following indictments have been obtained in the State of Louisiana since November 1, 1905: For conspiracy to defraud the United States, Joseph S. Chick and Joseph C. Chick; for perjury, Joseph S. Chick—two indictments; for subornation of perjury, John R. Brown; for timber trespass, A. J. Fautheree, George W. Erskins, Y. C. Talbert, Wyly Hatton, Eugene Wood, W. T. Herrin, and Will Herrin.
The following persons are under indictment in the State of Minnesota: Matthew Jones, R. B. Stearns, and Carl F. Winger.
United States v. Ed.
J. Straw.
Perjury.
Section 5392, U.S. R.S. Found guilty and sentenced to three months' imprisonment in the Ramsey County jail and fined $200.
United States v. Herman Hauki.
Section 2461, U. S. R. S. Criminal liability settled by payment of $100.
United States v. R. B. Stearns, Wm.
T. Horsnell.
Conspiracy— Section 5440,U.S. R. S. Stearns found guilty and sentenced to eighteen months' imprisonment in State prison at Stillwater and fined $1,000.
Horsnell found guilty and sentenced to nine months' imprisonment in Ramsey County jail and fined $500.
Case now pending in circuit court of appeals.
United States v. Soren F. Sorenson.
Section 2461, U. S. R. S. Found guilty and sentenced to forty-five days' imprisonment in Ottertail County jail and fined $375.
The following persons are under indictment in the State of Mississippi: Joe Heller, Will Douglas, Lewis Phelps, Keen Hamilton R. J. Briggs, D. A. Douglas, and Frank Dunn.
In my last annual report I called attention to the difficulties encountered in securing the conviction of persons in Nebraska guilty of the unlawful inclosure of public lands.
There has been no cessation of activity·on the part of the Government.
Civil suits have been instituted in connection with inclosures embracing a total acreage of 1,349,319 and decrees have been obtained affecting 593,000 acres.
Indictments are pending as follows: For unlawful fencing, George G. Ware, H. B. Reed, Adam Miller, Clarence Miller, Charles Miller, William O. Miller, A. R. Modisett, A. M. Modisett, Edward C. Harris, Will G. Comstock, Earl Comstock, Nebraska Land and Feeding Company, Bartlett Richards, William G. Comstock, Charles C. Jameson, The Star Ranch Company, Charles H. Tully, Anthony M. Wilson, The De France Cattle Company, Charles C. Jameson, James P. Nolan, Leslie Ballinger, M. C. Hubbell, W. Lotspich, Herman Lotspich, John R. Webster, Frank Ankeny, Cyrus C. Joy, W. N. Wilkinson, Martha Patmore, Thomas Higgins, A. M. Wilson, Albert Metzger, William Metzger, Metzger Brothers, Joseph A. Saults, Daniel Webster, John Bishop, Jonathan F. Young, Bishop & Young, George E. Shadbolt.
H. C. Shadbolt.
William Fleischman, Shadbolt Brothers & Fleischman, Edward Weed, The Rush Creek Land and Live Stock Company, Thomas E. Wells, Reuben Lisco, Samuel P. Jones.
Harvey H. Bellwood, James Bellwood, R. M. Hampton, Joseph H. Vaughn, Joseph C. Vaughan, Daniel Hill, Henry Oberwetter, John W. Hill, John M. Lowry, William A. Margrave, James T. Margrave, Earl Margrave, David M. Gourley, J. C. Pettijohn, and Charles T. Stewart; for conspiracy to defraud the Government, Frank W. Lambert, Harry Welch, G. T. H. Babcock, H. C. Dale, William Smoot, John Agnew, Bert Furman, H. G. Furman, Frank Allen, Reuben W. Mahaffy, Anthony F. Hatch, David M. Gourley, Earl Comstock, Edward C. Harris, Reason Hudgel, A. R. Modisett, A. M. Modisett, E. C. Harris, James H. Edmiston, Olin Hendee, William R. Keefer, Bartlett Richards, Will G. Comstock, Charles C. Jameson, Ammi B. Todd, Aguilla Triplett, Thomas M. Huntington, Fred Hoyt, James K. Reid, F. M. Walcott, R. M. Allen, Daniel Perdue, Robert F. Gillespie (deceased), Jacob W. Stetter, J. C. Pettijohn, J. M. Tucker, Perry A. Yeast, Harry Sutton, Lawrence E. King, Patrick J. King, Frederick S. Baird, Charles T. Stewart, Stewart Welker, and Elias Stillwell; for perjury, Bennett R. Moore, Anthony F. Hatch, Perry A. Yeast, William George, Reuben W. Mahaffy, James H. Edmiston, Robert F. Gillespie (deceased), James Headington, Jesse C. Headington, and Harry Sutton; for subornation of perjury, Frank Allen, G. T. H. Babcock, Bert Furman, Perry A. Yeast, Elias Stillwell.
Triplett, and F. M. Walcott; for forgery, James H. Edmiston; for endeavoring to corrupt grand jurors and to impede the administration of justice, Joseph Crow.
In fencing cases decrees have been entered against the following companies and individuals: H. B. Read, Robert Gillespie, Jacob W. Stetter, William E. Black, S. M. Cooper, John Conway, Henry Hoffgard, U. B. I. Land and Cattle Company, Reuben W. Mahaffy, Robert H. Schimmin, Howard L. Dawson, George W. Dawson, Albert L. Dawson, William F. Black, Frederick J. Black, Thomas B. Hord, Black Brothers & Hord, H. S. McMillan, Joseph Demil, Federal Cattle Company, Clinton J. Anderson, Bernard J. Haffacker, O'Connor Cattle Company, Daniel Adamson, Horace G. Wallingford, Cornelius J. O'Connor, Woodruff Ball, Dawson & Ball, George Heyne, Gustave Gunderson, Charles Guthrie, and Ernest Guthrie.
Convictions: For conspiracy to defrau the Government, George G. Ware, Frank W. Lambert, and Harry Welch; for unlawful fencing, John and Herman Krause.
In Nevada there is pending the case of United States v. Frederick A. Hyde, John A. Vincent, and E. W. Clark for fraudulent entry of public lands.
Indictments are pending in the Territory of New Mexico as follows: For conspiracy to defraud the United States, Benjamin H. Talmage, 6 indictments; John H. McKinstery, 3 indictments; Carl C. Young, 3 indictments; Chester L. Talmage, 4 indictments; Edwin R. Talmage, 4 indictments; Walter R. Hayner, John F. McGraw, James W. Overstreet, J. B. Atkeson, Wm.
B. Linnell, and Hannah E. Linnell; for conspiracy to commit an offense, Chester L. Talmage, 2 indictments; Edwin R. Talmage, 2 indictments; Benjamin H. Talmage, 2 indictments; Carl C. Young and John H. McKinstery; for perjury, Benjamin H. Talmage, 4 indictments, and J. B. Atkeson; for subornation of perjury, Benjamin H. Talmage, 2 indictments; E. J. Carlin and J. B. Atkeson; for timber trespass, John Frazier and E. D. Hart; for unlawfully obstructing free passage over public lands, Benjamin H. Talmage.
The following persons are held under bail, fixed at $1,000: George Roberts, Paul Ayers, Francis Lockleer, Sud Lockleer, William Freels, Benjamin Lockleer, Andy Lockleer, Frank Taylor, C. Elliott, and Henry Roberts.
Reports of special agents of the General Land Office show action in 151 cases of unlawful fencing, affecting 100,000 acres.
Indictments are pending in North Dakota as follows: For perjury, George W. Jones, Claude M. Wetherbee, John Van Slyke, Joseph Stalder, Nick Mahervold, Walter H. Robinson, William Ryan, Homer Welsher, J. J. Marony, Loring W. Jordan, Elmer Carr, And.
Kerzmann, Louis Welsher, and Ray Wilson; for subornation of perjury, Robert Everett, E. E. Hazen, Edgar Wetherbee, Willis Gettle, and Tom Welch; for violation of the act of January 30, 1897, Fed.
Stat.
3, p. 384, John Miller; for violation of the act of January 30, 1897, Chapter 109, 29 Stat.
L., 506, Wanikiya; convictions, Eugene Brown and Gabriel Porter, plead guilty and sentenced to three days' imprisonment in Ramsey County jail and $5 fine each; William McMasters, plead guilty and fined $100.
Eight cases of unlawful fencing are pending in this State, involving 79,050 acres.
Indictments are pending against J. E. Duff, Elwood Wilson, and J. W. Lovitt for timber trespass in Oklahoma.
The gigantic land frauds in the State of Oregon, mentioned in my last several annual reports, are being pursued with·relentless vigor.
New cases, as well as ramifications of the old ones, are carefully and thoroughly investigated and indictments are being pressed to convictions as rapidly as possible.
The following persons are under indictment: For conspiracy to defraud the United States, Franklin Pierce Mays, Horace G. McKinley, S. A. D. Puter, Marie L. Ware, Emma L. Watson, D. W. Tarpley, Robert Simpson, John Doe, Robert Doe, Binger Hermann, John N. Williamson, Maud Witt, Frank H. Walgamot, Henry C. Barr, Richard Roe, Henry Roe, Annie Roe, Salmon B. Ormsby, W. H. Davis, Clark E. Loomis, Henry A. Young, George Sorenson, Joseph Black, John C. Black, August Anderson, Benjamin Doughty, James Doughty, Leander Choate, Sumner A. Parker, James H. Driscoll, Thomas Daly, James Bray, Richard D. Jones, William H. Smith, Jacob C. Cross, David M. Goodwin, Will D. Gould, Frank A. Stewart, William T. Kerr, John R. Miller, Fred W. Dennis, Richard Hines, M. M. Riley, Lee R. Myers, George L. Stearns, Jeremiah Huntley, Ames S. Johnson, Warren Gillelen, R. W. Kenny, A. H. Hedderly, Robert Roe, Thomas Roe, F. W. Gilchrist, Ralph E. Gilchrist, Patrick Culligan, James D. McPherson, Heman W. Stone, Edmund Dorgan, Francis J. Devine, John Joseph Collins, Chas.
M. Elkins, John Combs, Benjamin F. Allen, Malcolm McAlpin, Almond C. Palmer, H. Judd Palmer, Donald F. Steffa, M. E. Brink, J. W. Hopkins, W. W. Brown, E. M. White, Thomas H.
Watkins, Andrew Roe, William Roe, Jane Roe, C. A. M. Schlierholz, J. W. Hopkins, W. W. Brown, Ed.
N. White, Thomas H. Watkins, George Waggoner, David H. Kinnaird, Rufus G. Moore, Benjamin F. Minton, Gustave Klaetsch, Livy Stipp, Frank W. Dungan, John H. Hall, Henry Ford, Harry L. Rees, A. P. Caylor, John Cordano, J. H. Hitchings, John Northrup, Charles Lord, Frank E. Alley, A. R. Downs, Edward R. Dorens, Stephen R. Turnell; Robert A. Booth, James H. Booth, T. E. Singleton, Claude Thayer, Clark E. Hadley, Maurice Leach, Walter J. Smith, Thomas Coates, John Tuttle, Charles E. Hays, G. O. Nolan, Heman K. Finch, Thaddeus S. Potter, Bert Blauvelt, Charles A. Graves, Erwin N. Wakefield, Ora L. Parker, and Robert B. Foster; for offering bribe, George Sorenson; for accepting bribe, James Henry Booth; for intimidating witnesses, C. Sam Smith and Dr. Van Gesner; for perjury, Riley Burden, George Sorenson, James Benson, William A. Bohart, and John Garrison; for subornation of perjury, George C. Brownell; for conspiracy to defraud the United States in connection with the unlawful fencing of public lands, Winlock W. Steiwer, Hamilton H. Hendricks, Clarence B. Zachary, A. C. Zachary, Charles A. Watson, Clyde E. Glass, Binger Hermann, John H. Hall, Edwin Mays, Clark E. Loomis, and E. D. Stratford.
United States v. Emma L. Watson, S. A. D. Puter, Marie L. Ware, Horace G. McKinley, Maud Witt, Frank H. Walgamott, Henry C. Barr, Dan W. Tarpley, Richard Roe, Henry Roe, Annie Roe.
Conspiracy to defraud the United States.
Section 5440, U. S. R. S., as amended by act of May 17, 1879.
Case 4735.
December 3, 1904, Walgamott entered plea of guilty.
December 6, 1904, verdict of guilty as to Watson, Puter, McKinley, and Tarpley.
July 6, 1906, Puter sentenced to two years in county jail of Multnomah County, Oreg.
July 28, 1906, order declaring bonds of McKinley and Watson forfeited and bench warrants issued.
Puter now serving sentence.
Watson also imprisoned for lack of bond, and awaiting sentence.
United States v. Henry Meldrum.
Forgery in connection with applications for United States surveys-Section 5418, United States Revised Statutes.
Case 4750.
November 17, 1904, verdict of guilty as charged on 21 counts in indictment.
July 5, 1906, defendant sentenced to sixty days imprisonment on each of 18 counts to run consecutively, at hard labor, and to pay a fine of $5,250.
Defendant out on bail pending proceedings on appeal.
United States v. Henry W. Miller, Frank E.Kincart, Martin B. Hoge, Charles Nickell.
U. S. R. S. Case 2899.
July 18, 1906, verdict of guilty as to Martin B. Hoge and Charles Nickell, Kincart and Miller having previously entered pleas of guilty.
July 28, 1906, Miller and Kincart each sentenced to imprisonment at hard labor for one year at McNeils Island, Washington.
July 28, 1906, Hoge sentenced to four months' imprisonment in county jail at Portland, Oreg.
August 6, 1906, Nickell sentenced to imprisonment at hard labor for thirteen months at McNeils Island, Washington.
All defendants now serving sentences, except Charles Nickell, who is out on bail pending proceedings on appeal.
United States v. John H. Mitchell.
Violation of section 1782, U.S. R.S. Case 2902.
July 3, 1905, verdict of guilty.
Proceedings on appeal pending at date of death of defendant on December 8, 1905.
United States v. Hamilton H. Hendricks.
Subornation of perjury, section 5393, U.S.R.S. Case 2908.
August 4, 1906, verdict of guilty.
Awaiting sentence.
United States v. Albert H. Tanner.
Perjury, section 5392, United States Revised Statutes.
Case 2910.
February 11, 1905, defendant entered plea of guilty.
June 26, 1906, pardoned by President.
United States v. John N. Williamson, Dr. Van Gesner, Marion R. Biggs.
Conspiracy to suborn perjury, section 5440, U. S. R. S. Case 2914.
First trial commenced July 8, 1905.
July 20, 1905, jury discharged on account of disagreement.
Second trial commenced July 20, 1905.
August 4, 1905, jury discharged on account of disagreement.
Third trial commenced August 28, 1905.
September 27, 1905, verdict of guilty.
Williamson and Biggs sentenced to imprisonment in county jail at Portland, Oreg.
Van Gesner sentenced to imprisonment in county jail at Portland for five months and to pay a fine of $1 000.
Defendants out on bail pending proceedings on appeal.
United States v. John H. Mitchell, Binger Hermann, John N. Williamson, Franklin Pierce Mays, W. N. Jones, George Sorenson.
Conspiracy, section 5440, U. S. R. S. Blue Mountains Forest Reserve.
Case 2918.
September 13, 1906, verdict of guilty as to Mays, Jones, and Sorenson.
United States v. Charles A. Watson.
Perjury, section 5392, U. S. R. S. Case 2938.
August 8, 1906, verdict of guilty.
August 18, 1906, sentence suspended.
United States v. Coe D. Barnard.
Perjury, section 5392, U. S. R. S. Case 2941.
August 11, 1906, verdict of guilty.
August 18, 1906, defendant sentenced to two years' imprisonment at hard labor at McNeils Island, Washington, and to pay a fine of $2,000.
Defendant out on bail of $8,000 pending proceedings on appeal.
United States v. Clarence B. Zachary.
Perjury, section 5392, U. S. R. S. Case 2945.
August 17, 1906, verdict of guilty.
Ready for sentence.
United States v. Willard N. Jones, Thaddeus S. Potter, Ira Wade, John Doe, Richard Roe.
Conspiracy, section 5440, U. S. R. S. Siletz case.
Case 2987.
October 14, 1905, verdict of guilty as to Jones and Potter and not guilty as to defendant Wade.
August 4, 1906, Jones sentenced to one year's imprisonment at hard labor at McNeils Island, Washington, and to pay a fine of $3,000.
Defendant Potter sentenced to serve six months in county jail at Portland, Oreg.
Jones and Potter out on bail pending proceedings on appeal.
United States v. William A. Townsend, John W. Townsend.
Unlawful fencing.
May 19, 1906, pleas of guilty entered.
Fined $250 each and costs and sentenced to one day in jail each.
May 25, 1906, fines and costs, amounting to $698.96, paid.
United States v. Ambrose Beard.
Unlawful fencing.
May 16, 1906, plea of guilty entered.
Fined $250 and costs and sentenced to one day in jail.
Costs, $80.25.
Fine and costs paid.
United States v. Emil M. Scharff.
Unlawful fencing.
May 4, 1906, plea of guilty entered.
Fine of $250 and a sentence of one day's imprisonment in county jail.
Fine paid.
United States v. Frank Hilbert.
Unlawful fencing.
May 4, 1906, plea of guilty entered.
Fined $250 and sentenced to one day's imprisonment in county jail.
Fine paid.
United States v. Julius L. Beckhusen.
Unlawful fencing.
May 5, 1906, plea of guilty entered.
Fined $250 and sentenced to one day's imprisonment in county jail.
Fine paid.
United States v. Charles Huntley.
Unlawful fencing.
May 18, 1906, plea of guilty entered.
Fined $100 and costs and sentenced to one day's imprisonment in county jail.
May 31, 1906, fine and costs, amounting to $143.84, paid.
United States v. John W. Dee, Alden R. Eastwood.
Unlawful cutting of timber from public lands.
May 15, 1906, pleas of guilty entered.
Fined $200 and costs each.
May 16, 1906, fine and costs, amounting to $648.80, paid.
The annual reports of the special agents of the General Land Office show action in 68 cases of unlawful fencing in the State of Oregon, affecting 31,169 acres.
Indictments are pending in the State of South Dakota as follows: For conspiracy to defraud the Government, John I. Newell, Thomas H. Ayres, John F. McGuire, and Howard Binford; for perjury, Carl Pitan, eight indictments, and Lizzie Burke; for subornation of perjury, John Q. Anderson, four indictments, and Elmer Hawkes; for forgery, A. H. Cobb and Royal B. Stearns.
Carl Pitan for conspiracy to defraud the Government have resulted in a sentence of twelve months in the county jail and a fine of $1,000, to stand committed till paid.
The special agent in charge of the State of South Dakota reports action in 12 cases of unlawful fencing, affecting 45,762 acres.
In the State of Washington indictments are pending against John R. Taylor, Ezra E. McCue, Melvin F. Hadley, Charles R. Morehouse, Lora E. H. Morehouse, Clarence B. Paul, Louise Paul, J. E. Paul, Jane Doe Paul, the Washington Lumber Company, and the Alaska Shingle Company.
Annual reports of special agents of the General Land Office show action in 25 cases of unlawful fencing, involving 4,560 acres.
Indictments are pending against the following persons for public timber trespass in the State of Wisconsin: William Burr, Roda Church, W. A. Dexter, Alvin Doxtator, Daniel Doxtader, Josephus Davids, Grady Gardiner, Dorsy Gardiner, Jenifer Gardiner, Zera Gardiner, Joseph Howe, Anna' Harper, Job Hammer, Ed Hoffman, Lewis Leroy, Ole Morgan, Jacob Pye, Milford Quinney, and Trueman Robinson.
Joseph Landwher, found guilty of public timber trespass and fined $25, was the only conviction secured during the fiscal year.
Proceedings for the cancellation of patents for lands in the State of Wyoming have resulted in the indictment of the following persons: W. N. Bush, Crawford W. Clark, Nathanial W. Frisbee, Frederick A. Hyde, four indictments, and John A. Benson, four indictments.
The.proceedings against Henry J. Weare for unlawful fencing resulted in a sentence of one day in jail and a fine of $300.
The sentence was served and the fine paid.
Decrees have been entered for costs and injunctions against reconstruction of fences in the following cases: Charles N. Niland, George W. Pollock, Western Ranches (Limited), James T. Craig, David W. Clawson, August La Fond, and John B. Carl, and an indictment is pending against James King, sr., whose showing that the fence complained of has been removed is awaiting confirmation.
There are now 106 forest reserves, created by Presidential proclamations under section 24 of the act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat. L., 1095), embracing 106,999,423 acres.
This is an increase over last year of 21,380,951 acres.
Three million sixty-seven thousand eight hundred and ninety acres were released from temporary withdrawal during the year and, after ninety days' published notice, restored to entry.
During the fiscai year 22 additional forest reserves have been established, the areas of 3 have been reduced, 17 have been enlarged, and 2 have been consolidated, as follows: The Baker City Forest Reserve has been consolidated with the.
Blue Mountains Forest Reserve, and the Logan Forest Reserve with the Bear River Forest Reserve.
The validity of contracts entered into by the Secretary of the Interior prior to the passage of this act shall not be impaired, * * * and if, for any reason not the fault of the party making the same, any pending selection is held invalid, another selection for like quantity of land may be made in lieu thereof.
All selections made under the act of June 4, 1897 (30 Stat. L., 36), and amendatory acts, received in the General Land'Office prior to March 1, 1906, have been considered where not suspended for cause.
Under contracts entered into by the Secretary of the Interior prior to the passage of the act of March 3, 1905 (33 Stat. L., 1264), there were available as selection bases on July 1, 1906, 155,439.26 acres in the San Francisco Mountains Forest Reserve, Arizona, and 5,430.90 acres in the Santa Barbara Forest Reserve (Rancho Los Prietos y Najalayegua), California.
Pursuant to Senate resolution of March 19, 1906, instructions have been issued to the local land officers directing the steps that should be taken by interested parties to enable the Department to report the names of those persons who have relinquished to the United States lands situated within forest reserves and duly recorded the deeds of relinquishment but failed to make selections in lieu thereof prior to the passage of the act of March 3, 1905 (33 Stat. L., 1264).
The matter will be fully reported at the proper time in compliance with the resolution.
SELECTIONS UNDER THE ACT OF APRIL 21, 1904.—Instructions have been issued under the act of April 21, 1904 (33 Stat. L., 189), providing for the selection of private lands within Indian reservations extended by Executive order, and in conformity therewith application has been made by the Santa Fe Pacific Railroad Company to select 214,987.51 acres of land in the Clayton, N. Mex., land district, in lieu of land within the Zuñi and Navaho Indian reservations in said Territory, as extended by Executive order.
Congress.
I concur therein and in the desire that such matters as have not been finally considered by Congress should receive attention during the approaching session.
Attention is called to the act of June 11, 1906 (34 Stat., 233), which authorizes the entry of lands in forest reserves.
It is recommended that this act be amended by adding thereto a section authorizing the subdivision of quarter quarter sections or lotted tracts into tracts containing 21 acres, or any multiple thereof.
Experience in the administration of said act shows that many of the lands listed are listed by the Secretary of Agriculture in tracts of 21 acres or multiples thereof which form regular rectangular subdivisions of quarter quarter sections.
Under existing law the Commissioner of the General Land Ofice is without authority to issue patent for any tract less than a quarter quarter section or smaller legal lotted subdivision, and unless the legislation suggested is enacted it will be necessary for entrymen who have been permitted to make entry for tracts of less than 40 acres to incur the expense of having the land entered by them regularly surveyed and lotted.
In my annual report for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1905, I recommended, for reasons then given, that the office of receiver of public moneys be abolished, and approximately a quarter of a million dollars thereby annually saved to the Government.
I renew the recommendation then made.
The compensation paid receivers during the past fiscal year was $281,500.
Considerable progress has been made by the Indians of the United States during the past fiscal year toward civilization, and there has been a material increase in the number engaged in earning self-support.
In the following summary of the operations of the office of Indian affairs the aim has been merely to include therein a brief review of the most prominent features of the work of the Indian Service, showing, however, that the work and the administration of the service have been in a marked decree successful.
In the very able report of Hon.
Francis E. Leupp, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, to which I take great pleasure in inviting special attention, there is presented in a most comprehensive and interesting manner a complete history of the work of his office during the year; of the legislation affecting the Indians, their lands and future interests, as well as of the plans proposed by him for the improvement of the general conditions of the Indian population and the better administration of their affairs in the field.
During the first session of the Fifty-ninth Congress important legislation for the benefit of the Indian population and that part of the white population whose interests are more or less bound up with thos3 of the Indians was past, such as authorizing the President to extend the trust period of Indian allotments at his discretion; the extension of the ration privilege under certain conditions to mission schools; the protection of allotments released from trust tenure, against liens for debts previously contracted; the allowance of interest on minors' money retained in the United States Treasury; also instances of special legislation important in the localities concerned, such as the opening of the Osage and Cœur d’Alene Reservations; of the closed half of the Colville Reservation; part of the Lower Brulé Reservation and the pasture reserves of the Kiowa, Comanche, and Apache tribes; for the settlement of a number of long-standing controversies, like the one between the Stockbridge and Munsee Indians; the Klamath Indians and the Government; the same Indians and the California and Oregon Land Company and between the Sisseton and Wahpeton Indians and the Government; the sale of timber of the Jicarilla Reservation; the establishment of an Indian town site on the Bad River Reservation, etc.
ApPRoPRIATIoNs.
The Indian appropriation act for the fiscal year 1907 appropriates the sum of $9,325,024.98.
As shown by the report for 1905, the aggregate of the appropriation for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1906, was $7,922,014.34.
1906 over 1907: Miscellaneous supports, gratuities ...... $9,000.00 Incidental expenses 16,920.00 Kansas consolidated fund.
Total......... .
The principal increases, fulfilling treaty stipulations and miscellaneous, are due, the first to carrying out the Klamath Indian agreement and the latter to increased appropriations for irrigations and survey in Utah, Washington, and Wyoming.
ExPENDITUREs.
Total ......... .......
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 1906, 261 Indian schools were in operation, as against 257 in 1905.
Of these, 25 were nonreservation boarding schools, with an enrollment of 9,279 pupils and an average attendance of 8,385; 90 were reservation boarding schools, with an enrollment of 11,007 pupils and an average attendance of 9,648; and 146 were day schools, with an enrollment of 4,476 pupils and an average attendance of 3,342; or a total enrollment in 261 Government schools of 24,762 pupils and an average attendance of 21,375, against a total enrollment in 1905 of 25,537 pupils and an average attendance of 21,537 or a decreased average attendance of 162.
There was also an average attendance of 4,117 pupils in mission boarding schools and in contract schools, including the Normal and Agricultural Institute at Hampton, Va., and in public schools, against an average attendance of 3,918 in 1905, an increase of 199 over 1905.
The total enrollment in all schools, Government, mission, and contract schools, during the fiscal year 1906, was 29,679, and the average attendance 25,492.
There are now under construction and all will probably be opened during the fiscal year 1907 nineteen new day school buildings, distributed as follows: 1 each at Fort Apache and San Xavier, Ariz.
3 on White Earth, Minn.
1 on Tongue River; 2 on Flathead and 3 on Fort Peck, Mont.
2 on Turtle Mountain, N. Dak.
1 on Warm Springs, Oreg.
4 on Colville, Wash., and 1 on Stockbridge, Green Bay, Wis.
For the fiscal year 1906 Congress appropriated for purchase, lease, and repair of school buildings, sewerage, water supply, and lighting plants, purchase of school sites and improvement of buildings and grounds, $400,000, against $350,000 in 1905.
For the 25 nonreservation schools there was also appropriated for the erection of new buildings and repair of old, water and sewer systems, lighting plants, and for minor improvements the sum of $306,400, as against $605,800 appropriated for 1905.
Formerly bids were opened in New York, Chicago, St. Louis, and San Francisco; now all bids are opened in Washington, but samples submitted are sent to the respective warehouses and awards made there.
This spring bids for clothing, hats, caps, etc., were opened first, to give prospective contractors more time to manufacture the articles; and the purchase of corn meal, hominy, flour, oats, dried fruit, etc., was deferred until fall, so that prospective bidders may know crop conditions with some certainty, and in the expectation that not only lower prices, but also current season's products, will be secured.
The Commissioner of Indian Affairs calls attention to the original "Lacey bill" and regrets that the bill as pending in the Senate had to undergo a number of modifications in terms in order to be made.
He states that he is still as firmly of the opinion as ever that the original proposition would work out better, yet he would welcome the modified bill rather than lose all legislation on the subject.
He also calls attention to certain funds, on which Congress appropriates interest every year, whereas the principal on which interest is paid has never been appropriated, and he thinks Congress should either appropriate the principal or commute the amount to be paid the Indians.
Under the act of February 16, 1889 (25 Stat. L., 673), logging at the Flathead Reservation of dead and down timber, amounting to 9,000,000 feet, was authorized and regulations approved August 4, 1906.
At La Pointe the cutting and sale of timber from allotted lands on reservations under the La Pointe Agency, Wis., except Grand Portage, was carried on under treaty of September 3, 1854 (10 Stat. L., 1109), and $411,720.42 were realized.
Under the act of February 12, 1901 (31 Stat. L., 785), and the regulations of October 2, 1901, the allottees on the Grand Portage Reservation are permitted to cut and sell timber on their reservation, except standing pine, and the agent's report shows that they cut and sold timber last year amounting to $10,512.42.
Under regulations approved by the Department on June 2, 1904, to govern the sale of timber on allotted lands of the Leech Lake Reservation in Minnesota, sold under act of April 21, 1904 (33 Stat. L., 189), there has been received during the year $74,100.54.
Operations for cutting the blown-down timber on the Red Lake Diminished Reservation in Minnesota were renewed during the season of 1905-6, under the regulations prescribed by the President September 3, 1902; and the special agent in charge reported, July 21, 1906, that 14,390,400 feet timber were cut and sold, and the net proceeds therefor realized were $92,666.18.
On the Menominee Reservation the act of June 28, 1906 (34 Stat. L., 547),authorizes the Secretary of the Interior to permit the business committee of the Menominee tribe in Wisconsin to dispose of their dead and down timber in what is known as the "blown-down district," amounting to between 25,000,000 and 30,000,000 feet.
This timber is in addition to the amount of timber authorized to be cut annually by the act of June 12,1890 (26 Stat. L., 146).
Under the rules to be prescribed the timber is to be cut into logs, and contracts are to be made with owners of portable sawmills to come upon the reservation and saw the logs into lumber at not to exceed $3.50 per M. feet board measure.
The regulations to be prescribed and all action under this law is under consideration.
No logging operations were conducted on the White Earth Reservation in Minnesota during the last logging season except to clean up the logs left in the woods the previous year.
Owing to an early break in the logging season of 1904–5, 2,247,540 feet of timber cut from tribal lands were left in the woods in skids.
In August, 1905, the sale of these was authorized, and the sum of $22,301.66 was received for them.
During the past fiscal year patents were issued and delivered to 4,027 Indians to whom allotments had been made, and 3,067 allotments were approved by the Department, for which patents have not yet been issued.
The progress in allotment work has been as great as the facilities at command would permit.
The Cheyenne River allotments were closed as far as field work was concerned October 15, 1905, because all the Indians who would take land had been scheduled and their selections surveyed.
About 260 Indians refused to take their allotments, but they having later indicated their willingness to accept them, the allotting agent was instructed on March 9, 1906, to allot them.
It afterwards appeared, however, that not all the recalcitrant party had been satisfied, and on May 18, 1906, the field work was closed, leaving 70 Indians still unallotted.
The Coeur d'Alene Reservation in Idaho, is nearly ready for allotment, as the plats of survey have all been accepted by the General Land Office except one, which will doubtless be ready at an early date.
Steps have been taken to cause trust patents to be issued to such Indians as have been allotted under the agreement concluded July 7, 1883, with Chief Moses and other Indians of the Columbia and Colville reservations, commonly known as the "Moses agreement."
All the Crow Indians have selected their lands, and the field work on their reservation is finished, except the preparation of the family record showing the relationship of each allottee.
This family record has become absolutely necessary in view of the act of May 8, 1906, conferring certain probate powers upon the Secretary of the Interior.
The Flathead Reservation will be opened for settlement after allotments are made to the Indians entitled, and it is believed that the work will be completed at an early date, as the members of the tribes entitled on that reservation are generally intelligent and progressive, having fixed abodes and many improvements.
The Jicarilla Reservation in New Mexico is an example of premature allotment, and, as a result, the problem presented is a serious one.
Because of their various migrations and the many changes in agents and employees, the census rolls of the tribe prior to allotment were practically valueless, as names had been given to the Indians arbitrarily, and new ones seem to have been used at each enrollment.
When patents were issued the allottees failed to recognize the individual names under which they had been allotted or else were too indifferent to disclose them.
In fact, perhaps not more than ten or twelve of the allottees can be absolutely identified with their allotments.
The only way in which the matter can be righted is to take relinquishment from each member of the tribe, cancel the outstanding patents, and reallot the lands.
It is hoped that Congress will soon authorize action along the proposed lines.
Allotment work in the field is progressing satisfactorily on the Otoe and Missouria, Pine Ridge, Ponca, and Sac and Fox reservations.
The Commissioner says that the Uintah Reservation furnishes an unhappy example of the rushing and haphazard method of making allotments, as they had to be made very hastily, because the act directing the opening of the reservation did not allow a reasonable time in which to do the work.
It was impossible to survey the lands before the opening, much less before the allotments were made, and even now approved plats for all townships containing allotments are not procurable, though more than a year has elapsed since the allotting commission finished its work.
The patents for the allotments have all been issued, but a large part of them do not describe the lands correctly.
The work of correcting the patents will be pushed as rapidly as possible, and a number have been canceled and reissued, but, as far as known, nearly 300 more will have to be put through the same process.
He recites the incident of a large part of the White River band, of both sexes and all ages, leaving the reservation for some point in South Dakota, apparently uncertain whether to settle down in the Black Hills or go on to Pine Ridge or Rosebud, and the measures taken to have them return to their own reservation.
The Commissioner considers at some length the general policy of allotment as controlled by law.
The general allotment act, as amended and now in force, prescribes that the area of each allotment shall be 80 acres of agricultural or 160 acres of grazing land.
For allottees in Kansas, Nebraska, or parts of Oklahoma such a provision might be considered fair, but it was made at a time when local conditions were only vaguely understood, and, for a sweeping rule, it fails, through giving an Indian either more land than it is wise to burden him with or less than he can possibly make a living on.
Nearly all the reservations yet to be allotted contain little or no agricultural land that can be cultivated without irrigation, and 80 acres of irrigable land to each Indian is far more than he can utilize, especially as, owing to lack of funds, the cost of irrigation is almost prohibitive.
On the other hand, the limit of 160 acres of grazing land is equally without the mark.
On such a reservation as the Jicarilla, for instance, no white man, much less an Indian, could support himself on only 160 acres.
This reservation is on the great Continental Divide, rocky, mountainous, and partly timbered, and at best it is only a tolerable sheep range.
To allot these lands to the Jicarilla Indians in 80 or 160 acre tracts would be of little benefit to the majority of the tribe.
In order to make an intelligent and effective allotment, therefore, the law authorizing it ought to be very flexible, permitting the authorities who have it in charge to take into account the altitude, character of the soil, climate, productive possibilities, and proximity to market, as weli as the habits of the tribe.
Similar conditions prevail elsewhere, notably in the Blackfeet country, where possibly 40 acres to a head of cattle is not too large an allowance for grazing purposes.
Apparently the only relief possible is an act vesting greater discretion in the Department, for no general law can be drawn which will meet the thousand varying conditions liable to arise.
The administrative power could then operate without the peril, now ever present, that its disposal of one case may control the disposal of many others, notwithstanding differences of conditions and the different courses which therefore ought to be followed.
I am convinced that a wise provision in any general allotment act would be to allow not less than 5 nor more than 40 acres of irrigable land, and not more than 640 acres of grazing land, to each Indian, in the discretion of the Secretary of the Interior.
This would better meet existing conditions and enable the Department to care properly for the interests of all concerned.
Another result which could hardly help flowing from it would be the more rapid opening of reservations and the consequent dissolution of the generally condemned reservation system; for the executive branch of the Government could act then in one case after another without the need of consuming the time of the Congress upon special legislation.
The development of what has been known as the Frontier West would thus proceed along the line of least resistance to the ultimate advantage of our whole country.
I fully concur in the views of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs as above outlined, and recommend them to the favorable consideration of the Congress.
INcomE.
As an illustration of the theory held by many that the best place to train an Indian to habits of industry and productiveness is at his own home and on his own land the Commissioner of Indian Affairs calls attention to the annual fair of the Crow Indians in Montana.
This enterprise, conceived and supervised by Mr. S. G. Reynolds, United States Indian agent for the Crows during the year 1904, was at first looked upon by the Indians merely as an excellent opportunity to indulge in unlimited dancing, horse racing, and athletic sports, and no interest whatever was manifested by them in the agricultural features.
The first fair was held in the latter part of October, 1904, and not a specimen of farm products, poultry, or larger live stock was exhibited, the whole occasion being given over to dancing and horse racing.
At the close of this fair a general call was issued for a meeting to organize for the next year's fair.
An organization was effected, the necessary officers were elected for the year of 1905, and a programme for the year was arranged.
It was agreed to stop dancing and racing during the farming months, in compensation for which there was to be, at the end of the season, a week of sports and friendly competition.
By the active efforts of Agent Reynolds, assisted by the Government farmers in the several districts, a great deal of interest was aroused among the Indians and a friendly competition started, which resulted in an excellent industrial fair, held at the agency September 25 to 30, 1905.
This event, described in detail by the Commissioner, appears to have proven a complete success and to have aroused the interest and pride of the Irdians to such an extent that they were unanimous in declaring that while this fair had been a great event the next one must be made still better.
The Crows, though their character and conduct in some respects leave much to be desired, are not drawing rations, and have not been for nearly two years.
A good part of them really believe that a man ought to work for what he enjoys of the pleasant things of life.
The fair proved that many of these Crows are anxious, by their own example, to show their neighbors that it is not impossible for an Indian to make a living for himself and family from the farm the Government has provided for him.
Under the provisions of the act of March 3, 1893 (27 Stat. L., 633), a commission was appointed to select, appraise, and sell such portions of Puyallup allotted lands as were not required for homes for Indian allottees; also that part of the agency tract, exclusive of the burying ground, not needed for school purposes; and said act provided that the Indian allottees should not have the power of alienation of the allotted lands not selected for sale by said commission for a period of ten years from the date of the passage of the act.
The proceeds arising from the sale of the allotted lands were to be placed in the Treas ury to the credit of the respective allottees, and the net proceeds of sale of the agency tract, after paying the expenses of the commission and reimbursing the United States for the amount advanced to said commission, were to be placed in the Treasury to the credit of all the Puyallup Indians, both these sums to draw interest at the rate of 4 per cent per annum, to be expended under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior for their benefit.
The Commissioner of Indian Affairs reports that all the lots or tracts in the "agency tract," selected by said commission, and for which the Indians have given consent of sale (known as the Indian addition to the city of Tacoma), have been sold and deeds executed for a total consideration of $262,653.61.
Cash and deferred payments, principal and interest, collected up to June 30, 1906, amount to $222,509.56.
The commission reserved 62.12 acres in said Indian addition for school, farm, and garden purposes, and 19.43 acres for church and cemetery purposes.
At the request of the Indian Office authority was granted on April 2, 1906, for the appraisal and sale of certain portions of the reserved tract, provided the consent of the Indians could be obtained for the same, it having been shown that 21.62 acres of said reserved tract were no longer needed for school purposes.
The required consent of the Indians has not yet been obtained.
The term fixed by said act of March 3, 1893, restricting the sale of Puyallup allotted lands expired on March 3, 1903, since which time these Indians have had the same right to sell their lands as any other citizens of the State of Washington.
Prior to the removal of the restrictions, however, more than 7,027.26 acres had been sold by the commission for a total consideration of $420,303.83.
Cash and deferred payments on these sales, principal and interest, collected up to June 30, 1906, amount to $430,675.24.
The Commissioner reports that the last of the deferred payments on allotted lands will probably not be made until about March 3, 1908, and on the Indian Addition lots February 11, 1911.
The work of the Puyallup Commission can be closed at about the latter date, unless the Indians consent to sell the additional tracts mentioned above, which will somewhat delay the completion of the work.
Upon the request of this Department, troops were detailed by the War Department, and six of the ring leaders of the disaffected Indians were arrested.
Later, in December, 1905, the superintendent, upon learning that an Indian named Do yal ke had been responsible for the action of the other Indians in capturing him, had Do yal ke arrested, and recommended that he be sent with the other prisoners to Alcatraz Island, California, and severely punished.
The seven renegade Navajos were, accordingly, sent under military guard to the military prison at Alcatraz.
During the spring of 1906 the attention of the Department was called to the fact that the damp climate of San Francisco Harbor was impairing the health of these Indian prisoners, and arrangements were accordingly made to have them transferred to Fort Huachuca, Ariz., which, it is understood, has been done.
The Commissioner of Indian Affairs calls special attention to the recent disturbances at the village of Oraibi, Ariz., resulting from a factional warfare that has been in progress for a number of years between two groups of the Moki (Hopi) Indians, familiarly known as the Friendlies and the Hostiles.
A plan has been formulated by him which he hopes to successfully carry out, with a view to making a final amicable adjustment of the differences between the two factions.
This Department has invoked the aid of the War Department to assist in carrying out the Commissioner's programme, which involves a demonstration with troops in order to convince the ringleaders of the hostile faction that nothing can be gained by further hostility.
During the past year nearly 300 acres of land, on various reservations, were set apart for the use of missionary societies for religious and educational purposes, as shown by a table contained in the Commissioner's report.
By an agreement concluded on December 28, 1905, between these Indians and United States Indian Inspector McLaughlin, the Indians accepted the provisions of the act of Congress of February 28, 1889 (25'Stat. L., 687), for the surrender of their reservation at Lemhi, and their removal to and settlement upon the Fort Hall Reservation in Idaho, where they were to take lands in severalty.
Under the agreement mentioned the improvements of the Indians on the lands to be abandoned were to be scheduled, appraised, and sold to the highest bidder, and the proceeds of such sales paid to the Indians owning such improvements.
On July 19, 1906, the superintendent in charge of the Lemhi School was designated by the Department to prepare the schedule and appraisement of said improvements, and he has been given special instructions by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs to that end.
The actual removal of the Indians to the Fort Hall Reservation has been postponed by the Office until next spring, because it was found to be impossible to make proper provision for their comfort in their new home before the winter set in, and no provisions had been or could be made owing to the lateness of the season for taking care of their stock; nor was it found practicable to provide school facilities at Fort Hall for the children of the immigrant Indians during the coming winter.
Plans are being perfected, however, so that the transfer of the Indians can be made early next spring.
Allotted lands.
During the past year 6,203 leases for farming, grazing, and business purposes were approved.
Tribal lands.
Six hundred and twenty-six leases for the occupancy of tribal lands for farming and grazing purposes were approved, embracing something over 656,930 acres, for an annual rental of $160,575.23.
One hundred and seventy-two permits for the grazing of stock on tribal lands, the annual tax on which amounts to $95,909.64, were also approved.
The act of June 28, 1906 (34 Stat., 539), provides for an equal division of the lands and moneys of the Osage tribe in Oklahoma among the members of the tribe.
The basis of such division is to be the roll of the tribe as it existed on January 1, 1906, after proper correction.
A commission has been appointed to supervise the selections of lands by the Indians, to divide the surplus lands, and to settle any differences that may arise.
The commission consists of two persons selected by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs—School Supervisor Charles E. McChesney and Charles O. Shepard—and one member of the Osage tribe, selected by the council—Black Dog.
The oil, gas, coal, and other minerals are reserved to the tribe for a period of twenty-five years from April 8, 1906; leases for the mining and production of minerals may be made by the Indians through their tribal council, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior under regulations to be prescribed by him.
States, but valid mineral leases in force at the date of the passage of the act remain unaffected.
No mining or prospecting for minerals is to be made without the written consent of the Secretary of the Interior.
All the funds of the tribe of every character, and all funds found to be due the Indians on claims against the United States, are to be segregated as soon as practicable after January 1, 1907, and placed to the credit of the individual members of the tribe on a pro rata basis, and will draw interest to be paid quarterly.
The act of March 3, 1905 (33 Stat. L., 1061), created a town-site commission and authorized the establishment of certain town sites on this reservation.
Five town sites—Pawhuska, Foraker, Bigheart, Hominy, and Fairfax—have been established.
Mention was made in my last annual report of the decision of the Supreme Court of the United States in the matter of Heff (197 U. S., 488), wherein it was held that Indians who have received allotments are citizens of the United States and subject to the jurisdiction of the States in which they reside, and therefore have the right to purchase intoxicating liquors.
It was stated that it was feared that this decision would prove a serious drawback to the efforts of this Department to suppress the liquor traffic among Indians.
Thereport of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs shows that because of this decision it has been much more difficult to prevent the sale of liquor to Indians on reservations, and especially upon allotments.
He cites several cases to show that it has been practically impossible to secure conviction and adequate punishment of violators of the liquor laws.
The Indian appropriation act for the current fiscal year contains a provision to enable the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior, to take action to suppress the traffic among Indians, and appropriates $25,000 for this purpose.
Under this provision two special officers have been appointed to detect, and to obtain the evidence required to successfully prosecute, this class of offenders.
Others will be employed as the exigencies of the situation may demand, and it is hoped by this means to greatly diminish the sale of intoxicants to Indians.
The Commissioner of Indian Affairs, in his annual report, sets forth at some length the history of irrigation on Indian reservations, and shows that up to a comparatively recent date the work of the Indian Department along this line was without definite order or system.
This condition of affairs has changed within the past few years, however, and there is now connected with the Indian Service a small corps of well-trained irrigation engineers, through whose intelligent efforts during the past year much creditable work has been accomplished on several reservations where irrigation is essential to the profitable and beneficial use of the lands, and in some cases an absolute necessity for bare existence thereon.
Of the appropriation for "Irrigation on Indian reservations" the sum of $179,500 was available for expenditure during the fiscal year 1906.
The remainder was variously distributed, nearly all the reservations in the arid region having received some part of it.
A large amount of tribal funds were also used on several reservations other than those mentioned above.
Reference was made in my last annual report to an.important project then under way on the Blackfeet Reservation.
This work was continued during the past year, and approximately $17,000 of tribal money was used in extending the ditch.
On the Crow Reservation the work of extending the system has been steadily carried on.
Laterals conveying water upon the lands have been put in very rapidly, and a large area of land is now under cultivation.
The Commissioner reports very encouraging progress in agriculture on this reservation, and the Indians are now realizing returns in the way of increased crops.
Twenty thousand dollars of tribal funds were used on this reservation.
Steps are being taken to plan a satisfactory system for the Klamath Reservation in the near future.
These Indians have now ample funds of their own available for irrigation.
Most of the reservations of the Mission Indians in California were visited during the past fiscal year, and the reports of the inspecting officer show that their greatest need is water for irrigation.
On the Agua Caliente Reservation No. 2, it was found that B. B. Barney claimed a water right in the Andreas Canyon under an old agreement (made in 1893) with the Government by which he was granted a right of way for a pipe line, flume, or canal across a part of the reservation, in consideration of which the Indians were to be allowed sufficient water from said pipe line to irrigate 100 acres, or so much thereof as they might have in cultivation, on the basis of 1-inch continuous flow for each 6 acres of land.
This quantity of water was found to be of little or no value to the Indians, and they soon vacated the land, leaving Mr. Barney in full possession of all the water.
As it appeared that Mr. Barney had expended about $6,000 in constructing a pipe line, with a carrying capacity of about 150 inches, and that he had a vested right which should be respected, a new agreement was made with him by which the Indians now on the reservation will be entitled to sufficient water to irrigate more land than will be required to support them thereon.
The ditch system on the Pala Reservation suffered from floods to the estimated extent of about $10,000, and the chief engineer estimates the cost of the construction of a ditch not likely to be damaged by any floods which may occur in the future, at $12,000, and authority has been granted for the expenditure of the sum named for that purpose during the current fiscal year.
The problem of a permanent water supply for the Pima Reservation has received special consideration during the past year.
A preliminary survey and estimates for the construction of a system of irrigation for this reservation were made by John J. Granville, a special agent appointed for that purpose, under the direction of and in conjunction with the chief engineer.
Further work on this project has been deferred until more definite data can be obtained as to the completion of the Tonto dam by the Reclamation Service.
The Uintah project is one of the most important that has yet been undertaken.
The Indian appropriation act for the current fiscal year carries an appropriation of $125,000 as the first installment of a total of $600,000 for this work.
It has developed that very grave difficulties are to be overcome in order to properly protect the interests of the Indians, and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs suggests that some amendment of existing law may be necessary to accomplish this end.
Work on the Navajo, Walker River, Shoshone, and Pueblo reservations has progressed satisfactorily during the year.
Irrigation work on the Yakima Reservation will, in the near future, under the provisions of the act of March 6, 1906 (34 Stat. L., 53), be taken over by the Reclamation Service.
Meantime the superintendent in charge of the reservation will see that the existing system of ditches are cared for and kept in repair.
The Commissioner calls attention to the provisions of the general allotment act of February 8, 1887 (24 Stat. L., 388), (better known as the Dawes law), which he regards as the crystallization of the resolve of the Government that the tribal relations of the Indians should cease.
The powers conferred by it to segregate the lands occupied by the Indians and have them taken in severalty have been exercised to as great an extent as conditions have seemed to warrant.
By its provisions the lands allotted in severalty were to be held in trust for a period of twenty-five years, and the Indians were to become citizens of the United States and of the several States at the instant of the approval of their allotments.
The same act subjected allotments to the local laws of descent and partition during the trust period.
This provision, taken in connection with the act of May 27, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 245), authorizing the sale of deceased allottees' land, has given rise to a mass of conflicting procedure by inferior courts of the several States and Territories, resulting in more evil than good.
The mere fact of so much conflict in the views and procedure of such courts makes the Indian administrative work extremely difficult and impedes the progress of the Indians as a whole.
Such conditions made plain the need of some law which would enable the Indian Office to manage the affairs of the helpless class with undisputed authority, but, on the other hand, to remove from the roll of wards and dependents the large and increasing number of Indians who no longer need any supervision from a bureau in Washington.
Hence the act of May 8, 1906 (34 Stat. L., 184), was passed.
This act materially modifies the general allotment act of February 8, 1887, and provides, among other things, that until the issuance of fee-simple patents all allottees to whom trust patents shall hereafter be issued shall be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the United States.
It also confers authority on the Secretary of the Interior, in his discretion, to terminate the trust period by issuing a patent in fee simple whenever he shall be satisfied that any Indian allottee is competent and capable of managing his or her affairs.
It also provides that hereafter when an allotment of land is made to any Indian, and any such Indian dies before the expiration of the trust period, said allotment shall be canceled and the land shall revert to the United States, and the Secretary of the Interior shall ascertain the legal heirs of such Indian, and shall cause to be issued to said heirs, and in their names, a patent in fee simple for said land; or he may cause the land to be sold as provided by law and issue a patent therefor to the purchaser or purchasers, and pay the net proceeds to the heirs, or their legal representatives, of such deceased Indians.
The action of the Secretary of the Interior in determining the legal heirs of any deceased Indian, as therein provided, shall in all respects be conclusive and final.
The Commissioner states that the power vested in the Secretary of the Interior by the act of May 8, 1906, to end the trust period by issuing patents in fee simple is a very important one, if not the most important relating to Indians that has vested in the Department, and that he believes it to be logically correct and in harmony with the spirit of the body of the law.
He presents certain suggestions as to the policy which should be pursued in exercising the power to issue patents in fee, and is of the opinion that any Indian who is earning a livelihood at any honorable occupation, if he wishes to own his land in fee simple, should have that privilege at once, because a man who has worked for his own support for any length of time will generally have some idea of the value of the land or what he should obtain for it.
He would make industry the primary test, and use this as a lever to force the Indians to earn their bread by labor.
He is of the opinion that this act, wisely administered, will accomplish more in this direction than any other single factor developed in a generation of progress.
When it is supplemented by other legislation which will enable their pro rata shares of the tribal moneys to be paid, principal and interest, to competent Indians, the beginning of the end will be at hand.
Such Indians, owning their land in fee, and receiving their portions of the tribal property without restriction, can not by any course of action maintain a claim for further consideration.
Through such measures the grand total of the nation's wards will be diminished daily and at a growing ratio.
The Commissioner recites the instructions issued to agents and superintendents as to the method of procedure under the provisions of 'the said act.
After an existence extending over a period of about twelve years the Commission to the Five Civilized Tribes, better known as the "Dawes Commission," after the name of its first chairman, Hon.
Henry L. Dawes, was abolished on June 30, 1905.
This Commission was created by an act of Congress approved March 3, 1893, for the purpose of negotiating agreements with the Five Civilized Tribes of Indians in Indian Territory, looking to the ultimate dissolution of their tribal governments and the formation of a Territory or State out of their domain.
These five tribes, which are the Choctaws, Chickasaws, Cherokees, Creeks, and Seminoles, had removed from their former homes in the Carolinas, Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana in the early thirties and located in the present Indian Territory, where each tribe established a government of its own.
They soon demonstrated their inability to preserve law and order within their respective commonwealths, and for a long time their affairs had been in a bad way, until Congress felt called upon to interfere to the extent of bringing about a restoration of order and prosperity.
Before the desired changes could be effected in a manner satisfactory to the Indians it was necessary to cause a complete reversion of public sentiment among the Indians.
For several years the Commission labored in vain, but the necessity for a renovation of affairs in Indian Territory was so apparent that when, after three years, the Commission had not succeeded in making a satisfactory agreement with any one of the tribes, Congress considered that the time had come to take some decisive preliminary step toward the dissolution of the tribal governments and a division of the tribal property.
With this end in view the Commission was authorized in 1896 to determine who were entitled to citizenship rights in the respective tribes.
The rolls which had previously been made by the tribal authorities were accepted so far as they went, but there were many citizens and claimants to citizenship whose names were not found upon the tribal rolls.
The rights of these persons were passed upon by the Commission, and appeals were allowed to the United States court.
The Commission continued in its efforts to negotiate with the several tribes, and finally succeeded in making an agreement with the Choctaws and Chickasaws which was ratified by Congress on June 28, 1898, and one with the Seminoles, which was ratified by Congress July 1, 1898.
These agreements provided for the enrollment of the citizens of the several tribes and the apportionment of their lands among the individual members.
The act of June 28, 1898, also provided for the enrollment of the members of the Creek and Cherokee tribes and the allotment of their lands in severalty.
Much preliminary work had to be done before the lands could be allotted.
They had to be surveyed and appraised, the improvements had to be located and platted, and the necessary reservations had to be made for railroads, towns, churches, schools, cemeteries, etc.
All this, as well as the enrollment of the Indians, required a great deal of field work, which the Commission proceeded to carry out as expeditiously as possible.
In the meantime a change was gradually taking place in the general sentiment of the Indians, and agreements were finally reached with the Creeks and Cherokees, the former being ratified by Congress March 1, 1901, and the latter on June 30, 1902.
Supplemental agreements were also made with the Choctaws, Chickasaws, and Seminoles which embraced essential provisions omitted from the former agreements.
These later agreements fixed the date for the closing of the rolls in each tribe, so that it was possible to commence the preparation of the final rolls and proceed with the work of allotment.
The Commission set about the work of enrollment, and as soon as practicable began the allotment of the lands of the respective tribes.
By June 30, 1905, the bulk of the work had been completed, and the supervision of a board of commissioners was no longer necessary.
By the act of March 3, 1905, the work was placed under the immediate supervision of the Secretary of the Interior, and the then chairman of the Commission was appointed Commissioner to the Five Civilized Tribes to represent the Secretary in the field.
The act of March 3, 1905, had made provision for the enrollment of minor children living on March 4, 1905, in all the tribes except the Cherokee.
The rights of other citizenship claimants were the subject of litigation, so that their claims could not be disposed of by the Commission.
To the work left over by the Commission, much was added by the act of April 26, 1906, which made provision for the enrollment of children born prior to March 4, 1906, and living on that date, in all the nations except the Seminole.
For this reason the number of pending applications for enrollment was greater at the close of the fiscal year just past than at its beginning.
In the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations applications for the enrollment of 2,860 persons were left undecided by the Commission.
Of these, 1,968 have been disposed of during the year.
A great deal of unexpected work has been caused in these nations by the efforts of freedmen claiming a degree of Indian blood to have their names transferred to the rolls of citizens by blood, so as to receive a larger allotment of land; by the attempts of intermarried white persons to enroll their children who have no Indian blood, and by the constant reopening of citizenship cases once decided, the Department being unable to control that matter prior to the act of April 26, 1906.
In the Cherokee Nation the claims of 3,779 persons were pending when the work was turned over to the Department.
These include the claims of 1,776 intermarried Cherokees whose rights were pending in the Court of Claims at the beginning of the year; that court having rendered a decision adverse to the intermarried whites, the case was appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States, where it is still pending at the close of the year.
In the Creek Nation 3,450 citizenship claims were left over by the Commission.
The work of enrollment in the Seminole Nation, as provided by the agreements, had been completed, but under the act of March 3, 1905, applications for the enrollment of 414 children were made, and 355 of these have been placed upon the final roll.
The number of pending citizenship cases in the several tribes at the close of the year was as follows: Choctaws, 1,620; Chickasaws, 649; Cherokees, 6,980; Creeks, 2,018; Seminoles, 59.
The allotting of lands was first commenced in the Creek Nation, where a land office was established April 1, 1899, and on June 1, 1901, allotment was commenced in the Seminole Nation.
Choctaw and Chickasaw nations on April 15, 1903.
Nearly all of those who had been finally enrolled and were willing to select allotments of land had done so before the Commission was abolished, but as names were still being added to the rolls, and there was much contest work to be disposed of, it has been necessary to continue the land offices in all the tribes except the Seminole, where the tribal membership is small and the allotments had been completed except as to the children enrolled under the act of March 3, 1905, who were arbitrarily given allotments of 40 acres each.
Especially has much been completed during the past year in the way of locating those recalcitrant Indians who would not voluntarily select allotments of land and making arbitrary allotments to them, so as to include such simple improvements as they had.
The names of persons who died at a date too early to be entitled to allotments have been weeded from the rolls, and where allotments had been selected for them they have been canceled.
The progress in the way of disposing of contest cases has also been very creditable, 3,580 cases having been decided by the Commissioner during the year, being nearly as many as were disposed of by the Commission during the entire period of its existence.
Another branch of the work which has progressed very rapidly during the year is the issuance of patents and deeds.
In the office of the Commissioner 20,232 patents and deeds have been prepared during the year.
When they have been executed by the chief executives of the tribes, these patents are transmitted to Washington for departmental approval, after which they are returned to the office of the Commissioner, where they are recorded in books prepared for that purpose, and then delivered to the allottee by registered mail.
Some delay was occasioned in the early part of the year by a difference of opinion between the Department and the chief executives as to the manner in which the Choctaw and Chickasaw patents should be delivered, but that matter has now been adjusted, and the work is moving along smoothly.
The act of April 26, 1906, calls for the completion of the final rolls not later than March 4, 1907, and an earnest effort is being made to dispose of all pending cases within the time specified.
It will take some time after the rolls are completed to wind up the work of allotment, to dispose of all the contests that may be expected to arise, and complete the issuance of patents and deeds, but under the act of April 26, 1906, authority is provided, which it is believed will enable the Department to close up the work within a reasonable time.
The full report of the Commissioner is hereto appended, marked “Exhibit A.
Section 27 of the act of June 28, 1898 (30 Stat. L., 495), provides "that the Secretary of the Interior is authorized to locate one Indian inspcctor in the Indian Territory, who may, under his authority and direction, perform any duties required of the Secretary of the Interior, by law, relating to affairs therein."
Under the authority conferred by said section, Mr. J. George Wright has continued in charge of the work specially intrusted to his supervision, and submits his eighth annual report, showing, in detail, the progress of the work during the past fiscal year.
The inspector, under direction of the Department, exercises supervision over the offices of the United States Indian agent, Union Agency, superintendent of schools in Indian Territory and his assistants, revenue inspector, mining trustees, town-site commissioners, and general town-site work; also, all other matters within the jurisdiction of the Department in the Indian Territory except those under the direct supervision of the Commissioner to the Five Civilized Tribes.
It is stated that the Indian Territory covers an area of approximately 19,000,000 acres and, with the exception of the Quapaw Agency in the northeast corner thereof, is divided among the Five Civilized Tribes.
Of the total number of approved citizens only about 25,000, including minors, are full-blood Indians, the remainder being intermarried, whites, freedmen, and mixed bloods.
It is also estimated that there are at least 700,000 white people in the Territory, making an estimated total population of 800,000.
The conditions existing in the Territory during the period from 1898 to the present time and the legislation affecting the matters in the Territory are briefly referred to, attention being invited to the fact that Congress at its last session provided for the admission of Indian Territory and Oklahoma Territory as one State.
1906 (34 Stat., 137), however, continued such tribal governments indefinitely, and placed the conduct of schools and other matters which have heretofore been controlled by the tribal authorities under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior.
The inspector states that few matters in the Seminole Nation have been brought to his attention during the year.
All allottees in such nations have been authorized to lease their land for agricultural purposes, with the approval of the tribal executive, but the act of April 26, 1906 (34 Stat., 137), provided that full bloods could only lease their land, exclusive of the homestead, for a period exceeding one year with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
Under the Seminole agreement patents to allotments could not be issued until after the extinguishment of the tribal government, but such government being extended indefinitely, it was provided in the act of April 26, 1906, that patents could be issued before the extinguishment of the tribal government.
Mining.
The mining of coal and asphalt in the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations is continued under leases theretofore approved by the Department in accordance with the provisions of the Atoka agreement contained in section 29 of the act of June 28, 1898 (30 Stat., 495).
No new leases were entered into during the year.
The matter of the segregation of approximately 445,000 acres of coal and asphalt lands as provided by the supplemental agreement with the Choctaw and Chickasaw tribes, ratified by the act of July 1,1902 (32 Stat., 641), is referred to, and it is stated that section 13 of the act of April 26, 1906 (34 Stat., 137), provided that all of such lands should be withheld from sale until further direction of Congress.
One hundred and eleven coal and 9 asphalt leases were in effect on June 20, 1906, aggregating an area of 107,760 acres.
The inspector's report for the previous year showed only 109 coal leases in effect, but the increase in the number is accounted for by the fact that a portion of two leases was transferred, which made four leases where only two were originally approved.
It appears that 7 coal leases and a portion of 2 leases were transferred during the year, and 1 asphalt lease was canceled at the request of the lessee.
The output of coal, in tons, during each fiscal year since the passage of the act of June 28, 1890, is as follows: 1899, 1,404,442; 1900, 1,900,127; 1901, 2,398,156; 1902, 2,735,365; 1903, 3,187,035; 1904, 3,198,862; 1905, 2,859,516; 1906, 2,722,200.
Only a limited quantity of asphalt was mined during the fiscal year, the output being 2,654 tons.
The total amount of royalty on coal and asphalt collected during the year and placed to the credit of the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations was $251,947.02, being at the rate of 8 cents per ton on all coal mined, 10 cents per ton on crude, and 60 cents per ton on refined asphalt.
The amount of royalty paid as given above, includes payments of advanced royalty required by the leases, and therefore does not agree with the reported output in tons.
The amount received each fiscal year since July 1, 1898, as royalty on coal and asphalt is as follows: 1899, $110,145.25; 1900, $138,486.40; 1901, $199,663.55; 1902, $247,361.36; 1903, $261,929.84; 1904, $277,811.60; 1905, $248,428.36; 1906, $251,947.02.
The leases require that a stipulated amount of coal shall be mined each year, and it is stated in cases where lessees fail to mine the required amount they were called upon to pay the royalty on the difference between the amount actually mined and the amount which should have been mined, and in most instances these payments have been made.
Three or four of the larger companies, however, have failed to make such payment, and the matter is under consideration by the Department.
The agreements with the Creek and Cherokee nations authorize the members thereof to lease their allotments for mineral purposes with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
It is shown that during the fiscal year there were filed in the agent's office 4,836 oil and gas leases and that there were pending in the agent's office 3,156 leases on July 1, 1905, making a total of 7,992 leases handled during the year.
Of this number 2,974 were forwarded for approval and 554 were dismissed on account of the failure of the lessee companies to comply with the regulations, leaving 4,464 leases pending in the agent's office on July 1, 1906.
Of the number forwarded to the Department, 1,523 were approved and 540 disapproved.
Prior to July 1, 1905, 542 leases were approved by the Department.
Indian citizens in the Creek and Cherokee nations are also permitted to develop their own lands for mineral purposes under regulations approved by the Department.
Mineral leases in the Creek and Cherokee nations are required to be filed with the Indian agent within thirty days from their date and as soon as they are examined and the requirements complied with they are forwarded for the action of the Department.
The royalty on oil is 10 per cent of the value on the leased premises of all crude oil extracted and the royalty on gas wells is $150 per annum on each well where the gas is utilized and $50 per annum where the gas is not used.
The amount of royalty on oil and gas collected by the United States Indian agent by fiscal years is as follows: 1904, $1,300; 1905, $91,624.40; 1906, $323,555.40.
Attention is also invited to transfers or assignments of oil and gas leases attempted to be made by lessees in violation of the regulations governing such matters, which require that such transfers or assignments can only be made with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
Such regulations also provide that no persons shall be interested in oil and gas leases covering more than 4,800 acres in Indian Territory, and it has been ascertained that through these alleged transfers certain persons have become interested in leases aggregating more than such acreage.
The regulations governing mineral leases in these nations are therefore amended so as to require lessees to furnish additional and more specific information and evidence of their good faith at the time of filing the leases.
Segregated coal lands in Choctaw and Chickasaw nations.
Prior to the passage of the above-mentioned act the Department had instituted an investigation as to the extent and value of the coal deposits, in and under the segregated coal lands in the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations, through competent officers of the Department in the Indian Territory.
This inquiry was concluded in the latter part of June, 1906, and showed that the cost of making a practical and exhaustive investigation of the coal deposits in question would be approximately $111,250, and that to complete the work would require at least two years.
In view of this fact no part of the appropriation of $50,000, made under the Indian appropriation bill, has been expended by this Department, but the results of the investigation made in the premises have been printed and copies thereof furnished to the Senate committee now investigating affairs in the Indian Territory, in order that the members thereof may be thoroughly advised as to the situation and their views on the subject be brought to the attention of Congress.
Leases of oil lands in the Creek and Cherokee nations.
Under the provisions of sections 16 and 17 of the act of June 30, 1902 (32 Stat., 500), and section 72 of the act of July 1, 1902 (32 Stat., 716), the Creek and Cherokee citizens are authorized to make leases for mineral purposes, with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, and not otherwise.
Regulations were duly issued prescribing the manner in which leases by said citizens should be made, and in order to prevent the oil lands in said nations from passing under the control of any person or corporation, and also in order to protect the interests of the Indian lessors, as well as the lessees, the regulations provided that every lease presented to the Department for approval must be accompanied by an application duly sworn to that the lessee is not directly or indirectly interested in any oil or gas mining lease or in any application for an oil or gas lease within said nations, which, with the tracts covered by the lease or leases presented for approval, would make more than 4,800 acres.
The regulations and the leases expressly provide that each lease shall be “transferable only with consent of the Secretary of the Interior.
The attention of the Department having been called to the allegation that one lessee company had attempted to transfer its leases to another lessee holding a large number of leases, an investigation was made under the direction of the Department, and it was ascertained that the transferees of said leases had become interested by drilling contracts with other lessees, covering many thousands of acres in excess of those prescribed in the regulations, and that the applications for the transfer of the leases or the drilling contracts had never been presented to the Department for its consideration or approval.
The parties to said transfers were called upon for an explanation and oral hearings were had, at which full opportunity was given for such explanation as the parties interested might desire to make.
The magnitude of the transactions involving many millions of dollars left no doubt in my mind as to the party furnishing the capital, and that if said transfers or drilling contracts were allowed to stand the oil industry in the Indian Territory would be practically under the control of the corporation which already dominates to a large extent the oil industry of the country.
The parties therefore were required to comply strictly with the regulations and reduce their holdings within the limit prescribed by the regulations, viz, 4,800 acres to one person or corporation.
Not satisfied, however, the parties endeavored to secure a reversal or modification of the departmental regulations from the President, but having been fully advised of my action in the premises the President declined to make any modification and directed that the rulings be enforced, of which the attorney of said parties was duly notified.
It is a matter of gratification that the lessees, parties to the transfer, have acquiesced in the ruling of the Department and have so signified their acceptance in writing.
Town sites.
It is stated that the work of surveying and platting town sites and appraising town lots has been completed, the only work remaining to be disposed of being the sale of vacant lots in a number of towns, and the determination of a few remaining contests over the right of persons to have lots scheduled under the law.
10,694.10 acres; Cherokee Nation, 53 towns, 9,501.47 acres; Choctaw Nation, 90 towns, 18,940.40 acres; Chickasaw Nation, 131 towns, 23,822.82 acres.
Payment of the proper per cent of the appraised value on town lots is made to the United States Indian agent at Union Agency.
The total amount so collected in the Creek, Cherokee, Choctaw, and Chickasaw nations, by fiscal years, is as follows: 1900, $11,213.50; 1901, $25,100.93; 1902, $237,725.39; 1903, $570,- 123.83; 1904, $554,621.72; 1905, $786,718.76; and 1906, $975,228.92.
During the fiscal year 1906 the following town-lot patents were issued, as many lots as practicable being included in one patent: Choctaw and Chickasaw nations, 9,815; Creek Nation, 2,079; Cherokee Nation, 1,623; total, 13,517.
The act of April 26, 1906, placed the entire matter of the conduct of all schools in the Five Civilized Tribes ur der the direction of the Secretary of the Interior.
All matters pertaining to schools in Indian Territory are under the immediate supervision of Mr. John D. Benedict, superintendent of schools.
In each of the Choctaw, Chickasaw, Creek, and Cherokee nations there is a school supervisor who, in conjunction with the tribal officials, attends to.
The Creek supervisor also has charge of the Seminole schools.
In the Indian appropriation act of June 21, 1906, $150,000 was appropriated for the support of schools in Indian Territory during the fiscal year 1907, and the proceeds of the recording fees received are also to be used for such purpose; the act also provided that the amount of tribal funds expended in any nation for schoo.urposes in any one year should not exceed the amount so expended during the fiscal year 1905.
Eight hundred and eighty-four day schools and 31 boarding schools were maintained during the year, distributed as follows: Cherokee Nation, 316 day and 4 boarding schools; Creek Nation, 161 day and 10 boarding schools; Choctaw Nation, 206 day and 10 boarding schools; Chickasaw Nation, 185 day and 5 boarding schools; Seminole Nation, 16 day and 2 boarding schools.
The total enrollment in the Choctaw Nation was 18,596, the attendance at the four academies being 520, at the boarding schools 417, and at the day schools 17,049, while 610 pupils were maintained in various private schools.
The expense of maintaining such schools during the year was $163,753.30, as compared with an enrollmert of 11,330, at an expense of $138,872.25, for the year 1905.
The Chickasaw Nation maintained 5 boarding schools, but no accurate data was obtained concerning the same, as the tribal authorities did not cooperate with the Government officials.
The enrollment of such schools was 340.
The 185 day schools in this nation were maintained under the direction of the Department, at which 14,170 were enrolled.
Three hundred and seventy-five Chickasaw pupils also attended various private schools.
The total number of pupils enrolled in Chickasaw schools under the supervision of the Department was 14,545, at an expense of $43,343.76.
The two boarding schools in the Seminole Nation were conducted by the tribal authorities without the supervision of the Department; 218 pupils were enrolled in these schools.
Sixteen day schools were maintained in this nation under the supervision of the Secretary of the Interior, at which 1,278 pupils were enrolled, at an expense of $4,867.32.
The Creek Nation maintains 10 boarding schools, of which 7 are for Indian children and 3 for negroes, at which 734 pupils were enrolled.
At the 161 day schools in this nation 10,937 pupils were enrolled, making a total enrollment of 11,671, at a cost of $115,061.73, as compared with an enrollment of 6,786 pupils, at a total expense of $79,099.01, during the fiscal year 1905.