DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, Washington, D. C., December 31, 1907.
Sir: I have the honor to submit the annual report of the Department of the Interior.
A portion of the time covered by this report was during the administration of my predecessor, Mr. Hitchcock, who terminated his long and faithful services in this Department on March 4, 1907.
The reports of the bureaus, offices, institutions, and Territories under the supervision of the Department are presented herewith.
These reports, carefully prepared and edited in accordance with your general instructions, present clearly and accurately the condition, needs, and activities of the public service with which each has to do.
Changes in organization.
The great increase in work of the Department during recent years, due to the imposition of new duties, the protection and development of natural resources upon the public domain, the disposition and care of Indian lands, and the growth of the Territories, has necessitated a radical change in the organization of the Department.
The purposes of the changes made were to free the Secretary's office from all detail work, which could better and more properly be done by the bureaus or offices, to clear away work in arrears, to introduce the most improved business methods, to throw upon the heads of the great bureaus and offices full responsibility and to hold them strictly accountable for results, and finally to so coordinate the work of the different offices and bureaus, by conference and cooperation between the Secretary and the heads of the offices and bureaus, as to avoid duplication of work and give to each officer the full benefit of the experience of other officers in the Department engaged upon allied or similar work.
Discontinuance of divisions in Secretary's Office.
To carry out these purposes four divisions of the Secretary's office, namely, Indian Territory, Indian Affairs, Patents and Miscellaneous, and Lands and Railroads, were abolished and the work of those divisions distributed to the bureaus and offices dealing with the particular subjects.
These divisions had outlived their usefulness, and had become stumbling blocks in the way of good administration, as they brought between the Secretary and the bureau chiefs an unnecessary examination of and action upon the work of the bureau or office.
They furthermore had a tendency to lessen the responsibility and authority of the head of the bureau or office and interfere with the cordial and confidential relation that must exist between the Secretary and the head of an office if the best results are to be obtained.
The change in those divisions made possible the consolidation of all the Departmental files and the introduction of a modern system of filing and indexing.
The immediate effect of this redistribution of work, relieving, as it did, the Secretary's office from a vast amount of unnecessary detail, made it possible to bring the work of the Secretary's office practically up to date.
Changes in work in bureaus.
Work within separate bureaus and offices has been changed wherever needed to correspond with the changes in the Department organization; within each bureau and office special efforts have been made to organize the work along lines that will produce the greatest efficiency, economy, and expedition.
The meetings of the Secretary with the heads of the various bureaus and offices have been found very helpful.
The discussions of difficulties of administration, the interchange of experience in dealing with kindred subjects, and the close cooperation resulting from a knowledge of what others in the Department are doing has tremendously increased the general efficiency of the bureaus and the Department.
Field service.
Particular attention has been given to the subject of field service.
This service is of especial importance in the Interior Department, as so large an amount of its work is done throughout the public domain under the Land Office, the Indian Office, the Geological Survey and the Reclamation Service.
One of the difficulties in administration of this service has been the lack of knowledge on the part of officers in Washington of conditions obtaining in the field.
Under the present organization, it is proposed to provide for a constant interchange of men in the field with men in the offices at Washington.
Much confusion has resulted from the decision or action of an officer in Washington who knew nothing of the conditions existing in the section to which his decision would apply or his action affect.
As far as the law permits, final decisions affecting local conditions will be made by local officers, they being held strictly accountable under general rules of policy and procedure adopted by the Department.
Inspection.
The question of inspection is of prime importance in the orderly conduct of a Department whose work extends over the entire country, as does that of the Interior.
It is idle to suppose that the Secretary of this Department, or even the heads of the great bureaus or offices, can personally direct the details of administration.
Each must rely upon subordinate officers; but by a system of inspection the head of the Department and the heads of the great offices can at all times know whether or not his subordinates are faithful, energetic, and honest.
The force of inspectors immediately under the Secretary is being used for the purpose of carefully examining and investigating the offices and officers of the Department.
This examination or investigation does not imply that the officers are suspected of maladministration, but is simply such an examination as will clearly give to the Secretary or to the head of the office or bureau accurate information as to the manner in which an official is conducting his business.
The inspectors will suggest improvements in administrative methods, give officers the benefit of others' experience, and promote uniformity in similar services.
Work of Gunn, Richards & Co.
In order to obtain the best advice upon organization, business methods, and accounting, members of the firm and employees of Gunn, Richards & Co., expert accountants, have been employed.
Their reports have been of very great value.
The facts found and recommendations made have resulted in doing away with obsolete, useless, or wasteful methods and in placing the business of the Department upon a very much better basis.
Many of the changes suggested have already been put into force; others will be as rapidly as conditions and appropriations permit.
Personnel.
Questions affecting the personnel of the Department are receiving most careful attention.
The total number of persons employed is 15,536.
Of these 3,836 are in Washington.
Comparatively few of these employees are unfaithful, incompetent, or inefficient.
Only one who is unfamiliar with the character and qualifications of the men and women employed in the public service could compare them unfavorably with those employed in similar pursuits in the business world.
The merit system, properly enforced, as it is now being under the civil service law, is responsible for this condition.
It is, of course, true that in so large a service there are many cases of individual hardship, and, I fear, many cases where individual merit has not received proper recognition, but such conditions are not found only in the public service.
There is no difficulty, under present civil service rules, in getting rid of an unfaithful, incompetent, or inefficient employee, and as long as the appointing officer does not have the opportunity of filling the vacancy by personal choice, the danger of removing a faithful and competent employee is reduced to a minimum.
If incompetent and inefficient employees are retained, the head of the Department and the head of the office where such person is employed are alone responsible.
It should be understood that permanency in employment depends upon efficiency, and that it is as easy to go down and out as to go in and up.
It is not agreeable for an officer to exercise the power of reduction or dismissal, and yet he injures both the service and the efficient employees if he fails to exercise that power when occasion requires.
The number of persons in the public service who are inefficient because of superannuation has been greatly overestimated, but unfortunately such employees are not distributed equally throughout the Departments, and it is in dealing with such cases that there is the greatest difficulty.
An employee who has served the public faithfully for a long period is entitled to great consideration, but such consideration must not be allowed to clog public business, nor prevent the recognition of good service on the part of other persons.
Employees who have served faithfully in either military or civil life should be given work and salary commensurate with their capacity and should not be dismissed except in cases of necessity.
Salaries.
The present need in the public service is a readjustment and reclassification of the salaries of its employees and some adequate provision for the retirement of those who are by long and meritorious services entitled to peculiar recognition.
Public documents.
The method of handling public documents has been materially changed.
A great number of old documents had accumulated, 867,943 volumes having been stored in the vaults of the Patent Office building.
These have all been transferred to the Superintendent of Documents, and the office of clerk in charge of documents transferred to the supply division of the Department.
This change not only gives much needed additional space to the Patent Office, but will greatly facilitate the ready distribution of publications.
Custodian.
The custodian, who is charged with the miscellaneous purchasing for the Department, has been transferred to the supply division.
Both this office and that of clerk in charge of documents have been dropped from the estimates for the next fiscal year, their duties to be assumed by the chief of the supply division.
Library.
The library of the Department, consisting of 9,287 volumes, which was used simply as a circulating library, has been abolished and the books distributed to the Library of Congress and the Public Library of the District of Columbia.
Plan for final reorganization.
The changes already made have resulted in increased efficiency.
There has also been an actual saving in expenditure, and when the changes now contemplated are made a still larger decrease in expenditures for administrative purposes will result.
I have presented to Congress in the estimates for the next year a plan for the final reorganization of the Department, which I trust will meet with favorable consideration.
The plan in brief is to create the positions of two under secretaries in the classified service, and to abolish the position of chief clerk, an office which is no longer required.
The two under secretaries, with the private secretary, would constitute an administrative committee to be charged with all merely administrative matters.
These officers would relieve the Secretary and the two Assistant Secretaries from detail work which now occupies a large portion of their time, and make it possible for them to devote their energy and thought to the problems and policies with which the Department and its offices have to deal.
Buildings.
A thorough examination has been made of the build.
The Geological Survey, the Bureau of Education, the Reclamation Service, and the models of the Patent Office are in rented quarters.
The total rent roll is $67,200, and the Government is obtaining for this expenditure buildings not fireproof and ill adapted to the uses to which they are put.
This is particularly true of the buildings occupied by the Geological Survey and the Bureau of Education.
In each of these buildings, not only are the employees obliged to work in overcrowded and insanitary rooms, but there is stored property of the Government of great value, much of which could not be reproduced.
I most earnestly renew the recommendations heretofore made to Congress for the construction of a building adequate for the needs of this Department.
The Patent Office building is in great need of repair.
I have had it examined by the superintendent of the Capitol, Mr. Woods, and on his report shall ask Congress for an appropriation which will put this building in condition to accommodate the Patent Office for some years to come.
The building was found to be in exceedingly bad sanitary condition, endangering the health of the employees.
It was possible to immediately remedy some of the conditions.
The old Post-Office building, now occupied by the Land and Indian offices is seriously overcrowded.
If it be feasible, the Indian Office will be moved to the Pension building, where there is now available space.
The decrease in the work of the Pension Office has made available in that building space which is more than sufficient for its needs.
If the Indian Office be moved, the Reclamation Service, which requires about half as much room as the Indian Office, would be removed to the Land Office, and the Land Office be given much needed additional space.
There would be a distinct advantage in having the Land Office and the Reclamation Service in the same building.
In accordance with the report of a committee recently appointed I shall adopt rules for putting and keeping the buildings in more sanitary conditions.
During the last summer I spent eleven weeks traveling through the public-land States and Territories west of the Mississippi River.
This trip gave me the opportunity to examine many of the land offices, Indian agencies and reservations, about half of the principal reclamation projects, and to meet the officials of the Territories, the officials and employees of this Department and hundreds of the people who deal with the Department.
It is my desire to make those whose lives bring them under the jurisdiction of this Department or in touch with its work feel that the officials in Washington have a direct and personal knowledge of field conditions.
The Interior Department, through the General Land Office, the Indian Office, the Geological Survey, and the Reclamation Service, is to play a most important part in working out the great projects for the conservation and the preservation of natural resources.
The work of these bureaus is closely connected with the work of the Department of Agriculture, and the future study of these problems and their solution demand the most hearty cooperation of these different governmental agencies.
The Indian question will soon become an agricultural land question.
Irrigation is distinctly an agricultural land question.
One of the great features of the work of the Geological Survey is the study of water sources and water supply, upon the successful determination of which depend the uses to which water can best be put, whether they be domestic, irrigation, power, or navigation.
Some of these are connected with the work of the Department of Agriculture—others with the work of the Department of Commerce and Labor.
It is evident that the ultimate development of all of this work will require its rearrangement and redistribution in order to accomplish the best results with the greatest efficiency and economy.
The Department of Agriculture has to do with the problems of production, and eventually all the various agencies of the Federal Government which have to do with the production and conservation of natural resources should be brought together in that Department.
It would be a distinct advantage if the President were given authority to rearrange the work under the different Departments as the needs therefor arise.
1. Routine adjudications: This work consists of the direct consideration and preparation of decisions on appeals from the General Land Office in matters concerning the public land, and from the Office of Indian Affairs in matters concerning contested Indian allotments and leases.
These questions call for a high order of work, not only because of the unusually large values sometimes involved, but because of the complexity of the laws and the danger that injustice and hardship may be worked upon multitudes of settlers and incompetent Indians.
2. Litigation: This office is required to keep in touch with and watch over litigation, both criminal and civil, in which the United States is attempting to protect the public land interests and the rights of Indians.
The suits themselves outside of the District of Columbia are entirely in the hands of the Department of Justice and are carried on by the United States attorneys.
Suits of this character which originate in the District of Columbia, however, are usually conducted entirely by the Assistant Attorney-General's office.
3. Opinions and legal advice: The force of this office must hold itself ready at all times to give advice to the Secretary and his executive chiefs concerning any legal matters involved in the business of the Department.
Questions of this kind are numerous, diverse in character, and very important, especially those relating to abstracts of title and contracts.
The kind of work done by the assistant attorneys in this office demands a class of men more expert and qualified than is usual in the law clerk positions of the Government.
I am glad to report that the personnel of the office meets these requirements.
The rate of compensation, however, which has remained stationary for years, is inadequate and constantly causes danger of the loss of trained and necessary men who receive better offers elsewhere.
For these reasons I have recommended to Congress particularly a reasonable increase in the rates of salary paid to the assistant attorneys in this office.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 1907, there were disposed of 20,997,566.58 acres, an increase of 1,566,379.11 acres over the preceding year.
There were embraced in entries completed during the year 7,114,250.38 acres which had been reported in original entries made in previous years, and are not included in the above statement.
Entries of all classes made last year numbered 209,642, an increase of 13.25 per cent.
Total cash receipts from the disposal of lands during the last fiscal year were $9,547,273.51.
Receipts from other sources were $2,005,904.49, making a total of $11,553,178, or an increase of 52.3 per cent over the receipts of the preceding year.
The total expense of the district land offices for salaries, commissions, incidental expenses, and cost of depositing moneys during last year was $810,856.96, an increase of $30,439.16.
The aggregate expenditures and estimated liabilities of the public-land service were $2,295,004.70, leaving a net balance of $9,258,173.30 in the Treasury.
Fifty-seven additional national forests were created during the year and one has been abolished.
There are 159 national forests, embracing 150,832,665 acres.
Of the lands temporarily withdrawn under the forestry act, 10,535,913 acres have been restored to entry during, the last year.
There were surveyed during the year 7,156,910 acres.
Recommendations as to the closing of the surveyors-general offices for Florida, Minnesota, and North Dakota, made in the last annual report, are renewed, and it is suggested that the offices in South Dakota and Louisiana be examined with a view to their discontinuance.
The general question of the system of surveys under the surveyorsgeneral demands the most careful attention.
The present system is not satisfactory.
It is both expensive and subject to very great delays.
I believe that a very great saving, both in efficiency and expedition, would be made if the Secretary were given authority to have the surveys made under the direct control of the Commissioner of the Gen eral Land Office, to whom authority would be given to have surveys made either by contract or by the force of the Geological Survey.
The following Indian lands have been opened during the last fiscal year: Under a sealed bid plan 380,790.69 acres belonging to the Kiowa, Comanche, and Apache Indians in Oklahoma were disposed of to the highest bidders for $4,015,385.25, an average of $10.50 per acre.
Five hundred and eighty-eight farm units, aggregating 32,287.93 acres within the Huntley irrigation project, which formed a part of the former Crow Indian Reservation, in Montana, were opened to entry on July 22, 1907, under a drawing system authorized by the act of April 27, 1904, and 79 of these tracts have been entered at the last reports.
Laws have been enacted for the disposal of the following Indian lands: Colville Reservation, Wash., 1,000,000 acres; Flathead Reservation, Mont., 1,000,000 acres; Yakima Reservation, Wash., 1,145,000 acres; Blackfeet Reservation, Mont., 500,000 acres; Lower Brule Reservation, S. Dak., 55,000 acres; Coeur d'Alene Reservation, Idaho, 310,000 acres; Rosebud Reservation, S. Dak., 835,000 acres; Lemhi Reservation, Idaho, 64,000 acres.
Steps are now being taken preliminary to the opening of these lands next year.
There has been a complete reorganization in the General Land Office.
This has been accomplished by the redistribution of business, the introduction of modern business methods, and a rearrangement of the field force.
As a result of these changes, the work of the office has been made very nearly current.
Unfortunately, this can not be said of the work in the field.
Despite the efforts of the field officers, there are many land districts so overcrowded with work that with the present force contest cases will be seriously delayed.
I most earnestly hope that the additional appropriations requested for the field force will be granted by Congress.
The delays to honest entrymen will inevitably be very serious if appropriations be insufficient to employ the needed number of agents to examine the contest cases.
In this connection I desire to call attention to the difficulties that the officers of the land office encounter in the conduct of their business.
The registers and receivers and special agents have been instructed that it is their duty quite as much to aid the honest entryman as to detect and punish the dishonest entryman.
Fortunately, most homestead entries are honestly made, but in many instances, through carelessness or ignorance, mistakes are made which may defeat an entry.
It is thus necessary that the utmost care be exercised by the local land officers, and it is upon these officers that the Commissioner of the General Land Office and the Secretary must rely for obtaining the facts and seeing that justice is done.
It is the duty of the special agents to aid the local officers in all of these cases, and unless the appropriation is large enough to employ the kind of men and the number of men needed, it is inevitable that there will be serious delays in the congested districts.
The fact that delays exist does not warrant the local officers or the special agents in passing or rejecting any entry without proper examination.
The purpose of the public land law is not to get rid of the public land, but to provide a method under which lands may be obtained by those who intend to use them legally and honestly.
The highest use of lands is the making of homes.
The utmost care should thus be taken to prevent the taking for other purposes of lands capable of being entered under the homestead act; on the other hand, we must not permit that law to be used as a device to obtain valuable mineral or timber lands.
The force of special agents now employed has been distributed as far as possible in accordance with the needs of the different land districts.
These agents are not detectives and are not so used, although it may be at times necessary for them, in the examination of cases where fraud has been committed and a criminal statute violated, to use the means necessary to discover the fraud or the criminal.
There probably have been cases where the agent has shown lack of judgment.
In so large a service, with such a multitude of cases, this is inevitable.
But the general charge, that the special agents of the land office have exercised their powers and performed their duties without regard to the rights of the citizens, is wholly unwarranted.
It almost invariably happens that the man who is suspected, who is charged with having acquired or attempted to acquire public land dishonestly, accuses the special agent of using unfair means or of having exercised his power unjustly.
I am pleased to say that in almost every instance the charges have not been substantiated.
Should any such conduct be shown, the officer guilty would be dealt with instantly and severely.
Under the present plan of organization, there will be a constant interchange between men in the field-and men in the offices at Washington.
By this interchange a man at the desk will understand the conditions that exist in the field, and, on the other hand, the man in the field who has had the office experience at Washington will be better able to accept the responsibility thrown upon his shoulders.
There has been no abatement in the efforts of the Department to prevent the illegal entry or misuse of public lands.
There have been collected for timber trespasses without suit $80,917.53 and there have been recovered through suits against trespassers $203,552.68.
One hundred and thirty-six cases of unlawful inclosure, involving 842,720 acres, have been reported.
In 94 of these cases, involving 256,918 acres, the inclosures have been removed.
In the other cases the fences are being removed or action is pending in the courts to compel removal.
Whenever the facts warrant, I confer with persons who are accused of using or holding land illegally, and if possible and proper effect a settlement or obtain return of the lands to the Government without litigation.
It is gratifying to notice that there is a growing sentiment in favor of the enforcement of the land laws.
Until quite recently, evasion of the public-land laws was not uncommon, and in many localities, due both to public sentiment and to the indifference on the part of the Federal officers, many thousands of acres were acquired contrary to law.
As long as there was an overabundance of public land available for agriculture, timber, water, and fuel, few, if any, complaints were made regarding either the misappropriation or misuse of the public domain, but the rapidly increasing population in the publicland States has changed this condition.
The great majority of the citizens of the West now recognize that the resources of land, timber, water, fuel, and forage are not inexhaustible, and that the waste or misuse of those resources must be stopped.
The growth of this belief has created the public opinion which now demands the enforcement of the land laws, the prevention of waste, and the recovery of lands which are now illegally held.
The difficulty the Department encounters in the enforcement of laws is that in some instances the laws themselves are not applicable to existing conditions.
This difficulty arises especially in connection with the laws affecting coal lands, timber and stone lands, and use of the public range.
It is estimated that approximately 70,000,000 acres in the Western States are underlain with coal.
The coal varies in quality from the low form of lignite to the highest form of coking coal.
Between July 26, 1906, and December 13, 1907, by Executive order, 66,938,800 acres of land were withdrawn from entry for the purpose of determining whether or not they were underlain with merchantable coal.
The reasons for this action were that it was found that serious frauds were being perpetrated in the acquisition of coal lands.
Under the existing coal land law comparatively few entries were made, but the lands had been acquired illegally under other forms of entry.
Unfortunately, a very large percentage of the land so acquired could not be recovered because of the statute of limitations; but wherever possible actions for recovery have been, and will be, brought.
In order to determine what lands were underlain with coal, I had the Geological Survey during the last summer examine about 14,500,000 acres.
Under the law the coal lands were subject to entry at the minimum prices of $10 and $20 an acre, in accordance with their proximity to railways.
It was unwise to longer continue the minimum as the only price, as many of these lands are of very much greater value than the minimum and should not be disposed of except for a price commensurate with their value.
Upon the report of the Geological Survey I have had the lands classified and restored to entry at the prices fixed in accordance with this classification.
The lands which are reported as not underlain with merchantable coal have been restored to the public domain.
Under the existing law no one individual is permitted to purchase more than 160 acres, nor can an association or corporation purchase more than 320 acres.
In some fields containing the highest grade of coal it would be possible to develop a mine profitably on this small acreage, but in the very great majority of instances a much larger acreage is necessary.
While many of the difficulties which have arisen regarding the enforcement of this law have been due to unwise restrictions imposed by the statute, yet, neither an executive officer nor a court is justified in refusing to enforce the law and impose the penalty because he does not agree with or believe in the wisdom of the statute.
If men commit perjury or cause others to commit perjury for the purpose of evading the law, they can not properly plead as an excuse the fact that they could not operate a mine on an area to which the law restricted them.
Because of these serious defects Congress has been asked, and will be asked again, to consider the amendment of this statute.
I can not urge too strongly the need of a change in the policy hitherto adopted by the Government for the disposition of the coal land.
The coal remaining in the public domain should be so used as to induce its development in accordance with the needs of the country, lut at the same time to prevent waste or monopolization in the hands of a few.
In order to accomplish these purposes, the man or the corporation producing the coal must be given an area sufficiently large to warrant the expenditure of the money necessary to profitably develop and market the coal.
The experience in other sections of our country and abroad leads me to believe that the best possible method of accomplishing these results is for the Government to retain the title to the coal, and to lease under proper regulations which will induce development when needed, prevent waste, and prevent monopoly.
Such a method permits the separation of the surface from the coal and the unhampered use of the surface for purposes to which it may be adapted.
A method of leasing is not an experiment.
It is successfully employed in large portions of the East, where the coal property is owned by individuals; in a number of our Western States, where the States have acquired coal land, and in foreign countries.
The experience of Australia is of peculiar interest to us.
The leasing system there is fully developed and has been of great advantage to both the public and the operators.
The surest way to avoid the evils of monopolistic control by private interests is to retain in the Government the right to control operation under lease regulations.
The use of the Alaska coal is of the utmost importance.
The millions of tons there should not be given away simply because they are not now accessible.
Within a few years systems of transportation will bring that coal to our furnaces, ships, and locomotives.
It is our duty to so guard those great deposits of national wealth as to prevent the consumer from paying an unduly high price when finally they are brought to market.
We should not yield to the specious claim that these lands must be given away now in order to develop Alaska.
Honest development will come as rapidly as the public need demands.
The law prohibiting the inclosure of the public domain or the placing of obstructions thereon likewise needs radical amendment.
As the law now stands, the Secretary of the Interior has no discretion in its enforcement.
Every fence which incloses a portion of the public domain or obstructs the free passage across must be removed.
Here again we have a law that is not applicable to present-day conditions.
Because of the agricultural development of the country the great public ranges have necessarily become restricted.
The old free range is a thing of the past.
Without proper restriction all the great ranges would soon be destroyed from overfeeding.
With all fences removed that result is inevitable.
Under the existing law, no fences can be permitted.
It is therefore necessary that the law be so amended as to give to the Secretary of Agriculture, who could best administer such a law, the power to permit the use of the public range in such manner as is equitable to the stockmen in each locality.
This can best be accomplished by a system of permit, based either upon an acreage or a per capita basis and regulated in accordance with the peculiar and special needs and customs of each locality.
Such a permit system would mean the preservation and the improvement of what is left of the great ranges.
It would not in any way prevent the ultimate agricultural development of any section.
The settler at all times should be given the right of homestead entry and a preference to use such portion of the range as may be necessary to graze the stock which can be supported upon his homestead.
The timber and stone act should be repealed.
Under this act many frauds have been perpetrated.
This act has been one of the most harmful of the public land statutes.
Under it millions of acres of timber land have been fraudulently acquired and the.monopoly of the timber supplies of the public land States made possible.
The purpose of the act may have been good, but its effects have been vicious.
The disposition or use of the remaining portions of the public domain demands the most earnest and careful consideration.
The time has come when we can no longer safely permit the unrestricted acquisition by private individuals of the public domain for purposes other than homesteads.
But, when one considers the future development of the country and the needs of an ever-increasing population, it becomes clear that we must not permit the natural resources remaining upon the public domain to be wasted or monopolized by private interests.
The snows and water in the great mountain ranges of the West contain power enough to turn millions of wheels, to irrigate millions of acres, to furnish water supply to hundreds of cities.
If these waters are permitted to be acquired by private interests then generations to come will pay tribute for the use of water which should be preserved as a public utility, not a private privilege.
The use and preservation of the fuel and timber supply are of equal importance.
If we are to guard the future of our country the supply of timber and fuel must not be left wholly to private enterprise, which necessarily looks to its own gain rather than the public need or good.
It is to be hoped that Congress will undertake a careful revision of the land laws.
The reports of the Commissioner of the General Land Office and of the Public Lands Commission afford the information necessary upon which to base much-needed legislation.
The work of the Indian Office has progressed in a most satisfactory manner.
The Commissioner of Indian Affairs devotes a large part of each summer to personal examination of conditions in the field, visiting the agencies, particularly those far removed from the ordinary routes of travel.
He has thus established a relation of mutual confidence with many of the Indian tribes.
The Bureau is in every possible way taking advantage of similar work in other branches of the Government service, with the purpose of giving to those in charge of the lands and property of the Indians the advantage of all expert and technical knowledge at the disposal of the Government.
This is especially valuable in connection with the use and development of the Indian lands for agricultural purposes.
The assistance by way of suggestion, advice, and cooperation between the Reclamation Service and the Geological Survey, in this Department, and the Forest Service, in the Department of Agriculture, has been exceedingly advantageous, and will be increasingly so as the Indian lands are allotted and opened for settlement.
It is idle to suppose that it is either possible or wise to prevent such disposition of the Indian lands in those areas where the lands are needed for agricultural development and men are ready and anxious to develop them.
The duty of the Government is to see that the opening, when made, is conducted with fairness to the Indian owners.
It is not surprising that in the great majority of cases the Indians object to the opening and to the allotment of individual tracts.
It is impossible for the Indians to suddenly, or even in a few years, discard the training of generations and accept the idea of individual ownership of land, which the white race has developed after hundreds of years of civilization.
By a slow and tedious process the great mass of the Indians will accommodate themselves to these new conditions; and the Federal Government must patiently help them during the early years of their attempt to walk in the white man's path.
The history of our dealings with the Indians contains many chapters which we wish might not have been written, but the mistakes made have not been without benefit, and it is safe to say that at present the Government is dealing wisely and justly with the Indians.
The day of serious armed conflict is happily practically past.
In but isolated cases are either the inclinations of the Indians or the conditions such as to make such conflict possible.
The Commissioner of Indian Affairs is constantly on the lookout to guard against the selection of other than capable, honest agents on the reservations, and is quick to punish or dismiss any official guilty of unfair or improper treatment of the Indians.
The educational work among the Indians demands most earnest consideration by Congress.
The Commissioner has shown clearly his reasons for recommending the discontinuance of almost all the nonreservation schools.The experiment of placing Indian children in schools far removed from their natural surroundings has not been a success.
The amount of money spent in such schools would be of very much greater permanent advantage if expended on the reservation for the purpose of teaching the boys and girls how to do those things which they naturally will have to do as men and women.
The greatest emphasis should be laid upon industrial education, and the industries selected must be those which the student can use as soon as he begins life work.
For example, those Indians whose lands are covered with forests should be taught how to best preserve, cut, and dispose of timber; those who have agricultural lands should be taught how to raise the crops to which they are best adapted, how to irrigate when necessary, and how to care for and improve cattle, sheep, and other stock in those regions best adapted for grazing.
Such education does not by any means preclude the possibility of any boy or girl who has the intellectual ability and taste from being given the opportunity for higher education and professional life.
The whole purpose of their education should be to enable them to become self-supporting, self-respecting citizens.
By the operation of law, as it existed for nineteen years prior to May 8, 1906, the moment an Indian had his land allotted to him he became a citizen of the United States.
The effect of this provision was to give the highest civic status to thousands of men who could have only the vaguest notions of its privileges and no conception whatever of its obligations, hence we are doing every Indian citizen and the community in which he lives a gross wrong if we fail to give him the opportunity to learn how to perform the duties of citizenship.
Conditions on the Crow Reservation afford an opportunity for trying an experiment which will be beneficial both educationally and industrially to the Indian and advantageous to the Government.
Twenty-three hundred and fifty-three persons were allotted on the reservation.
The surplus land amounts to about 1,800,000 acres.
It is proposed that a portion of this land—from 200,000 to 400,000 acres, which is especially valuable for grazing purposes—be devoted to raising horses; that a company be organized to carry on this project, the stockholders of which shall be the Indians; that the Government have ex officio representation upon the board of directors, and that the stock be held in trust by the Government for the Indian owners.
The Crows are natural horsemen, and it is believed would be able to make this a profitable business enterprise.
The interest of the Government would be in obtaining horses for the Army.
There is at present very great difficulty in purchasing the needed number of horses of proper quality.
The horses raised on the reservation would be of a quality required by the Army and would in measure supplement the supply from other sources.
I trust that this proposition will receive favorable consideration.
One of the chief difficulties encountered in the administration of Indian affairs is that the Indian more readily adopts the white man's vices than his virtues.
This is particularly true regarding the use of liquor; those who wholly blame the Indian speak without knowledge of the facts.
The Indian's weakness for liquor makes him an easy prey to the greed of the white man who wishes only to obtain the Indian's money or his land.
Special efforts have been made to reduce to a minimum the sale of liquor to Indians, but, unfortunately, too often it is found that the public sentiment of a community is not such as to aid our officers in the enforcement of the law.
However, there has been a very great advance during the past year, and many courts have shown their desire to keep liquor from the Indian by the imposition of heavy penalties.
The progress of the irrigation works on the Indian reservations has been very satisfactory.
There now exists close cooperation between the Indian Office and the Reclamation Service, and wherever feasible the Indian lands have been brought under the general reclamation projects.
The courts have uniformly sustained the Department in its efforts to protect the existing water rights of the Indians, and by agreement with the settlers in locations where there has been a conflict as to water rights it has usually been possible to effect arrangements to give the Indian the opportunity to use his land in connection with that of his white neighbors, from whom he will learn how best to cultivate irrigated land.
The reclamation work has also given the opportunity for the employment of a large number of Indians in the construction of the ditches and reservoirs.
Special effort has been made by the Indian Office to find employment for the Indians not only on the Government but on outside work as well.
It is gratifying to find that many of the members of the tribes that were most warlike a few years ago make the best laborers.
If the Indian understands that he is to be treated as the white man when he shows himself able and willing, he ordinarily becomes a self-respecting and persistent worker.
Under the employment system it is possible to teach the Indian that the Government will no longer support him in idleness, but that if he wishes to eat he must work.
In pursuance of this policy rations are no longer distributed, except to those who by reason of age or other infirmity or because of some other peculiar necessity are incapable of supporting themselves.
A striking example of this fact was shown in connection with the band of Indians known as the “Absentee Utes.
About 375 Utes, becoming dissatisfied upon their reservation in Utah about a year ago, left the reservation, marched across Wyoming, and were finally arrested in South Dakota.
United States troops were used for the purpose of effecting this arrest and preventing a violent clash between the Indians and the local settlers.
By an agreement with the Sioux the Utes were permitted to rent from the Sioux one of their vacant pastures, where they settled down and spent the last winter.
During that period it was necessary to issue them rations, because they had had no opportunity to provide for themselves.
This year they were given the opportunity of work.
At first they declined, but when it was clearly explained to them that those who were able-bodied would not have any further rations issued, and that they could obtain food only as a result of work, all who were able to accepted the conditions and went to work.
It is believed from present indications that next spring all of these Indians will return to their reservation and try to improve their allotments.
On June 30, 1905, the greater part of the work coming within the jurisdiction of the Commissioner to the Five Civilized Tribes had been completed, thereby making the supervision of a board of commissioners no longer necessary, and in accordance with the provisions of the act of Congress approved March 3, 1905, the work was placed under the immediate supervision of the Secretary of the Interior, and the chairman of the Commission to the Five Civilized Tribes was appointed Commissioner to the Five Civilized Tribes to represent him in this work.
1906, and living on that date, in all nations except the Seminole, so that a large number of applications for enrollment were pending at the beginning of the fiscal year just ended, and the Commissioner continued to receive appplications for enrollment in accordance with the provisions of the above act until July 25, 1906.
The act of Congress approved April 26, 1906, further provided that the Secretary of the Interior should be without authority to approve the enrollment of any person after March 4, 1907, and on account of the necessity for the final disposition of all enrollment matters by the Commissioner and the Department the enrollment work for the past fiscal year was quite heavy, requiring the employment of additional employees and many hours of extra work.
Applications for allotments were received during the year at the respective land offices of the Commissioner to the Five Civilized Tribes located at Muskogee, Atoka, and Ardmore, Ind.
T., and at the close of the year allotments had been made to the majority of the citizens and freedmen of the Five Civilized Tribes.
The allotment work consisted principally of the making of allotments to minor children enrolled under the act of Congress approved April 26, 1906, and to those citizens and freedmen previously enrolled but who had not selected the entire amount of land to which they were entitled.
There were allotted to citizens and freedmen of the Five Civilized Tribes during the year 1,067,334.03 acres, classified as follows: Choctaw, 312,016.64 acres; Chickasaw, 361,708.16 acres; Cherokee, 229,- 507.26 acres; Creek, 164,101.97 acres; Seminole, none.
The allotment contest work has decreased to a marked extent, and, with the exception of the Cherokee Nation, the contests have been practically disposed of.
In the Cherokee Nation the contest work is more unsettled because of the question of the right of minors to be enrolled under the act of April 26, 1906, which is now pending, and the controversies arising from the appraisal of the improvements belonging to former intermarried white claimants.
Copies of the final rolls of citizens and freedmen of the Five Civilized Tribes are being· made, which will soon be printed in book form and ready for sale.
The enrollment work, with the exception of those cases now pending in the courts, having been completed, the work remaining undisposed of concerns largely the making of allotments to those few persons for whom no selections have been made and those to whom it will be necessary to allot additional land for the purpose of completing their allotments to the full amount.
The closing of the rolls marks the beginning of the last period in the settlement of the relations between these tribes and the National Government.
The work of the allotting commissions can now be completed, and there will be left only the final disposition of the surplus lands and the execution of such laws as Congress may enact relative to the disposition of the tribal funds and the removal of the property restrictions remaining upon certain classes of Indians.
Requests have been presented, and doubtless efforts will be made to reopen some if not all of these rolls, but it is to be hoped that such action will not be taken.
Without doubt there are persons on the rolls who are not entitled to be there, and there are persons not on the rolls whose names should be there, but after the years of painstaking inquiry and determinations made by the citizenship court, by the Commissioner to the Five Civilized Tribes, and finally by the Secretary of the Interior it is believed that the cases of injustice or mistake are too few to justify an action that would surely result in thousands of claims being presented for readjudication.
The reports of the Commissioner to the Five Civilized Tribes, the Indian inspector for the Territory, and the superintendent of schools present in detail the work of the Department in allotting the lands, caring for the leasing of the coal and oil lands, protecting the rights of those Indians whose lands are still not subject to alienation, and providing the necessary schools for the education of the children.
On July 1 the offices of inspector and Commissioner of the Five Civilized Tribes were united and the Commissioner placed in direct charge of all matters.
By the organization of the State of Oklahoma, Indian Territory becomes an integral part of the new Commonwealth.
The Indians are citizens, and there will necessarily result a change in the relations between them and the Federal Government, although by the enabling act Congress wisely retains control of all Indian affairs.
Many questions, both of policy and law, have already arisen, and the greatest care must be taken to as far as possible settle these questions promptly and wisely.
I have appointed Mr. Ryan, who during his many years' service as First Assistant Secretary of the Department has acquired an intimate knowledge of the affairs in the Indian Territory, as a special representative to consider these new relations.
The problems presented for immediate consideration are those affecting the Indian lands.
There were approximately 19,000,000 acres in the Indian Territory, all of which were until within the last few years not subject to alienation, and hence not subject to taxation.
From time to time certain of these lands have, by act of Congress or by the act of the Secretary of the Interior, been relieved from these restrictions, sold, and subjected to taxation.
The land thus relieved approximately amounts to 3,000,000 acres.
From these figures it is apparent that there is not enough land subject to taxation in the old Indian Territory portion.of the State of Oklahoma to support the county governments, townships, and schools; but the question of removing restrictions from these lands must not be considered solely with a view of levying taxes.
These lands are owned by Indians many of whom are incapable of properly caring for their property interests.
It is the duty of the Government to see that the rights of the incompetent and incapable ones are fully protected.
Under the enabling act the Government definitely retains all the power that it formerly held over these Indians and their lands, and the Federal Government must see to it that no improper burden is placed upon these people and no action taken that will permit their property to be taken from them and they left penniless to become public charges.
A most careful investigation has been made of all of these conditions.
I have personally been to the Territory and conferred with the leading representatives of the Indian tribes and the white citizens, their neighbors.
There are many Indians who insist that no restrictions shall be removed except as now provided by law.
On the other hand, there are white men who wish to have all the restrictions removed and the Indians thrown immediately upon their own resources.
Neither of these positions is tenable.
Those Indians who are now as capable as the average white man of caring for their property and performing all the duties of citizens should be placed upon the same footing and given the same burdens as the white man.
In no other way can these men become independent, self-supporting citizens.
But for those who are not so qualified, the Government must continue to act as guardian as far as their land is concerned.
The experience since the opening of this territory to white settlement shows most clearly that it is not safe to remove all restriction.
The dealings of the white man in the Indian Territory, in the acquisition of the valuable agricultural and oil lands, have shown too many instances of unconscionable greed and dishonesty.
The agricultural lands in the Indian Territory are wonderfully fertile, having increased many-fold in value during the past ten years.
But, in addition to'this, the discovery of the deposits of oil and coal has made certain sections of that country very much more valuable and has tremendously increased the desire of white men to obtain control of those sections.
Thus far these oil and coal lands have been handled under a system of leasing controlled by the Interior Department.
As between these two extreme views there is a middle ground which will protect the Indian and at the same time permit the development of the country by throwing open many millions of acres to sale and taxation.
1. By act of Congress remove the restrictions from both homesteads and surplus lands owned by citizens not of Indian blood and by citizens of mixed blood whose quantum of Indian blood is less than one-half; also remove the restrictions from the surplus.lands owned by all other citizens of mixed blood.
2. Empower the Secretary of the Interior to remove restrictions in individual cases from homesteads owned by citizens of mixed blood whose quantum of Indian blood is one-half or more and from homesteads or surplus lands owned by full-blood citizens; provided, however, that no homestead shall be reduced to less than 80 acres.
The power of the Secretary to remove restrictions should carry with it the power, in cases where the facts warrant, to pass upon the adequacy of the consideration and to provide for the use or care of proceeds of sale for the purpose of providing.for the maintenance of the Indian or the improvement of the homestead.
The quantum of Indian blood and age of persons should be determined by the entry upon the approved citizenship rolls.
Various other provisions are necessary to protect certain classes and define how and when the changes are to be made.
I shall prepare a bill, covering all these details, for the consideration of Congress.
Area from which restrictions have been removed and which is subject to taxation.
Area that would be taxable if restrictions were removed.
Under the existing laws, the transfer of lands by the Indian whose restrictions have not been removed has been positively prohibited; yet there are men who have attempted to purchase lands or acquire rights thereto, maintaining that the act of Congress imposing restrictions was invalid.
That kind of transaction has caused great confusion and has cast a cloud upon many titles.
Some pressing need of an Indian made it possible for a would-be purchaser to obtain a power of attorney or a deed for a very small fraction of the real value of the land.
Congress, realizing the injury such action was to the Indian, passed in 1906 a law, to finally settle affairs of the Five Civilized Tribes, which provided that the restrictions should not be removed for an additional period of twenty-five years.
This was done because of the belief that, under the then existing laws, the time for the removal of restrictions was altogether too near, and unless this additional protection were granted all Indians who were incompetent to manage their own affairs would be quickly deprived of their property and left as paupers upon the community.
The Department has consistently held that any transfer, direct or indirect, was void and has advised the Indians that they should neither sign papers purporting to transfer their lands nor feel obliged to carry out the terms of any papers signed by them under the conditions above described.
It is urged by the men who have obtained either powers of attorney or other papers from the Indians that we are teaching the Indian to violate his contracts if we do not compel him to carry out the terms of a written instrument which he has signed.
This reasoning, however, is wrong.
Many of these Indians have not acted as free agents.
They have been imposed upon and their necessities taken advantage of.
To compel them, under these circumstances, to carry out such agreements is simply to become a party to the original fraudulent, unfair, or dishonest transaction.
If Congress acts favorably upon the recommendations regarding the removal' of restrictions this kind of difficulty will cease, but the law providing for the removal of restrictions should specifically provide against the validating of any of the powers of attorney, deeds, or other forms of attempted transfer hitherto obtained from the Indians, and should furthermore provide for the cancellation of record of any such instructions to the end that the titles may be clear.
Suits will be instituted to recover lands that have been illegally acquired, or to cancel deeds improperly obtained.
In the town of Muskogee there was a question regarding the sale of a large number of lots belonging to the Creek Nation.
After a most careful investigation actions have been brought to set aside about 900 deeds.
It is to be regretted that this action is necessary, casting, as it does, a cloud upon the title of so many parcels of town property.
The community necessarily suffers, but on the other hand it was not proper to allow such actions to go unquestioned.
The trouble has been with the community that tolerated that kind of dealing, and it will be necessary that public sentiment shall so change as to demand the enforcement of law and the recognition of the obligations which we owe to the Indians whose property we must administer for their benefit, not for ours.
The production of oil in the Territory has increased much faster than it has been possible for the transportation companies to remove it.
The remarkable development of oil fields in the Territory continues.
In July, 1906, the production of oil was about 980,000 barrels, while in June, 1907, it was about 3,150,000 barrels, and to-day it is 200,000 barrels per day.
The royalty collected by the United States Indian agent on account of oil and gas for last year was approximately $775,000.
Very careful consideration has been given to the oil and gas regulations and certain modifications made.
The production of oil has far outstripped the capacity of the pipe lines to carry it away, despite the fact that two new lines, one owned by the Gulf Company, the other by the Texas Oil Company, have been completed from the field to the Gulf of Mexico, and are now carrying about 20,000 barrels per day.
The Prairie Oil and Gas Company has a carrying capacity of 87,000 barrels per day.
At present the daily production exceeds the pipe line capacity by about 85,000 barrels.
This excess is being stored, and there is now in tanks owned either by the pipe-line companies or the producers 43,000,000 barrels of oil.
As long as this condition continues there is no probability of an increase in the price of crude oil.
The conditions -in the field are being carefully watched by the agents of the Department for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of the leases and the regulations imposed upon both the producers and the pipe-line companies.
Whenever it can be shown to be necessary or advantageous the regulations will be modified.
One of the large oil producers' associations has appointed a committee which has had conferences with me, and I trust that by conference with the producers and with the leaseholders it will be possible to avoid much of the difficulty and friction that have existed in the past.
The pipe-line companies are by law made common carriers, but so far there has not been devised a practical method for the producer to use the lines as common carriers.
The transportation of oil by pipe is far different from the transportation of commodities by rail or by water.
Unless the producer has tanks at both termini of the lines, it becomes difficult, if not impossible, for his oil to be handled, as the common carrier can hardly be expected to provide tankage sufficient to store all the oil carried.
These questions are all being considered, and it is hoped some more satisfactory arrangement may be reached than at present exists.
The future action of the Department in dealing with the oil question will be in great measure affected by the character of legislation removing restrictions.
Thus far the general purpose of the regulations has resulted beneficially to both the Indian owner and the oil producer.
Had it not been for the regulations and the restriction of ownership to the lessee of 4,800 acres, this great field would have been monopolized by a few interests.
And while the price of oil is not as great as either the landowner or the producer desires, yet it has never reached the low price which obtained in some of the other fields where there were not such restrictions.
It is clear that the action of the Government has had a most healthful and steadying tendency on both the production of oil and the price.
There has been no change in the condition of the segregated coal lands belonging to the Choctaws and Chickasaws.
About 106,760 acres are under lease and careful examination is being made of the remaining 338,352 acres, to determine the locality and character of the underlying coal.
This examination will make it possible to more closely estimate the value of the coal and to determine how best to dispose of it.
Immediate action should be taken relative to the disposal of the surface.
The improvements on the surface have been appraised and should be sold.
At present it is not possible to give title, and should the occupant leave, the improvements would soon be destroyed, the Government having no right whatever to lease or otherwise use them.
But quite apart from the question of improvements, legislation should be enacted which will make it possible to dispose of the surface separate from the underlying coal.
By that separation the surface could be immediately disposed of for purposes to which it is best adapted and the proceeds turned over to the owners, reserving, of course, the necessary right to occupy so much of the surface as may be necessary for the opening and operation of mines.
The coal may be disposed of in different ways, either by sale to the State, as has been suggested, or it may be leased as a portion of it is already leased, and the proceeds paid to the owners.
The leasing could be continued as it is now under the Government or a corporation could be organized and the citizens now owning the land would become stockholders in proportion to their land ownership, and the lease money paid to them in the form of dividends.
It is clear that by such use it will be possible to prevent monopolization of this great field by a few interests, and its development in the interests of the people of the new commonwealth will be assured.
Furthermore, by this separation of the surface from the coal, the surface would be immediately subject to disposition, an object much to be desired, as has been elsewhere indicated.
A large area of timbered land, about 2,000,000 acres, in the southeastern part of the old Indian Territory, is heavily wooded and unfitted for agriculture.
I urge upon Congress the desirability of authorizing the purchase of this timber tract for the creation of a national forest.
This area could be purchased from the Indians and payment made to them either by direct appropriation or from the proceeds of the sale of timber.
This is one of the few remaining timbered tracts in that section of the Middle West; it should be acquired and held as a reserve.
If this area be allotted, the Indian owners will realize but a small portion of its real value.
Pending the decision of Congress upon this question, I have continued the policy of not allowing selections and allotments to be made within this area.
Comparatively few selections have theretofore been made, and it would not be difficult to acquire them should a national forest be created.
It is of course understood that the general laws relating to the national forests would apply to this area, and that wherever any portions of it are capable'of cultivation the homesteader would have the opportunity and the right to make entry.
A very great and permanent injury will be done the people of that State if this area be treated as so many similar areas have been treated in the West, by allowing it to be acquired by private parties who will strip it and destroy the possibilities of perpetuating the timber for centuries to come, and preserving the watershed.
The schools under the care of the Superintendent will be continued this year with the hope that the new State will soon be able to provide for the children.
It will be necessary for Congress to continue the appropriations for at least the next fiscal year.
There are at present about 22,000 pupils enrolled.
I have directed that such necessary repairs be made upon the school property as will insure it being kept in good physical condition, so that when the time comes for turning it over to the State it will be fit for use.
It is to be hoped that the historical records of the Five Civilized Tribes will be collected and carefully preserved.
They are of great value in showing the wonderful progress that these people have made in a comparatively few years.
It is not only gratifying but most remarkable that all the changes in political and property conditions have been made with so little friction.
The fact speaks well for the high degree of civilization attained by a great majority of these people.
Their leaders have for the most part shown rare qualities of judgment and patience in dealing with their own people, and of loyalty to their own people as well as to the National Government.
All that I have said regarding the removal of restrictions and the special legislation suggested applies only to the citizens of the Five Civilized Tribes.
The other Indians upon the reservations must be treated as are Indians throughout the United States.
As tribes they are not to be compared with the Five Civilized Tribes.
It has been suggested that, within the State of Oklahoma, they should be treated the same as citizens of the Five Civilized Tribes, but I am confident that this would not be advisable.
A large per cent of the individual Indians are not ready to bear the full burdens of citizenship, and they must, for some time to come, be cared for as wards of the nation.
Individuals will be considered as are individual Indians elsewhere, and restrictions in individual cases removed in accordance with the general laws.
During the entire year ended June 30, 1907, the total number of pensioners on the roll was 1,017,005.
At the close of the year there were on the roll 967,371 pensioners—679,937 soldiers and sailors, 286,892 widows and dependents, and 542 army nurses.
This was the smallest number of pensioners since 1893.
The "high-water"mark in the history of the Bureau was reached on January 31, 1905, at which date 1,004,196 pensioners were enrolled.
The gains to the roll during the year were 29,904 new pensioners and 1,130 restorations and renewals, a total of 31,034; of this number 181 were pensioned by special acts of Congress.
The losses to the roll during the same time were 45,768 by death and 3,866 from other causes, a total of 49,634.
The net loss for the year was 18,600, the greatest net loss for any year in the history of the Bureau.
The number of deaths of soldier and sailor pensioners of the civil war for the year was 31,201.
The cases referred to above under the head of "regular establishment" embrace those in which the disability originated in service in the Army, Navy, or Marine Corps between the close of the civil war and the commencement of the war with Spain, and since the close of the war with Spain and the insurrection in the Philippine Islands.
The last surviving widow pensioner of the Revolutionary war died November 11, 1906.
The last pensioned soldier of the war of 1812 died May 13, 1905, but the roll contains the names of 558 widows of that war.
A new class of civil war pensioners was created by the act of February 6, 1907, and on June 30, 1907, the names of 116,239 pensioners were on the roll under that act.
That any person who served ninety days or more in the military or naval service of the United States during the late civil war, or sixty days in the war with Mexico, and who has been honorably discharged therefrom, and who has reached the age of sixty-two years or over, shall, upon making proof of such facts according to such rules and regulations as the Secretary of the Interior may provide, be placed upon the pension roll, and be entitled to receive a pension as follows: In case such person has reached the age of sixty-two years, twelve dollars per month; seventy years, fifteen dollars per month; seventyfive years or over, twenty dollars per month; and such pension shall commence from the date of the filing of the application in the Bureau of Pensions after the passage and approval of this act: Provided, that pensioners who are sixtytwo years of age or over, and who are now receiving pensions under existing laws, or whose claims are pending in the Bureau of Pensions, may, by application to the Commissioner of Pensions, in such form as he may prescribe, receive the benefits of this act; and nothing herein contained shall prevent any pensioner or person entitled to a pension from prosecuting his claim and receiving a pension under any other general or special act: Provided, that no person shall receive a pension under any other law at the same time or for the same period that he is receiving a pension under the provisions of this act: Provided, further, that no person who is now receiving or shall hereafter receive a greater pension under any other general or special law than he would be entitled to receive under the provisions herein shall be pensionable under this act.
That rank in the service shall not be considered in applications filed hereunder.
That no pension attorney, claim agent, or other person shall be entitled to receive any compensation for services rendered in presenting any claim to the Bureau of Pensions, or securing any pension, under this act.
As no provision was made for the recognition of agents or attorneys in the prosecution of claims under this law, the Pension Bureau promptly supplied half a million blanks for the use of claimants, and up to June 30, 1907, about 350,000 applications had been filed.
The clerical force of the Bureau was immediately arranged and readjusted to meet the conditions imposed upon it by this large mass of new applications, and within a very few days after the passage of the act the Bureau was in a position to adjudicate the claims.
The first certificate was issued February 14, 1907, and within four months 90,000 certificates had been issued.
Up to June 30, 1907, 120,355 certificates had been issued under the act of February 6, 1907, and the Commissioner reports that by the close of the present fiscal year, perhaps sooner, all pending claims under this act will have been adjudicated.
Final action was taken during the year in 298,822 claims, of which 238,249 were approved for allowance and 60,573 for rejection.
The number of claims pending July 1, 1906, was 182,453, and there were filed during the year 440,517 new applications of all kinds.
At the close of the year 356,181 claims were pending, of which 222,539 were filed under the act of February 6, 1907.
These claims are being settled at the rate of about 30,000 per month.
The appropriation for the payment of pensions for the fiscal year was $140,000,000; repayments to the appropriation made the amount available $140,003,322.58.
The disbursements for army and navy pensions during the year, including the amount disbursed by Treasury settlements, were $138,155,412.46, leaving an unexpended balance to be covered into the Treasury of $1,847,910.12.
The expenditure for navy pensions during the year was $4,248,711.80.
The amount expended during the year for salaries, fees of examining surgeons, and other expenses of the Pension Bureau was $3,309,- 110.44, or 21 per cent of the appropriation for pensions.
The total disbursements for pensions from July 1, 1790, to June 30, 1865, a period of seventy-five years, were $96,445,444.23.
The annual value of the pension roll, the amount that would be required to pay for one entire year the pensioners on the roll, provided there were no changes by death or otherwise, was $140,850,- 880.60 at the close of the fiscal year, an increase of $4,613,131.60 over the annual value for 1906.
The increase over 1906, notwithstanding the decrease in the number of pensioners, is due to the pensions granted at the higher rates under the act of February 6, 1907.
The average annual value of each pension was $145.60, an increase of $7.42 over that of the former year.
The average annual value of general law (civil war) pensions has increased from $191.43 to $204.20, while the average annual value of pensions under the act of June 27, 1890, has decreased from $114.33 to $112.32, those of the Spanish war from $127.33 to $127.19, and those of the regular establishment from $173.35 to $173.12.
The average annual value of pensions under the act of February 6, 1907, was $170.09.
A marked progress has been made with reference to the period within which claims were adjudicated during the year, and much less time now elapses between the dates of filing and dates of settlement of pension claims than in former years.
Since 1861 there have been granted by special acts of Congress 19,737 pensions and increases of pensions, of which 12,362 were on the rolls at the close of the fiscal year, with an annual value of $3,502,650, a little more than one-half of which amount is in excess of what could have been granted under general laws.
The number of special acts granting pensions and increases of pensions passed during the second session of the Fifty-ninth Congress was 2,523.
The increase in the annual expenditure resulting from these special acts was $375,333.
Several acts of Congress granting land as bounty for military service have been enacted from time to time, which are all obsolete except three—the act of February 11, 1847; the act of September 28, 1850, and the act of March 3, 1855.
The act of 1855 provides that officers and enlisted men and, under certain conditions, nonenlisted persons who served fourteen or more days, or were engaged in battle in any war between 1790 and March 3, 1855, are entitled to 160 acres of land, and when a warrant for less than 160 acres issued under any prior act, an additional warrant may issue for such quantity of land as will make in the whole 160 acres.
During the last year 23 warrants were issued, granting 3,280 acres of land, as against 55 warrants, granting 8,080 acres, for the previous year.
During the year 159 indictments were found and 108 convictions secured on account of violations of the pension laws.
There were 6 acquittals, 30 cases were dismissed, 4 civil suits were instituted, and $8,377 was recovered.
Of the persons convicted, only 16 are believed to have had any military or naval service.
As a result of investigations made by the Bureau in certain military bounty land claims, a number of attorneys have been recommended by the Commissioner for disbarment from practice before the Department, one attorney has been disbarred, and one firm of attorneys has made restitution to twenty-two clients of the aggregate sum of $6,841.95, representing the difference between the amounts for which the attorneys sold the warrants of their clients shortly after the issue and the amounts which they paid over to their said clients.
A special report (H. Doc. No. 352, 60th Cong., 1st sess.) has been made to Congress on the advisability of discontinuing all the agencies except the one at Washington.
In the present condition of the roll, this change would effect an immediate saving of approximately $200,000 a year and there would be no loss in efficiency of the service and in the promptness of payment to the pensioners.
On July 1, 1906, there were pending 1,474 appeals and motions for reconsideration, and at the close of the year the number pending was 642, a reduction of 832.
During the year there were filed 9,121 appeals and motions, an excess of 1,305 over the number filed during the preceding year.
On December 31, 1907, the total number of pending appeals was but 305.
The working force of the board has been reduced during the year by 11 members, as follows: One member by resignation, 1 by absence since May 31, 1907, on account of sickness, and 9 detailed elsewhere.
A stenographer and typewriter has also been permanently transferred to the General Land Office.
The board is now agreeably and conveniently located in new quarters in the Pension Office building.
The work of the Patent Office has steadily increased.
There were received during the year 58,762 applications, an increase of 2,190 over the preceding year.
The number of patents granted, including reissues and designs, was 36,620, an increase of 4,655.
There were registered 7,878 trade-marks, 667 labels, and 315 prints, a decrease of 3,073.
The total receipts of the office from all sources were $1,910,- 618.14, the total expenditures $1,631,458.36, leaving a surplus of receipts over expenditures of $279,159.78, which was turned in to the Treasury.
The increase in receipts over the preceding year was $119,696.76.
Unfortunately the office has not been able to care for the increase of business with the present force.
Despite the utmost endeavor of the Commissioner and those with him, the work of the office is in arrears.
Not only is the force insufficient in number, but the salaries paid to examiners are not adequate to meet competition in the business world.
The report of the Commissioner sets forth very clearly the needs of his office, and presents a plan for its reorganization which, if authorized by Congress, will make it possible to bring the work of the office up to date and keep it so.
The Patent Office is a constant source of revenue.
Its receipts have, during the last ten years, exceeded its expenditures by $1,734,- 743.58.
It is, therefore, eminently fair that the increased appropriations asked for should be granted.
The inventors whose genius and work sustain the office should be afforded every facility for prompt action, and their applications should be passed upon by the ablest technical examiners.
Litigation over patents is expensive at best, and it is clearly the duty of the Government to provide the Patent Office with every means to reduce as far as possible the opportunity for litigation.
Prompt and careful work in the Patent Office may save an inventor from serious loss or vexatious litigation.
Particular attention should be given the suggestions and recommendations regarding the appellate jurisdiction of the United States courts in patent causes.
Owing to diversity of decisions in the different circuits and the difficulty of appealing to the Supreme Court, it is claimed that exceptional hardship is imposed upon litigants.
The American Bar Association has given this question most careful consideration and urges the creation of a special court of patent appeals.
While I am not at all clear that this is the best method for remedying the difficulty, it is apparent that the most careful consideration should be given the question with a view of providing a speedy method for the determination of the class of cases referred to, if it be found that the present court procedure can not be so modified as to afford relief.
The plan proposed for the repair and enlargement of the Patent Office building should be adopted.
Many portions of the building as now arranged are unavailable for use as offices because of lack of air and light, and many of the storage rooms are so damp as to render them useless.
The construction of a fireproof storage building in the interior court will afford space for filing the copies of patents and will make possible their arrangement in a much more satisfactory manner.
The millions of copies must be kept accessible for daily use.
The-old patent models are still stored in the Union Building.
The rental for this purpose is $19,500 a year and the cost of care $4,180.
I find it will be possible to use the space in the court of the Pension building for the storage of these models, thus saving the entire cost of rental.
Many of them of historic value will be placed ultimately in the National Museum.
The transfer to the Pension Office may be made if Congress grants the necessary appropriation for moving.
The ultimate disposition of the thousands of models which are not of historic value is still open for consideration.
It is evident, however, that there is no good excuse for the expenditure of $19,500 a year for their storage.
The Bureau of Education has continued its regular work of collecting and distributing educational statistics and publishing reports on special subjects.
But this is not all that should be done.
The scope of the work is being extended and brought into close relationship with the educational work of the States and Territories.
This Bureau should be the clearing house for educational information, and the Federal Government should show its deep interest in the educational needs of the country by appropriations commensurate with the importance of the work.
The statistical information obtained should be compiled and analyzed by technically trained men who can present results in such form as to make them of permanent value to the educational world.
Each of our States and Territories, through the State universities, the agricultural and mechanical colleges, and the public schools, is endeavoring to work out a system of education best adapted to the needs of its citizens.
The National Bureau of Education should be in a position to do the work which the State organizations can not do, and publish the results of the work of the ablest educators of our own and foreign countries.
The library of the Bureau contains over 80,000 bound volumes and about 100,000 pamphlets.
In certain portions of its field it is the leading collection in this country.
An experienced and highly trained librarian has recently been placed in charge, who will establish a closer connection with the Library of Congress and other governmental libraries, and make the Bureau library more useful to the general educational movements of the country.
In the act of March 4, 1907 (34 Stat. L., 1281), Congress provided for a progressive enlargement of the appropriation made to the several States for the benefit of their colleges of agriculture and the mechanic arts, so that from the year 1911 each State will receive a total of $50,000 for the support of these institutions, instead of $25,000 as at present.
It is an encouraging fact that an increasing proportion of the funds of these institutions is provided by State appropriations; these have increased during the ten years ending in 1906 from $2,218,100 to $7,531,502, or about 240 per cent.
In the same period there has been an increase from 12.6 to 17.6 per cent in the proportion of funds provided by the National Government that is devoted to instruction in agriculture, and a similar increase from 25 to 30.5 per cent in the case of instruction in the mechanic arts.
The number of students in agricultural and engineering courses has likewise noticeably increased.
Provision has been made by Congress for devoting a portion of the new funds for the land-grant colleges to courses for the special training of teachers in the elements of agriculture and the mechanic arts, in order that these subjects may be properly taught in the secondary schools of agriculture and the mechanic arts that are coming into existence throughout the United States.
This work will be conducted in cooperation with allied work under the Department of Agriculture with a view of giving to those who live on farms greater educational and social advantages.
For the support of the United States public.
Under this provision for day schools there are now ten new school buildings going up in different parts of the Territory.
A number of additional buildings are to be erected later in the year, when the needs of the different sections shall have been more.fully determined.
During the year ended June 30, 1907, the Bureau of Education maintained 52 United States public schools for natives of Alaska.
In 48 of these schools the total enrollment was 2,483 and the average attendance 1,076.
Modifications in the methods employed in the schools will be made as experience shows the need with a view to render the natives of Alaska better able to care for themselves.
Beginnings have been made in industrial training in some of the schools, as well as in connection with the reindeer herds.
Emphasis will be placed upon the kind of school and industrial work best adapted to the peculiar needs and conditions in Alaska.
The experiment of raising reindeer has proved a success.
The herd now numbers about 15,000.
The animals are distributed among the natives as rapidly as they learn how to care for and use the animals.
It is now possible for the natives to acquire the deer by purchase as well as by service as apprentices at the reindeer stations.
On April 30, 1907, Mr. G. O. Smith became Director of the Geological Survey, in place of Mr. Chas.
D. Walcott, who resigned to become Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution.
Mr. Walcott has been a member of the Survey since its organization, and the thirteen years of his service as the administrative head of the Bureau are the period of its greatest growth.
The appropriations for the last fiscal year amounted to more than four times the total of those made thirteen years ago.
The development of the relations between the Geological Survey and the public within the same period is measured by a more than fourfold increase in the amount of official correspondence, a nearly fourfold increase in the number of printed pages in the various reports issued during the year, and a more than fivefold increase in the number of copies of maps printed, while the total annual distribution of publications, books and maps, grew from less than 200,000 to more than 1,000,000 copies, the sales increasing from $2,100 to upwards of $18,000.
The extent to which the results of the work of this organization are now utilized by both the industrial world and the educational and scientific institutions furnishes the best index of the degree of success attained in the period mentioned.
The organization of the Survey was modified within the year by the creation of a technologic branch, by changes in the divisions constituting the topographic branch, and by the substitution of the name"water-resources branch"for"hydrographic branch."
Water-resources branch.
The change from hydrographic to water resources in the name of that branch was made because the former did not correctly define the character of the work performed.
The investigations are authorized by appropriations in successive sundry civil bills"for gauging the streams and determining the water supply of the United States and for the investigation of underground currents and artesian wells and the preparation of reports upon the best methods of utilizing the water resources."
The ultimate purposes of the work relating to the water resources are Federal in character, the data so far collected being in the nature of a census of water-supply resources; and although there are various private uses to which they must necessarily have been put, the benefits to the Federal Government have been worth many times the amount invested in the work.
For example, the United States is now expending more than $40,000,000 for the construction of irrigation projects, the integrity of which rests upon the amount of water available for distribution from these streams.
More recently, under an Executive order, a commission has been appointed, known as the inland waterways commission, the purpose of which is to investigate and determine upon the broad policies to be followed by the Government with reference to the interstate rivers which make up the water highways under the control of the Federal Government.
Almost immediately upon commencing its work this commission found its necessary to make use of the results of water-supply investigations that had previously been made by the Survey, and the work of the commission has been facilitated thereby.
The study of the drainage problem will likewise be immensely facilitated by the work on water resources carried on under the Survey.
The success and value of this work depend upon its continuance over a long period of years.
Covering as it does large areas of country and the great watersheds, the conclusions drawn from investigations carried on during a few years might lead to disastrous consequences.
The water supply of many cities and the permanent irrigation or drainage of agricultural areas are dependent upon the most thorough and continued examination of the sources of supply.
It is examinations of this kind that the Survey has been making and hopes to continue.
At the beginning of the last fiscal year it was necessary to rearrange and reduce the work of this branch, because of the reduction of 25 per cent in the appropriation.
It was decided that, instead of making a uniform reduction along all lines of work, it would be better to reduce or discontinue in each region that work which seemed to be least important.
Mississippi Valley, broadly speaking, the work of greatest importance is the study of stream flow for purposes of navigation, and the study of underground water and the determination of its quality; while in the eastern part of the United States the measurement of stream flow again assumes greatest importance.
Stream-flow measurements were made at 686 gauging stations; underground-water investigations were conducted in 18 States, and investigations as to quality of water were carried on in various parts of the country.
Topographic work.
Many of the States have continued the policy of cooperation with the National Survey.
The success and value of the plan of cooperation are assured, and it is to be hoped that the appropriations available for this purpose will be steadily increased to meet the increased demands from the cooperating States.
Before many years we shall have as a result of this work the much-needed complete topographic map of the United States.
The total area mapped topographically amounted to 32,448 square miles, with 1,833 square miles of revision or resurvey.
This makes the total area surveyed in the United States to date 1,025,065 square miles, or about 33 per cent.
This work will be long drawn out unless larger annual appropriations are provided.
In connection with these surveys there were run 5,797 linear miles of primary spirit levels and 1,595 miles of precise levels, making 203,763 miles of primary and precise spirit leveling done since the authorization of this work by Congress.
Triangulation stations to the number of 281 were occupied or located and marked, and 3,156 miles of primary traverse were run.
In the course of this work 40,000 square miles were covered by primary control.
Alaskan work.
The progress of areal surveys in Alaska is such that practically every mining camp has been visited and investigated.
The importance of the rapid extension of these surveys can not be too strongly emphasized, for they furnish not only a guide to the prospector, but are essential to all engineering enterprises.
It is worthy of note that while nearly $500,000 has been spent on Alaskan surveys and investigations, this is only about one-half of 1 per cent of the value of the gold output during that time.
There remain nearly 500,000 square miles in Alaska which have not been covered even by reconnaisance geologic surveys.
Until this work is much more nearly completed, all generalizations on the distribution of the mineral wealth must remain largely hypothetical.
Mining and mineral resources.
In the division of mining and mineral resources the report for 1905 was completed, published, and distributed, and the report for 1906 was prepared in part, manuscripts for many of the chapters being in hand and ready for publication as advance chapters of the volume.
United States.
The total value of all minerals reached the unprecedented amount of $1,902,517,565, an increase of 17.15 per cent over the value of the output in 1905.
The plan of utilizing the services of geologists in the permanent employ of the Geological Survey for the work of this division proved successful in the preparation of the report for 1905, and was continued last year, so that the report for 1906 will be prepared almost wholly by regular members of the Survey staff.
Technologic branch.
The technologic branch organized its administrative office in Washington, D. C., on April 2, 1907, the official headquarters of both fuel and structural-materials divisions having before that time been at St. Louis.
The work of the fuel division includes all investigations of the mineral fuels of the United States.
The laboratory work includes the testing of coals used by the Government, determination of the chemistry and physics of the combustion of fuels, the heating value of various fuels, the examination of by-products obtained in the coking of coals from public lands, and kindred problems.
Investigations were conducted to determine the most efficient method of burning coal in the heating and power plants of the Government; the utilization of the low-grade fuels of the West for gas; the efficiency of engines using such gas as compared with those using kerosene and similar fuels; the use and value of briquetting certain grades of coal; the study of the value of the coal remaining in the public lands, and the uses to which those coals are best suited.
These investigations have been made thoroughly practical.
The importance of these investigations can not be overestimated.
We are rapidly reaching the limit of our coal supply, unless there be a radical change in the method of its use.
The present method is one of tremendous waste, only a small fraction of the heating power of the coal being used.
In addition to the foregoing work, investigations have been made of structural materials belonging to and intended for the use of the United States.
More than 25,000 laboratory tests have been made of cement, gravel, and other material.
The work of the Geological Survey in connection with mining and mineral resources demands special attention, for it has, during almost its entire history, devoted a large amount of its appropriation to the collection, compilation, and publication of mining and mineral statistics.
The geological work carried on in the mining areas has been of very great practical value.
The total value of all minerals produced last year is nearly $2,000,000,000, an increase of 17.15 per cent over the value of the output in 1905.
From those engaged in this business, there is a strong and proper demand that still greater emphasis be placed upon this work.
The question of how this work shall be carried on demands the careful attention·of Congress.
Whether a special bureau be authorized or the work carried on under the present organization, is for legislative determination.
The work can be well done in either manner.
I shall ask for an increase in the appropriations to be devoted to this work.
One of the chief purposes of this additional appropriation will be for the investigation of the methods of minimizing the accidents and dangers in mines and for the investigation of mining accidents and recommendations for their prevention.
The terrible mining accidents which have occurred within the last few months show the immediate need for this kind of investigation.
It should not be left alone for State authority or to private investigation.
The problem is too large a one to leave to any one of these agencies.
The health and, lives of thousands of men engaged in our mines may be secured if the causes of these accidents be discovered and means devised for their prevention.
The reports of the inspectors of coal mines in the Territories are handled through the technologic branch.
The mines in the Territories are being.
During the past year the Reclamation Service has been separated from the Geological Survey and organized as an independent service responsible directly to the Secretary.
Director of the Geological Survey Charles D. Walcott had acted also as Director of the Reclamation Service from June 17, 1902, to March 9, 1907.
On the latter date I advanced F. H. Newell, chief engineer, to the position of Director, and designated the assistant chief engineer, Arthur P. Davis, as chief engineer of the Service.
Rapid progress has been made in the construction of the works authorized by my predecessor.
The accumulated fund has practically been expended, and during future years the outlay will probably be less, being governed by the returns to the fund and the income from the annual sales of public lands.
The problems of construction have to a large extent, been solved and large areas of land already placed under irrigation.
There is thus brought forward at the present time the difficult question of operation and maintenance, involving the dealing with thousands of settlers, many of whom are unaccustomed to the conditions of life in the arid regions, and unused to the practice of irrigation.
The conditions of labor on the works and of transportation have been such as to result in great difficulty and delay.
The cost of labor has advanced notably, in some cases the increase being as high as 40 per cent or more as compared with conditions in 1905, when many of the larger contracts were let.
The difficulty of securing the prompt transportation of materials for construction has also added materially to the cost of the work.
Shipments of iron, cement, lumber, and machinery have often been en route to the works for many months, resulting in great embarrassment to the contractors, and in some cases in serious losses.
These conditions are not peculiar to the work of the Reclamation Service, but have been so widespread throughout the West that all construction has suffered directly or indirectly.
The following is a list of the approved projects on which construction has been commenced.
The table shows in the second column the irrigable area of the projects, or the extent to which it is expected to develop the projects during the four years 1908 to 1911; next, the estimated cost to complete the work to these points; the estimated expenditures to the end of the calendar year 1907; and the percentage of completion December 31, 1907, based upon the ratios of the expenses to that date to the estimated cost as shown in the second column.
An average of $36.65 per acre.
Construction work has advanced rapidly, and during 1907 the activity of the Reclamation Service in this regard has probably reached its maximum, as the expenditures are very nearly twice the amount which will be available for use during 1908.
Under a policy previously determined upon of pushing forward construction as rapidly as possible, all of the funds available up to December 31, 1907, have been invested, and during succeeding years the operations will be limited to the income derived from the disposal of public lands and the revenue derived from the refund of the cost of bringing water to the lands irrigated.
The construction work is done by contract wherever this course of procedure is deemed practicable.
In many cases the contractors have failed, owing to the rapid and unprecedented increase in cost of labor and materials.
It has been necessary under these conditions for the Reclamation Service to finish the work under what is known as "force account;" that is to say, by using the equipment on hand and by employing the needed laborers.
In some instances, also, after advertising for competitive bids the offers have been so high that it has not been found wise to award contracts.
In such cases the Reclamation Service has been authorized to carry on the work directly with its own equipment and by employing labor, either by the day or by making small contracts in detail.
In general, the results have shown that it is more economical and effective to execute this work by force account than by contract.
This is due to the fact that the Reclamation Service, as the result of five years' experience, has acquired a large constructing equipment and a notably effective organization with practical experience in this class of work; in fact, it has probably a better organized force of experienced superintendents and an equipment superior to that possessed by many of the large contracting firms of the country.
Its work, also, is of a somewhat peculiar kind, involving construction of tunnels or of earthwork where it is impossible to predict in advance the character of all of the materials to be encountered.
For this reason a contractor, in making a safe bid on this class of work, must always add a large percentage to cover possible contingencies.
In case he fails the loss to the Government is large, because of resulting delays and the complications arising from dealing with a defaulting contractor.
All of these risks are avoided by the direct execution of the work by the Reclamation Service.
In either event it is necessary for the Service to maintain a large force of competent inspectors and supervisors, particularly in the case of a contractor who is executing a losing contract, where the greatest care and vigilance must be exercised in order to prevent poor work.
In hydraulic construction it is of the highest importance to secure absolute safety of the structure.
During the year a number of irrigation projects have been brought to a point of completion where it has been possible to deliver water to the irrigated lands.
The results attained have been very gratifying and point to the success which will be had as the works are brought to a still higher degree of completion.
The effort has been made in the case of each project to complete some one integral part or unit and put this upon a revenue-producing basis at the earliest possible date.
There have been, of course, cases of failure or of disappointment on the part of the irrigators, due largely to inexperience or to the fact that much of the land has not been subdued and brought under a condition of tilth such as will result from careful work in the future.
Where the settlers have taken the precaution to thoroughly cultivate the land in advance of the time the water was put upon it and have leveled or graded it up to a good surface the results have been highly gratifying.
In a few cases the crop return of the first year has practically paid for the entire cost of water.
It is to be observed in this connection that the men who have been successful and who have made good earnings have said very little about the matter, while the relatively few who have not succeeded have made their complaints known widely.
In Arizona, under the Salt River canal, acquired by the Government and operated successfully in spite of the incomplete condition of the permanent dam at the head of the canal; in Idaho, under the Minidoka project, where the greater part of the settlers have raised fair and even very good crops, the number of failures being relatively small and most of these being due to lack of actual residence by the settler upon his farm; in Montana, under the Huntley project, where settlement has just begun, the lands are being brought into condition for cultivation; in Nevada, under the Truckee-Carson project, the success has been notable, especially on the new lands, where experienced irrigators from other States have taken up small tracts; in Nebraska-Wyoming, under the North Platte project, considerable areas have been successfully watered; in New Mexico, on the Carlsbad project, the system, although not complete, has sufficed to save further losses of orchards and to encourage the people toward extensive planting in 1908; in Washington, in the Yakima district, under the Sunnyside canal, the success has been very great, and it is estimated that of the 50,000 acres irrigated from the Sunnyside canal there has been a crop yield of $40 an acre.
In the reports of the Secretary of the Interior and of the Commissioner of the General Land Office for several years past attention has been called to the large number of approved rights of way for railroad, irrigation, and other purposes which, under the terms of the statutes under which they were granted, are subject to cancellation because of the expiration of the statutory period for construction.
These unused rights constitute a serious interference with private development, and have also been a source of delay, annoyance, and expense in the operations of the Government in carrying out the provisions of the reclamation act.
I desire to call the attention of Congress to the urgency of this matter, and to recommend that appropriate legislation be enacted forfeiting all such grants which are now subject to forfeiture, and authorizing the Secretary of the Interior in all cases in which the statutory period of construction may expire after the date of such legislation to declare the forfeiture of such grants theretofore or thereafter made, after due notice to the grantee and without further proceedings on the part of the United States.
The questions of the drainage of swamp lands and the irrigation of arid lands are closely connected.
There are about 78,000,000 acres of swamp lands in the central and southeastern States.
It is feasible to drain much of this land and provide homes for thousands of families.
I believe it possible to adopt a plan, well within the powers of Congress, which will permit the Federal Government to undertake this work, and I most earnestly urge the early consideration of all phases of the problem.
In compliance with the provisions of sections 681 and 683 of the Revised Statutes and acts of February 12, 1889 (25 Stat. L., 661), and July 1, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 630), 4,924 volumes of United States Reports and 6 sets of Russell and Winslow's Digest of the same published by the Banks Law Publishing Company, together with 15 volumes of United States Reports and 3 sets of Digest published by the Lawyers' Cooperative Publishing Company, were received by the Department and distributed to executive and judicial officers of the Government.
As provided in section 5 of the act of July 1, 1902 (32 Stat. L., 630), requiring the Secretary of the Interior to distribute to each Senator and Representative who may apply in writing for the same one copy of the Revised Statutes of the United States and the Supplements thereto, 33 sets were delivered during the year.
The aggregate number of sets delivered to Congress to date is 401.
In compliance with the provisions of an act of Congress approved March 4, 1907 (34 Stat. L., 1387), 576 copies of Index Digest of Opinions Delivered and Cases Decided by the Supreme Court, reported in volumes 187 to 202, United States Reports, were purchased from the reporter of the Supreme Court and distributed to executive and judicial officers of the Government.
As the distribution of United States reports and the Revised Statutes is in no way connected with the work of this Department, it is recommended that Congress transfer this work to the superintendent of documents, who is better equipped to do it.
Considerable bookkeeping will be obviated if the distribution of the Revised Statutes is made by the superintendent of documents, because under the present practice this Department pays the superintendent of documents for the copies of the Revised Statutes distributed to Senators and Representatives, and then presents a voucher to the Treasury for the amount required.
During the last fiscal year 2,525 maps of the United States, edition of 1905, were delivered to the House of Representatives.
Since the beginning of the present fiscal year 7,200 maps of the edition of 1906 have been delivered to the Senate and 14,400 to the House of Representatives.
Pursuant to authority contained'in the act making appropriation for the legislative, executive, and judicial expenses of the Government for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1907, approved June 22, 1906 (34 Stat. L., 430), wherein among other things an appropriation of $19,160 was made for furnishing and delivering connected and separate United States and other maps prepared in the General Land Office, after due advertisement a contract was entered into, under date of June 14, 1907, with the Sackett & Wilhelms Lithographing and Printing Company, a corporation organized under the laws of the State of New York and doing business in New York City, the lowest bidder, for furnishing and delivering 25,000 copies, more or less, of the map of the United States at the rate of 731 cents for each complete and correct copy of the map delivered and accepted.
The engraving upon the copperplate base map of the United States of the necessary additions and corrections has been made up to June 30, 1907.
Transfers from such copperplate base have been made and delivered to the contractor to be placed on lithographic stones from which the map is to be printed.
The work is being expeditiously prosecuted, and in all likelihood deliveries of the map of 1907 will be made prior to the adjournment of Congress in 1908.
The sum of $41,002.35 was received by the Department from the sale of documents during the fiscal year, divided as follows: $4,328.67 by the office of the Secretary, $18,633.81 by the Geological Survey, and $18,039.87 by the Patent Office.
Since July 1, 1907, Government publications have been transferred to the superintendent of documents, Government Printing Office, as follows: From the office of the Secretary, 92,942 volumes, and from the Patent Office, 765,000 volumes.
As a result of this transfer four rooms have been vacated.
There have also been transferred to the Library of Congress and the superintendent of documents 28,939 books, pamphlets, etc., from the Bureau of Education.
The work of the document office of the Department, which includes the distribution of annual reports of the Secretary and of the subordinate officers of the Department, Land and Pension Decisions, Statutes of the United States, and United States maps published for its use, together with the distribution of United States Reports and Digests to executive and judicial officers and Revised Statutes and Supplements to Members of Congress, is practically up to date.
It is hereby ordered that on and after June 1, 1907, all official communications or reports from and to executive officers of the Territories and territorial possessions of the United States—viz, Arizona, Hawaii, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Porto Rico, Alaska, Indian Territory, Samoa, and Guam—and all official communications or reports relating to Territorial matters from and to all executive officers of the United States stationed in such Territories and territorial possessions, shall be transmitted through the Secretary of the Interior in such manner and under such regulations as he may prescribe.
The necessary steps have been taken to put this order in effect.
Under existing laws the Territories have been left practically without a home at Washington.
The governors and other officers are required by law to report to the President or to the heads of different Departments, and there has been no single executive office charged either with the compilation of information about the Territories or with the duty of attending to the requests made by their officers.
As a result of this haphazard method it was extremely difficult to obtain information regarding the Territories, and many of their proper needs were neglected.
By bringing Territorial matters together in this Department, it will be possible to remedy these difficulties.
All the available information regarding the Territories has been collected.
The reports from the Territorial officers receive immediate attention and are promptly acted upon either directly by this Department or through such other Department as is required by ·law.
Harmony and uniformity in the decisions of matters affecting the Territories are now possible, and very generally the work affecting the Territories has been handled with greater expedition and efficiency.
I recommend that Congress consider the amendment of existing laws to the end that all the Territorial possessions, other than the Philippine Islands, be placed specifically under the Interior Department, and that those sections of the laws which require reports from Territorial officers to be made to the President and heads of other departments be repealed.
The last year of the political existence of the Territory of Oklahoma was one or continuing prosperity.
On July 1, 1907, the population was 772,441, an increase of 81 per cent since the last general census in 1900.
Ninety-six per cent of the people of the Territory were American born.
On July 10 the constitutional convention, organized under the enabling act, completed its work, and on July 22 filed with the secretary of the territory a complete copy of the constitution and the election ordinance.
On July 24 a proclamation was issued calling for an election on September 17, presenting to the people of Oklahoma and Indian Territory the question of the adoption of the constitution and the adoption of the prohibition clause as a separate provision, and for the election of State officers.
The necessary certificates and abstracts were delivered to the President on October 28, and on November 16, in accordance with the proclamation of the President approving the constitution, the State of Oklahoma was admitted into the Union.
The population of the State on July 1 was 1,414,177 (Oklahoma 733,062, Indian Territory 681,115).
The relations between the new State and the Indians of the Five Civilized Tribes have been elsewhere discussed.
Conditions in the Territory are steadily improving.
There has been a gradual increase in population, which is now estimated at 185,000.
The financial condition is better than ever before.
Taxable property has increased in the last three years from $45,000,000 to $77,000,000, and the rate of taxation has decreased.
There is no difficulty in more than caring for the current expenses of the Territory and the retirement of its bonded indebtedness.
The organization and use of the rangers have been most satisfactory in the enforcement of law and order.
The annual school census, taken in May, gave 33,167 as the number of children of school age (6 to 21 years) in the Territory.
The total number of children enrolled in the schools was 25,370.
This apparently would indicate that nearly 8,000 children fail to attend school; but it is explained that most pupils finish school at about the age of 18, although they are enumerated in the school census until they are 21.
Practically all of the children who attend no school are of Mexican parentage.
To remedy the evil of nonattendance at school, the late legislature enacted a law which makes attendence compulsory, under severe penalties for parents and guardians.
There were 293 school districts, employing 626 teachers; 108 men and 518 women.
The average monthly salary paid men teachers was $93.30; for women it was $71.08.
Not only is the mining wealth of the Territory developing very rapidly, but the agricultural possibilities have been enormously increased by the development of irrigation projects and the experiments in dry farming.
There has been an almost unprecedented increase in population during the past year.
More than 16,000 homestead filings on over two and one-half million acres were made.
It is significant that this increase in the agricultural population is not to any great extent in the river valleys, but is along the mesas, which until recently had been given up entirely to grazing.
This fact is due to the success of the dry farming method.
If this proves an ultimate success, it is estimated that nearly 50,000,000 acres of land in New Mexico will be available for it.
The population of the Territory is now estimated at almost 400,000, a gain of nearly 100 per cent since 1900.
The principal new mineral development has been coal.
The explored areas cover a million and a half acres.
The stock industry next to agriculture is still the main support of the people of the Territory.
The Reclamation Service has completed two projects in the lower Pecos Valley.
In this coming season the settlers will receive the full benefit of this improvement.
The financial condition of the Territory is excellent.
In education, progress is steady.
More than 1,000 teachers are employed and the total enrollment of scholars is 50,000 out of a school population of 80,000 children of school age.
The Territorial institutions of higher learning are better attended than ever before.
There has been some serious difficulty in the disposition by the Territory of certain lands granted to it by the Federal Government for educational purposes.
It has been necessary to institute proceedings to test the validity of transfers involving about 71,000 acres.
These suits are now pending in the lower courts.
It is most gratifying to know that both Arizona and New Mexico are now almost entirely free from the lawlessness that obtained a few years ago.
The conditions in the Territory for the most part have been very satisfactory.
The trade with the mainland was the largest, with one exception, in the period of five years.
The financial condition is excellent, the income of the Territory having exceeded the disbursements by about $50,000, and the bonded debt has been reduced to an amount equaling only.
2.84·per cent of the taxable property.
While the Territory is an integral part of the United States, yet the geographical location, the population, and-the industries are radically different from those on the mainland.
For the development of the agricultural lands there is need of European immigration.
Until the recent change in the immigration law the Territory aided the immigration of about 4,000 Europeans.
The reasons presented by the governor for modifying the existing law to the end that for a period of six years the Territory, may bring in European labor are most cogent.
The difference in conditions is clearly such as to justify Congress in excepting the islands from the operation of the general law.
The further improvement of the agricultural lands and the introduction of intensive methods of agriculture are receiving the most careful attention of the people.
There is need for the conservation of both the water and timber resources, and the Federal Government should aid the Territory as it aids the Territories on the mainland in the study of these conditions.
The improvement of the harbors of the islands is a pressing need.
There must be a close relationship between the Federal Government and Hawaii.
The Pacific is now a center of commercial and political activity.
These islands, being the middle ground between the Philippines and our mainland, must be developed and protected to the highest degree.
They are on the line of one of the great trade routes of the world.
Their people are loyal, self-respecting, independent citizens of the United States, and should be made to appreciate that that citizenship is something more than a mere name.
The population of Alaska has not materially increased during the vear.
It is estimated that there are 31,000 permanent white residents, besides about 7,000 who are employed in the mines, canneries; and railroad camps during the summer and leave at the close of the season.
There has been a considerable increase of the commerce between Alaska and the United States.
The increase in the output of gold was more than 50 per cent; the output of copper increased 54 per cent; and the amount of salmon canned was 30 per cent more than the product of 1906.
Gold, which is still the leading product, is being successfully mined throughout the whole Territory.
The development of the recent discoveries on Chicagof Island has been very encouraging.
During the year there were serious strikes and labor troubles, beginning at Treadwell and extending throughout the Fairbanks and Nome mining districts.
The'most serious trouble was at Fairbanks.
This camp is so new that it had few reserve supplies to draw upon, and living expenses are so high that a cessation of work caused some suffering.
The strikes grew out of a demand for the recognition of a miners' union and for changes in wages and hours; and at Treadwell and Fairbanks there was quite an exodus of working people, so that the supply of labor at these places is much below normal.
There were also labor troubles at the Ellamar mine, in Prince William Sound.
The strikes were all settled during the summer.
Prospecting during the early part of 1907 in the Fairbanks district extended the area of workable gravel in that district materially, and preparations for work on a large scale were made; but the miners' strike, extending from April to July, covered the only period during the year when there is sufficient water for sluicing purposes.
If labor can be had and there is sufficient water, next year should show a great increase in the gold produced in the Fairbanks district.
New discoveries of rich deposits on old beach lines near Nome are stimulating the mining industry in that district.
The large ditches in and about Nome have been completed.
These, with the dredges now being built, insure a prolonged life for this camp.
Placer mining on the branches of Copper River, Slate Creek, Miller Gulch, and Nizina River -still continues, and increased activity at these places can be expected upon the completion of one of the railroads now building to the Copper River Valley.
Mining continues near Circle City, on the headwaters of the Koyukuk, at Rampart, and the older placer camps of the Yukon Valley; but the gold-bearing gravel of these camps is now largely held for the installation of dredges and labor-saving appliances.
New discoveries of gold-bearing placer ground have been reported at Chandlar, Innoko, and on the Big Chena, in the Yukon, but it will require another year of prospecting to determine the extent and value of these discoveries.
There are also encouraging reports of prospects on the Yentna and at the headwaters of Kuskokwin River.
Construction work upon various railroads has continued during the year.
The Solomon River Railway, on the Seward Peninsula, has been completed.
The Nome and Arctic Railway has extended its line to Shelton, a distance of 85 miles, and has aIso built branch lines along the third beach line near Nome.
The Copper River and Northwestern Railway Company has begun the construction of a standardgauge road, both east and west from Katalla.
The eastern branch is intended to open up the Bering Sea coal fields, and the western and northern branch extends to Copper River, thence up its valley to the copper deposits in the Coast Range.
This railroad has also been making preparations to construct a breakwater at Katalla.
The Alaska Central Railway had a large force of men laying track, and expected to complete about 75 miles of road during the season.
The Alaska Pacific Railway has a force of men at work on a line beginning at Martin Island, near Katalla, and extending to the Bering River coal fields.
Surveys have been extended to the Copper River Valley.
The Alaska Home Railway in August began the construction of a narrow-gauge electric road; this road is to run from Valdez to the Copper River Valley.
The Tanana Mines Railway extended its lines about 15 miles to Dome and Vault creeks and to Chatanika River.
It now has in operation about 50 miles of railroad.
The total pack of salmon canneries for the year will be about 2,140,000 cases of 4 dozen 1-pound cans each.
The price of salmon has been such as to insure a good profit during the year.
A new industry, that of mild curing king salmon, has been established in southeastern Alaska during the past year and has proved profitable.
This fish can be caught throughout the year.
The service rendered to the people of Alaska by the military cable and telegraph continues to be excellent.
The land lines are being strengthened and the service is growing better from year to year.
The copper shipped during the year was valued at $1,267,621.
Shipments of copper ore from the Ketchikan district have increased, and new mines have been developed.
Great àctivity and prospecting and development of claims on Latouche Island, Boulder, Landlock, and Galena bays, as well as in other parts of the Prince William Sound country, have been shown during the year.
The mines north and east of Prince William Sound, in the Copper River range of mountains, have begun work; and as the ores of this section are of very high grade, it is expected that the development of this country will be very rapid.
The great value of the coal fields of Matanuska and Bering rivers having been determined and the transportation assured, the development of these fields will rapidly follow.
The existing coal-land laws require radical modification.
These changes should be made in accordance with whatever general method Congress may prescribe for the disposition of the coal lands in the United States proper, with such additional provisions as may be necessary to meet the special conditions in Alaska.
In Alaska it is possible to prevent much of the waste that has occurred in the Western States.
This applies not only to the coal lands but to the other natural resources of timber, stone, and water.
The education of white children, which is placed under the jurisdiction of the governor by the act of January 27, 1905, has been progressing favorably; and the education of the natives, under the Bureau of Education, is also accomplishing good results.
It is recommended, however, that a compulsory education law be passed.
This seems particularly important in the cases of children of native or mixed blood, whose parents are frequently indifferent to the cause of education.
The general administration of affairs in the Territory has not been by any means free from difficulty.
Many of the settlements are still mining camps where the authorities have to face the usual conditions attendant upon the life in such communities.
There has, however been a better enforcement of law and the gradual eradication of the gross evils arising as a result of the misuse of liquor and from gambling.
The report of the governor of Porto Rico, which is required by law to be transmitted to the President, through the Secretary of State, has been forwarded by the President to Congress.
The reports of other Territorial officers have been presented with the governor's report.
The naval officers who act as governors of Guam and Samoa have submitted their reports to the Secretary of the Navy.
The constantly increasing number of persons visiting these parks fully justifies their preservation and development.
The parks are very much more than mere playgrounds.
They contain not only magnificent scenery and natural curiosities, but they become great game preserves and afford the opportunity for the preservation of species of animals and birds which would otherwise soon become extinct.
Many of these parks are connected with or surrounded by national forests.
The problems for the maintenance and development of the parks are practically the same as those connected with the administration of the national forests.
The construction of roads and trails, the protection against fire, the preservation of game, are all problems that are being studied in a broader and better way in the Forest Service than by any possibility can be studied or applied in each park.
These considerations lead me to recommend that the Congress be requested to enact such legislation as will make possible the transfer to the Forest Service of all parks except Hot Springs Reservation, Arkansas.
The only park created during the last year was the Mesa Verde, situated in Montezuma County, Colo., adjacent to the Southern Ute Indian Reservation.
It contains 41,920 acres, and was created for the purpose of preserving the prehistoric ruins and relics.
Under the act creating the park, the prehistoric Indian ruins, situated within 5 miles of its boundaries on Indian and public lands not alienated by patent, are placed under the care of the Secretary, to be administered by the custodian of the park.
This 5-mile strip contains 175,360 acres.
Within this reservation are contained some of the most remarkable of the Indian ruins, among them the Spruce Tree House, near Navajo Canyon, the Cliff Palace, and the Balcony House.
The appropriation of last year made possible the organization of the custodian service and the beginning of the work of constructing roads and trials.
The work of examination and excavation of the ruins is being conducted under the supervision of one of the-trained officials of the Smithsonian Institution.
At the time of the creation of the park there were a number of private and State holdings within the boundaries.
These should eventually be eliminated by purchase.
The act of Congress approved April 20, 1832 (4·Stat. L., 505), reserved 4 sections of land including the hot springs in Arkansas," for the future disposal of the United States."
The act of June 11, 1870 (16 Stat. L., 149), authorized the bringing of suits by persons claiming title, legal or equitable, to any of said lands, in order to quiet title thereto; and by the act of March 3, 1877 (19 Stat. L., 377), a commission to be known as the Hot Springs Commission was authorized to survey, plat, and lay out the city of Hot Springs into convenient squares, blocks, lots, avenues, and streets, in order that the same might be sold as therein provided.
This act finally reserved the Hot Springs Mountain and the lands containing the springs, aggregating 911.63 acres; placed the reservation under charge of a superintendent, to be appointed by the Secretary of the Interior; and authorized said Secretary to grant hot water and other privileges upon the reservation.
Of the lots platted by the Commission, about 116 still remain unsold.
An appraisement of these lots in 1904 gave a value of $88,125.
A sale of the lots was advertised for March 21, 1905; but in view of the fire of February 25, 1905, which destroyed a considerable portion of the city, the Department, upon the petition of numerous citizens, postponed the sale indefinitely.
Upon the reservation are 49 hot springs, the waters of which are radio-active to a high degree, and have an aggregate flow.
It has been demonstrated that these waters are possessed of wonderful curative properties, and effect cures or produce marked benefit in a very large number of diseases.
There are 25 bath houses receiving hot water under franchise from the Department, of which 11 are on the reservation and 14 on private property in the city of Hot Springs.
These bath houses having been constructed by their respective owners according to their varying circumstances and ideas, there is no uniformity, either of architectural design or of quality of equipment.
The Department has accordingly prescribed a varying schedule of rates to be charged for baths by the different houses, varying from 20 to 50 cents per single bath, the rate in each' case being based upon the quality of equipments, accommodations and service furnished by the bath house.
On March 31, 1907, the resignation of Mr. Martin A. Eisele as superintendent of the Hot Springs Reservation was accepted, and Mr. W. Scott Smith was appointed superintendent of the reservation, and entered on his duties on April 1, 1907.
The Government Free Bath House has been operated without friction, and the benefits of the healing waters of the springs extended to thousands of individuals.
The demands on this bath house are constantly increasing; and steps are now being taken looking to its rearrangement in order to accommodate the increasing demands.
Work on the filling up of the lakes in the Whittington Lake Reserve Park has been continued, and many minor repairs and improvements have been made on the reservation generally.
Under the act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat. L., 842), the right is reserved to the Secretary of the Interior to increase the rates to the bath houses under lease every period of five years; and the authority thus vested in the Secretary has been exercised by increasing the rate to $60 per tub per annum for the bath houses; and the rent for the Arlington Hotel has been increased from $2,500 to $5,000 per annum.
The natural growth of the patronage of the reservation creates a demand for repairs and improvements; and as the fixed charges for operating the reservation have consumed almost the entire revenues from water rents and other privileges, this readjustment of rates became necessary in the interest of the Government and the proper administration of the affairs of the reservation.
The act approved June 8, 1906 (34 Stat. L., 225), among other things authorizes the President, in his discretion, to declare by public proclamation historic landmarks, historic and prehistoric structures, and other objects of historic or scientific interest that are situated upon the lands owned or controlled by the Government, to be national monuments, and to reserve as a part thereof parcels of land the limits of which in all cases shall be confined to the smallest area compatible with the proper care and management of the objects to be protected; provided that when such objects are situated upon a tract covered by a bona fide unperfected claim or held in private ownership, the tract, or so much thereof as may be necessary for the proper care and management of the object, may be relinquished to the Government, and the Secretary of the Interior is authorized to accept such relinquishment in behalf of the United States.
Uniform rules and regulations for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of so much of the act as relates to American antiquities were jointly promulgated December 28, 1906, by the officers mentioned in the act.
Protests, however, were received from the Archæological Institute of America and other concerned in making archæological researches as to the alleged restrictive character thereof, and the question of the revision of these rules is now under consideration.