Washington, D. C., November 10, 1909.
Sir: I have the honor to submit for your consideration my first annual report of the operations of the Department of the Interior, together with the reports of the bureaus, offices, institutions, and Territories under its supervision.
This report covers a portion of the time under the administration of my predecessor, Mr. Garfield, who, by his earnest and disinterested services, contributed greatly to the advancement of the department in organization and efficiency of administration.
Of a total of 18,916 officers, clerks, and employees of this department, 4,620 are stationed in Washington and the remainder are in the field service.
Under my predecessor diligent'effort was made to improve the efficiency of this force, by the elimination of incompetent persons and the instillation of a spirit of individual responsibility for the character of the service performed, and this policy is being continued.
But no policy within the reach of the Executive can humanely solve the difficulties involved in the discharge of superannuated clerks.
The Department of the Interior in all of its bureaus in Washington is laboring under a great disadvantage in trying to introduce modern business methods and to keep pace with the increasing volume of work, because of its inability to retire members of the clerical and laboring force after they have become incapacitated by age or other causes.
Intermittent efforts have been made to secure congressional aid to retire them upon a basis that will recognize their long service and protect them against want.
An involuntary retirement and sustenance statute, by which all persons after arriving at a prescribed age, or for other reasons, should be required to stand an examination before a competent board as to physical and mental ability, with a fund created by national appropriation—in the first instance, and maintained by some equitable system of contribution from salaries would seem to me to be advisable.
The work of the office is now practically up to date.
The office has also been required to consider and pass upon a vast number of leases of oil and other Indian lands, contracts and other matters incident to the administration of the reclamation act, questions affecting asylums, parks, and other institutions under the jurisdiction of this department, together with recommendations for the institution of appropriate proceedings by the Department of Justice for the recovery of damages arising out of timber and other trespasses upon the public lands, and the cancellation of patents erroneously issued or fraudulently obtained, which matters are too numerous and diverse in character for detailed specification.
The number of certiorari, prohibition, mandamus, and injunction proceedings instituted in the courts of the District of Columbia against officers of the department in connection with the administration of the public-land laws and the distribution of the properties of the Five Civilized Tribes has greatly increased, 83 cases of that character having required attention during the past year, the defense of which has occupied a large amount of time and entailed much labor on the part of the office force.
In the performance of its functions there has been complete cooperation between members of the office force and a most hearty support from the Department of Justice.
The proper use and disposition of the public lands have been questions involving no little legislative as well as administrative difficulty from the beginning of their history.
They were, during the earliest administrations, treated as a national asset for the liquidation of the public debt and as a source of reward for our soldiers and sailors.
Not until the discovery of gold on the Pacific slope did the policy change for one of exploitation, by which our citizens were encouraged to develop the mineral and agricultural resources of the public domain on condition of receiving limited areas at a nominal cost.
For similar reasons, railway and wagon-road grants were liberally donated by Congress in order to add facilities for the opening up of these almost inaccessible regions.
The railway grants generally were limited to nonmineral lands, except such as contained coal and iron, which latter minerals were taken to be essential for railway construction and operation.
New States were, when admitted, liberally endowed with public lands for school and other purposes; so that, out of a public domain in 1860 of 1,055,911,288 acres (Alaska then not belonging to the United States), we now have only about 731,354,081 acres, confined largely to the mountain ranges and the arid and semiarid plains, except lands within some of the Indian reservations and the 368,035,975 acres of undisposed of land in Alaska.
All of the principal land statutes were enacted over twenty-five years ago; the homestead act, the preemption and timber-culture act, the coal-land, and the mining acts for the aid of the industrious prospector, were among the earlier acts of this nature.
The liberal and rapid disposition of the public lands under these statutes and the lax methods of administration which for a long time prevailed naturally provoked the feeling that the public domain was legitimate prey for the unscrupulous and that it was no crime to violate or circumvent the land laws.
It is to be regretted that we, as a nation, were so tardy to realize the importance of preventing so large a measure of our natural resources passing into the hands of land pirates and speculators, with no view to development looking to the national welfare.
It may be safely said that millions of acres of timber and other lands have been unlawfully obtained, and it is also true that actions to recover such lands have in most instances long since been barred by the statute of limitations.
The principal awakening to our wasteful course came under your predecessor's administration.
Notwithstanding this, it is necessary to continue with utmost vigor, through all available sources, the securing of information of violations of the public-land laws, and to follow such violations with rigid prosecutions.
In this present policy of conserving the natural resources of the public domain, while development is the keynote, the best thought of the day is not that development shall be by national agencies, but that wise utilization shall be secured through private enterprise under national supervision and control.
Therefore, if material progress is to be made in.securing the best use of our remaining public lands, Congress must be called upon to enact remedial legislation.
Classification of public lands.
In order that intelligent administration shall be applied in the disposition of the public lands, it is essential that they be classified into various clearly defined divisions according to their principal value or use.
They have generally been classified in legislation as agricultural, mineral, desert, timber, and coal lands, and it is only in recent years that the Interior Department, through the Geological Survey, has undertaken to make this classification in the field in the aid of the administration of these public-land statutes, and then only through the general authority given in the organization of this bureau.
Specific legislative authority should be given the department to classify and segregate our public lands into well-defined divisions according to their greatest apparent use, with the continuing power of reclassification to meet changing conditions and the increased knowledge of their character which may necessitate the transfer of lands from time to time from one class to the other.
Full legal effect should be given such classification when made, so as to prevent entries, under laws applicable to one class, of land belonging to another class, except after application for and a review of the classification; in other words, if lands are classified as coal lands, they should be enterable only as coal lands, and in case it be shown that they are improperly classified as coal lands and are, in fact, agricultural, they should then be enterable only as agricultural lands.
This, to my mind, is the only way the Government can scientifically and effectively proceed to conserve the natural resources of the public domain.
To leave to the self-interest of applicants the option to claim a particular tract of land as more valuable for mineral, agriculture, timber, phosphate, oil, or gas, or for power sites, is to invite confusion, fraud, and contention, and this has been the source of a major portion of the difficulties of the Interior Department in administering the public domain.
It may seem at the outset that this would be a radical departure, to the extent of suspending the disposition of public lands pending their classification, but, as a matter of fact, a large portion of the undisposed-of public lands has already been classified by the department, but such classification has not the authoritative basis or effect to accomplish the result above outlined.
As to minerals, other than those hereinafter specified, because of the manner of their occurrence, doubtless no effective classification can be made in advance of discovery, and they should for that reason be treated as an exception in classification and dealt with accordingly.
As regards new legislation, the present coal-land laws respecting the States and Territories, as well as Alaska, should be supplanted by an act fully meeting existing as well as future conditions.
The inducements for much of the crime and fraud, both constructive and actual, committed under the present system can be prevented by separating the right to mine from the title to the soil.
The surface would thereby be open to entry under other laws according to its character and subject to the right to extract the coal.
The object to be attained in any such legislation is to conserve the coal deposits as a public utility and to prevent monopoly or extortion in their disposition.
This may be accomplished either through a leasing system, by which the title would remain in the Government, under proper regulation and supervision by the Secretary of the Interior, or through the sale of the deposits, and in either case with restrictions on their mining and use which would control the minimum output and conserve the deposits as a public utility.
I believe the most advantageous method will be found in a measure authorizing the lease or sale of the coal deposits in the lands, subject to forfeiture for failure to exercise the rights granted, under such reasonable regulations as may be imposed.
An exploration period of at least one year upon a permit basis, at a nominal charge, would insure to the applicant the necessary preliminary knowledge upon which to make the lease or purchase of the coal deposits and venture the necessary investment for operation.
The maximum unit authorized for this use could safely be made from three to five sections, provided no greater surface rights be granted than will give proper facilities to reach and extract the coal deposits.
In case of the failure of the lessees or grantees to open and operate the coal deposits under reasonable limitations and to maintain an output reasonably suited to the deposits, and in case of combinations as to price or limitation of output, title should be forfeited by proceedings in court for that purpose.
Government mine supervision would doubtless be necessary to enforce the conditions and limitations under the grant.
The above suggestions with reference to the disposition of coal deposits are equally applicable to the oil and gas fields in the public domain, and similar legislation as to lands containing the same is hereby recommended.
Indeed, the very nature of these two important mineral resources requires that their disposition be in terms of quantity of the product extracted, rather than of acreage.
Pending the enactment of new legislation as affecting coal lands, all known coal areas were withdrawn from entry for classification and appraisement through the Geological Survey.
April 10, 1909, I changed to a practical and scientific basis the system of classification and valuation for disposition of coal lands under existing laws.
For the purposes of classification and valuation, the coal deposits are divided into four classes in accordance with their fuel value and the thickness and depth of the coal beds.
The prices of the lands are determined on the basis of an estimated tonnage and range from one-half cent to 3 cents per estimated ton, in accordance with the quality, thickness, and situation of the coal.
Provision is also made for taking into consideration in making the valuation any special conditions enhancing the value of the land for coal-mining purposes; also, for a review of the classification or valuation upon proper application and showing to the department.
The classification and appraisement of the coal lands in the States and Territories other than Alaska proceed upon the authority of the act of March 2, 1873, which fixes the minimum price only for lands and leaves to the Secretary of the Interior their appraisement and the determination of their maximum value.
In view of the fact that the law of Alaska directs the disposition of the coal lands in that Territory at the flat rate of $10 per acre, no such classification or appraisement is warranted by existing law.
Congress has, by the act of February 19, 1909, substantially adopted the recommendations made by me as Commissioner of the General Land Office, in the enactment of a statute, known as the "dry-farming" or"enlarged-homestead" act, authorizing the classification and entry of semiarid lands.
I desire to call attention to the importance of asking Congress to authorize the Executive to reserve certain areas of these lands for the purpose of affording a supply of fuel oil for the future use of the navy, and to make such regulations as may be necessary for the preservation and extraction of such deposits.
No legislation exists for the entry of oil and gas lands, other than the general mining laws of the United States, which are not adaptable to the disposition of lands containing mineral oils and gas.
Under the previous administration, there were temporarily withdrawn, pending action by Congress, 4,702,520 acres of land, in the States of Wyoming, Idaho, and Utah, as containing phosphate deposits.
These lands are being reexamined by the Geological Survey at my direction with a view to eliminating all tracts not containing such deposits.
The area of the original withdrawals has now been reduced to 4,471,480 acres by the elimination of nonphosphate lands, and I am advised by the classifying officers that additional areas will be eliminated as a result of their examination.
The lands containing phosphate are not adaptable to disposition, and should not be allowed to be disposed of, as either placer or lode mineral claims, but the deposits should be leased or sold in limited areas and on conditions preventing monopoly, and insuring domestic use.
The so-called timber and stone acts of June 3, 1878, and August 4, 1902, should be repealed, and a law enacted providing for the disposition of all the remaining timber upon the public lands separately from the soil, and for the disposition of the land after the timber is removed, under appropriate agricultural or mineral laws.
The act of August 18, 1894 (28 Stat., 372, the Carey Act), as amended, should be modified in two important respects.
Under the law as it now stands the reservation of lands applied for by the States and Territories under that act is effective only from the date of filing of map and plan of irrigation.
Frequently when the States are engaged in the preliminary work of surveying and the endeavor to ascertain the feasibility of the reclamation of the lands, individual or corporate speculators file or enter upon the lands, thus interfering with or defeating the success of the state reclamation project.
It has also happened in some instances that the States or the contractors who have agreed to engage in the work of reclaiming lands under this act have allowed all or nearly all of the ten-year period of segregation permitted by the act to elapse without engaging in bona fide reclamation work.
Such a contingency should be provided against.
I therefore recommend that section 4 of said act be amended so as to authorize the Secretary of the Interior, upon application of the State or Territory, to withdraw areas of public land that appear to be susceptible of reclamation under the Carey Act, pending examination of the lands by the state officials, and the preparation and filing of their map and plan of irrigation if the State determines to attempt the reclamation.
Also that a proviso be added to the second paragraph of said section 4 to the effect that unless actual construction of the reclamation works is begun within three years after the segregation of the lands, the Secretary of the Interior is authorized to declare the annulment of the contract and restore the lands segregated to the public domain.
Unsurveyed railroad lands in national forests.
These lands can not be surveyed out of the present or general appropriations by Congress for the survey of public lands, as such survey without additional legislation would not give the department authority to reimburse itself out of the lands in case of failure of the private owners to make repayment on demand.
There is no incentive for the grantees of these lands to ask for surveys and to make deposits therefor, inasmuch as until surveyed-they are not subject to state or other local taxation.
This is undoubtedly the main reason for the failure of the railroad companies to expeditiously perfect title.
It is also apparent from this state of facts that the small timber-land owner, whose lands are generally surveyed, is placed at a disadvantage, as he has to contribute a larger share of taxation than he would if all such lands were taxed.
Estimating the value of these lands at $10 per acre (a conservative average value on timber lands), they are worth $60,574,000, and a tax of one-half of 1 per cent per annum would amount to the sum of $300,000 annually, which should be collectible for the support of state and local government.
This is the annual donation given to these great timber-land owners under the present system.
The department is interested in having these lands surveyed for another reason, namely, in order that it may speedily complete the adjustment of these land grants.
I therefore recommend that Congress be asked to make an appropriation sufficient to survey these lands, impose a lien upon them for the reimbursement of the cost thereof, and give authority to compel a prompt reimbursement.
Power sites.
In anticipation of new legislation by Congress to prevent the acquisition of power sites on the public domain by private persons or corporations with the view of monopolizing or adversely controlling them against the public interest, there have been temporarily withdrawn from all forms of entry approximately 603,355 acres, covering all locations known to possess power possibilities on unappropriated lands outside of national forests.
Without such withdrawals these sites would be enterable under existing laws, and their patenting would leave the General Government powerless to impose any limitations as to their use.
If the Federal Government desires to exercise control or supervision over water-power development on the public domain, it can only do so by limitations imposed upon the disposal of power and reservoir sites upon the public lands, the waters of the streams being subject to state jurisdiction in their appropriation and beneficial use.
7. That all books and accounts shall always be subject to the inspection of the department.
Unreasonable or narrow restrictions beyond the necessity of public protection against monopoly, or extortion in charges, will, of course, defeat development and serve no useful purpose.
The statute should, therefore, while giving full public protection against the abuses of the privileges extended, so far as consistent encourge investment in these projects; and it must always be borne in mind that excessive charges for the franchise will fall upon the consumer.
Legislation of this character proceeds upon the theory that Congress can impose such contractual terms and conditions as it sees fit in the sale or use permitted of government lands, so long as such limitations do not conflict with the powers properly exercised by the State wherein they may be situated.
Withdrawal of public lands.
The following table shows withdrawals of public lands for various purposes, the dates of such withdrawals, together with any restorations thereof, and the approximate acreage in each instance.
This table does not include lands withdrawn under specific statutory authority.
As the legal authority of the Secretary of the Interior to make even temporary withdrawals of public lands for the purpose of submitting to Congress what may appear to the Secretary as an exigency requiring new legislation applicable to their proper use and disposition has been questioned, it is recommended that Congress give specific authority to make temporary withdrawals of public lands in such cases.
The area of public lands included in original entries and filings during the fiscal year 1909 was 19,982,503.76 acres, which was an increase of 802,146.98 acres over the area entered during the year 1908.
The area patented was 13,072,377.54 acres, of which amount more than one-half was disposed of under the homestead law.
The total cash receipts from the sales of the public lands, including fees and commissions, were $9,235,227.70.
In addition thereto there were received from the sales of Indian lands $2,651,051.08; reclamation water-right charges, $159,490.93; amounts recovered-for depredations on public lands, sales of property and copies of records, $170,645.68, making the total cash receipts from all sources in connection with the public lands, $12,216,415.39—the largest amount received during any fiscal year, except the year 1908.
The excess of receipts over all expenditures and estimated liabilities of the public-land service is $9,494,925.40.
The appropriation of $1,000,000 for the protection of public lands, timber, etc., became available March 4, 1909, and I directed the Commissioner of the General Land Office to make every possible effort to expedite the work to be carried on under said appropriation and to secure prompt action upon pending cases.
As a result of investigation by the field force, 1,282,201.1 acres have been restored to the public domain during the past year, an increase of 135,660 acres over the preceding year; $403,444.26 have been collected and turned in to the Treasury as a result of the work of this force, an increase of $304,755.95 (308 per cent) over the amount collected from the same source last year.
During the year 12,397 entries were examined in the field and 5,308 reported upon unfavorably; 7,089 entries have been reported upon favorably; 241 civil suits were gained and 35 lost, and 115 convictions secured in criminal cases.
The appropriation for the work of the survey for the fiscal year aggregated $1,590,680.
While the work of the bureau was hampered by the fact that this appropriation is not large enough to carry out as fully as is desirable the varied lines of investigation and research, material and important results have been obtained in aid of the administration of the department and for the information of the general public.
This is especially notable with reference to public lands, in which connection, through cooperation with the General Land Office, great progress has been made along the lines of better care and conservation, and proper disposition, of the lands under existing laws.
A land classification board has been organized to establish and maintain a uniform standard of classification.
Under this organization the classification of coal lands has been continued with important results set forth in another portion of this report.
Nonirrigable lands have been classified and made available to entry under the terms of the enlarged-homestead act.
The classification work in the western oil fields has aided in the conservation of this important resource and afforded material advantage to those engaged in the oil industry.
The examination and classification of phosphate lands have substantially progressed.
An important item in the work of the survey during the preceding year has been the utilization of data already on hand and securing further information with reference to the water-power resources remaining in the undisposed-of public lands.
The geologic, topographic, water-resources, and technologic branches of the survey have cooperated in the work of classification, valuation, and designation of lands and resources, with the result of combining in each instance all available information upon the subjects under consideration.
Geologic branch.
Geologic surveys and investigations were continued during the year in 39 States and Territories, and over 55 per cent of the appropriation for geologic surveys was expended in the 16 public-land States and Territories.
In connection with the landclassification work, about 16,000 square miles of supposed coal territory in the Rocky Mountain region was examined.
Other work in the public-land States included commencement of the study of the phosphate deposits in Idaho, Wyoming, and Utah, the continuation of systematic, detailed surveys of important mining districts in Colorado, Utah, New Mexico, Arizona, Nevada, and California, and of oil fields in southern California and Colorado and an extension of areal geologic work in these and other States.
General geologic work was continued, one-fifth of the appropriation being devoted to the paleontologic, stratigraphic, glacial, and physiographic investigations which are essential to the advance of the survey's scientific work.
Especially notable is the essential connection of the paleontological work with the various problems of economic geology.
In the surveys of the oil and coal fields, the tracing of the productive horizons and the correlation of beds from place to place would be impossible without the assistance of the expert paleontologist.
Under specific appropriation for investigation of the mineral resources of Alaska, geologic and topographic surveys and water resources investigations were continued.
Approximately one-fifth of the district has now been covered by reconnaissance surveys, both topographic and geologic, resulting from work beginning in 1898, while areas covered by the detailed surveys consuming a considerable portion of the appropriations since 1903 aggregate less than 1 per cent of Alaska.
It appears from the above that it would require, at this rate, at least fifty years to cover the whole district with this preliminary mapping.
However, the areas that have been chosen for survey are those of most importance to the mining industry, so that possibly a quarter of the remaining area may not require mapping for many years to come.
It is believed that there are about 200,000 square miles in Alaska which should be surveyed at an early date, but under the present appropriation it will be impossible to accomplish this in less than two or three decades and at the same time carry on the detailed work demanded by the mining development.
Along the Pacific seaboard of Alaska the economic exploitation of ore bodies, the installation of fish packeries, and other industries are dependent in a large measure on the utilization of water powers.
The scant data at hand indicate that available water powers are fairly abundant, but little information is at hand regarding them.
Cooperation between the divisions of geology and mineral resources was continued and a large proportion of the annual report of mineral statistics was prepared by geologists who have become specialists in various subjects.
The effort to expedite the compilation and publication of mineral statistics resulted in the publication during January and February of preliminary statements of the 1908 production with a review of the conditions prevailing during the year, and special bulletins were given to the press on the following subjects: Gold and silver mining in the United States; copper, lead, and zinc production; the cement industry; review of the coal-mining industry; petroleum.
Topographic branch.
Topographic surveys were made in 27 States and Territories, covering 23,831 square miles.
Of this amount 15,880 square miles, or more than 66 per cent, were surveyed in the publicland States.
In addition, 11,200 square miles of revision or resurvey were completed, making the total area of actual surveys for the season 35,031 square miles.
Under a final special appropriation of $10,000, providing for surveys and plans for drainage of the ceded Chippewa Indian lands in Minnesota, this work was completed, the maps and plans drafted and.transmitted with the final report to the Secretary of the Interior for submission to Congress.
The popular appreciation of topographic surveys as evidenced by the steady increase in sales of the survey maps is believed to be indicative of the increased efficiency of the topographers.
Other recognition of the high standards attained has come in the calls for the topographers of the survey to take up similar work in other countries.
Not only have members of the topographic branch been detailed to work under the international boundary commissions, on the Porto Rico Irrigation Survey, and for the Isthmian Canal Commission, but survey topographers have resigned or taken leave of absence to make topographic surveys in Mexico, Honduras, Peru, Africa, and China.
The latest and possibly most notable instance of appreciation of the topographic work of this Government has been the request from the director of the Canadian geological survey for the temporary assignment of one or more of the most experienced topographers to be employed by the Canadian survey in the inauguration of similar topographic work in Canada.
One topographer is at present on leave of absence and acting in the capacity of field instructor to several of the Canadian parties.
Water resources branch.
During the year the survey has maintained 347 gauging stations in the United States, well scattered over the country, except in certain low-lying portions.
In addition, 128 stations have been maintained in cooperation with the Reclamation Service, 82 stations in cooperation with private parties, and 272 stations in cooperation with various States, or a total of 829 gauging stations.
The general investigation of the water resources of the country has been continued along previous lines.
The scope of the investigations has recently proved to be of national significance in two important respects.
The first is the necessity for the data gathered in connection with the administration of the enlarged homestead act, passed by the Sixtieth Congress.
It is obvious that the proper administration of this act requires at the outset a knowledge of the available water supplies.
Without such information the act is practically nonadministrable.
The second national feature dependent on these investigations is the temporary withdrawal, under the authority of the President, pending legislative action, of water-power sites along the rivers of the public domain.
The extent and value of any water power depend on the amount of water that the stream furnishes.
To withdraw from entry power sites on the public domain intelligently would be impossible without definite information, but with the aid of the information which the survey has collected during past years, it has been possible to withdraw a large number of power sites immediately, and many more can be withdrawn in the near future by reason of the fact that partial information is now available that can soon be made practically complete.
Technologic branch.
Technologic work was carried on during the year in fuel investigations, structural material investigations, and mine accidents investigations.
The first has included an inquiry concerning the fuels of the public domain and also the fuels for use by the Government.
The larger part of the fuel used by the Government, aside from that used on board naval vessels, involving an annual expenditure of more than $5,000,000, is now purchased under specifications prepared by the survey and the coal is sampled and tested by the survey.
A like treatment is accorded crude petroleum and other mineral fuels used by the Government.
In connection with the building and construction work of the Government, the materials to be used are now being generally tested by the survey.
These include materials for more than 300 public buildings in various States and Territories, recently authorized by Congress, involving an expenditure of over $50,000,000.
Structural materials for use in the engineering works of the Panama Canal, the Reclamation Service, and several bureaus of the army and the navy are also being examined at the survey testing laboratories.
The investigations into the causes of mine explosions have included examinations and analyses of explosives used in coal mining in the United States, examinations into the occurrence of explosive gases and dust and of those mines in which explosions have occurred during the year, examinations of so-called "safety" lamps used in mines and of mine-rescue apparatus.
The manufacturers of explosives used in coal mining have voluntarily submitted their explosives for testing by the survey and have withdrawn from the market a number of explosives that failed to pass these tests.
They have also made commendable efforts to increase the safety of their explosives even beyond the requirements of these tests and have shown a desire to carry out the wishes of the state inspectors and the recommendations of the federal engineers and chemists connected with these investigations.
In view of the fact that more than 85 per cent of the fatalities in our coal mines are due not to explosions but to other though in many cases related causes, it is important that the scope of the investigation be extended to include all conditions which make for greater safety in mining.
Publications.
Survey publications embodying the results of the investigations and surveys serve their purpose only as wise and prompt distribution is secured, and special attention has been given to this phase of administration.
In the distribution of reports the increase was nearly 10 per cent over that of the preceding year and the number of volumes distributed equaled the number of copies received from the Public Printer.
The whole number of topographic maps distributed exceeded that of 1907-8 by over 25 per cent and the sales of geologic folios and of topographic sheets showed an increase of 25 per cent and 20 per cent, respectively.
The act approved June 17, 1902, known as the reclamation act, clothes the Secretary of the Interior with a broad discretion in the construction of irrigation works and the disbursement of the reclamation fund, into which fund had been paid, up to and including June 30, 1908, the total sum of $50,661,549.27, and the net investments from which in reclamation works on June 30, 1909, amounted to the sum of $45,757,918.94.
The cash receipts from water-right charges to June 30, 1909, were: Building charges, $299,841.22; operation and maintenance charges, $70,825.88, total, $370,667.10.
Because of the magnitude of the work and the desirability of making plans far in advance, it has been found necessary to make estimates of the amounts that will become available before the actual receipts can be known.
The estimated total receipts in the fund to June 30, 1909, are $58,582,140.66.
Upon this basis, and estimated receipts which will become available before December 31, 1910, $5,528,050 have been allotted for reclamation purposes to December 31, 1910.
The discretion imposed by the act also carries with it commensurate responsibilities and obligations, which my predecessors have carried out with the utmost fidelity to the public good.
Some of the most important elements of conservation of the natural resources of the public domain lie within the purview of this statute; the dormant power of stream and flood being conserved for the transformation of the desert into vast tillable areas.
As the law fixes the responsibility for the success of these investments peculiarly upon the Secretary of the Interior, I have felt it incumbent upon me to visit during the last four months as many of the government undertakings as possible, and to determine upon the ground what, if any, changes in administration were demanded to secure the highest results, and, also, to learn the views and the needs of the settlers who are ultimately to pay for these works.
The Reclamation Service has been subjected to much unjust and to some just criticism.
The work in the earlier stages of its existence being, of a pioneer or experimental nature, room was left for the imagination of the unfair or uninformed critic.
Generally speaking, the character of construction of dams, gates, drops, canals, etc., has been of a high type of modern practical utility.
The precaution and pains exercised in giving extraordinary strength and durability to structures and to uniformity in canals and ditches has led some to claim that an unfair burden is thereby imposed upon the lands irrigated, without a resultant benefit.
Whatever merit there may be in this contention will doubtless not exist in the future work of the service.
The department has been unfortunate in the selection of some projects, considering water supply, soil, and climatic conditions, and in some instances, projects having practically no public lands have been undertaken, which are within the domain of private enterprise rather than that of the Government.
I wish to assert my disapproval of irrigation projects undertaken by the Government where irrigation is to be accomplished by pumping with steam plants at high lifts, since the burden of operation and maintenance is usually too great for the average farmer.
The time may come when such methods may be feasible.
Upon several of the projects the work is of a stupendous character, involving engineering skill of a high order and large initial expenditures, as, for instance, the Roosevelt and Shoshone dams and the Gunnison Tunnel.
In so far as any of the projects have been completed, with few exceptions they promise great and lasting beneficial results to the settlers.
The present period is perhaps the most unfavorable under which to judge the service, as sufficient time has not elapsed to fully demonstrate results to be accomplished.
The aggregate of these allotments is all the available moneys, except moneys payable from installments of construction, operation, and maintenance charges.
The receipts from this latter source do not give encouragement that the fund will be sufficiently replenished to enable an expeditious completion and extension of existing projects or to take up any new work.
I am not in favor of the extension of the time of these payments, as eleven years (which the law practically gives) without interest, in ten annual installments, ought to permit any prudent man to meet his payments, unless the cost of construction is a greater burden than the lands will naturally sustain.
Forbearance in enforcing payments may be necessary in individual cases, where misfortune which could not be reasonably anticipated has overtaken the settler, as, for instance, sickness or the destruction of crops by the elements, etc.
In view of the importance of a speedy completion of existing projects and their proper extension, and of the necessity in 1912 of an adjustment between the States by which the major portion of the funds arising from the sale of public lands within each State and Territory shall have been expended as far as practicable within such State or Territory, and in view of the importance of making a beneficial use of waters already appropriated or capable of appropriation to which rights may be lost for nonuse, I believe an urgent appeal should be made to Congress to authorize the issuance of certificates of indebtedness, or of bonds against the reclamation fund, to an aggregate of not exceeding $30,000,000, or so much thereof as may be needed.
These certificates or bonds should be sold by the Treasurer of the United States from time to time as may be required by the Secretary of the Interior and the proceeds placed to the credit of the fund.
They should be redeemable on call within a period of not exceeding ten years after issuance.
The proceeds should be devoted to the completion of feasible existing projects and the construction of any feasible extensions thereof, and so much thereof as may be needed should be devoted to the construction of new projects in the States and Territories in which the expenditures have not met the requirements of section 9 of the act of June 17, 1902.
This is a reaffirmance of my recommendation to you from the field August 2, 1909.
An amendment authorizing the recognition of irrigation district organizations incorporated under state laws prior to the turning over of the project or any portion thereof.
For detailed statements as to expenditures and specific information relative to the various projects, reference is made to the Eighth Annual Report of the Reclamation Service.
Because of the congested condition of the old post-office building, in which the General Land Office and the Indian Office were housed, in July of this year I transferred the Indian Office, with its 203 clerks, to the Pension building, where it is now comfortably installed in rooms vacated for that purpose by the Pension Bureau.
An investigation of the field service of the Indian Bureau in the early spring satisfied me that it required a thorough reorganization, and steps have been energetically taken to effect this necessity.
In no other public service is it as important to have reliable and faithful field agents and a systematic method of inspection and report as in the Indian Service.
The Indian may suffer the impositions and know of the misconduct of his agent without a murmur, where the white man under similar provocation would loudly voice his rights.
This diversity of temperament has, in a measure, its foundation in the fact that the Indian's appeals have been too frequently ignored by field agents, especially where the Indian's interest conflicts with the white man's interest.
I have no doubt that this unfortunate condition has had a demoralizing effect upon some of the officers of the service.
I do not want it understood that the service has no agents or superintendents in the field who are of the high type and character that such a service demands.
On the contrary, the faithless and deficient agent is the exception and the department is dispensing with the services of such officers as fast as they can be weeded out.
The most arduous task of the department in this respect is to secure the right kind of agents and superintendents for the meager salaries warranted by the appropriation, which should be increased.
A reservation containing several million acres, on which the Government has spent many thousands of dollars in the erection of agency buildings, irrigation works, schools, hospitals, and other improvements, should be in charge of a skillful business manager, and the agricultural supervisors on such reservations should also be skilled agriculturists.
The civil-service regulations are not adapted to the securing of thoroughly competent public servants of these classes, as the qualifications outside of civil-service examinations are frequently more important than those determined by such examinations.
Indian schools.
My personal visitation to some of the nonreservation Indian schools convinces me that certain of them should be abolished.
It is my purpose to abandon at the end of this school year such of these schools as are not sufficiently promoting the public service, and where retained, in such instances as possible, to concentrate the energies of the department on the development of agricultural and industrial schools in order to give the Indian the means of learning how to support himself by farming and by the exercise of the simpler trades; and, for the Indian girls, a domestic training in harmony with the station they must naturally fill.
The development of the district or day school should be the ultimate aim of the service; a school similar to the system in white communities throughout the country.
It will be necessary to extend the system of day schools, each having its demonstration farm, to maintain instructors in hygiene, domestic science, and farming, and, in general, to guide the individual progress of these people.
All governmental effort should be with the aim of fitting the Indian to manage his own affairs, and this is the pronounced policy of the department.
It is not surprising that the Indians have not adopted civilized methods of living as rapidly as might be desired.
All the traditions of their ancestors and their inherited instincts tend to a continuation of the tribal life.
Reclamation.
Considerable progress in reclamation has been made on a number of the reservations.
The most notable success is shown on the Fort Belknap Reservation in Montana, where about 30,000 acres are irrigated at a cost for construction of $4.61 per acre.
Splendid agricultural results have been obtained by the Indian farmers among these Indians.
Over 100,000 bushels of grain have been harvested this season.
Some of the other reservations show advancement in the same line, but not to the same extent.
It is, however, a mistake, I believe, to construct irrigation works upon Indian reservations beyond the agricultural capacity of the Indians or their willingness to utilize them, so that these works will lie dormant for years and fall into disuse and decay.
The works on the Crow Reservation are, to a large extent, an example of this kind, and I fear others have been projected which will result in a like manner unless the Indian is skillfully supervised in agricultural pursuits, and his labor used in the construction of the project, and he is thus encouraged and educated to make a beneficial use thereof, and to understand the importance of its use.
Indian warehouses.
I am strongly in favor of discontinuing the United States Indian warehouses at New York, Chicago, St. Louis, Omaha, and San Francisco as soon as it is possible to clear up the business that will pass through them under the annual-contract system.
The Indian Service is purchasing about $2,000,000 worth of supplies each year under a system which is in no wise based on commercial methods, as a result of which there is a lack of competition because Indian business can not be as enticing to manufacturers as commercial business, goods are not being obtained at the best prices, and trade discount is an unknown factor.
In the first instance, goods are bought under the annual-estimate system, which means that a superintendent must submit estimates from seven months to nineteen months in advance of the time that the goods will be needed.
This results in purchasing more goods than is actually needed, because where there is a doubt as to the need, the supplies are asked for and usually bought.
Certified checks to the amount of 5 per cent of the bids are required with all bids submitted; when the award is made the successful bidder is required to enter into a contract and furnish a bond in a sum equal to 50 per cent of the amount of the contract; the total of any item bought is not shipped in bulk, but must be split up and packed with other items for special shipment; a period of from two to six months elapses between the delivery and the payment for the goods.
This represents a conservative estimate of the increased cost and does not include the extra cost on account of our requirements for packing, nor does it take into consideration the cost of maintaining the warehouses through which nearly all of the goods pass for inspection, and the cost in salaries to maintain a force at Washington to handle the work incident to the annual contracts and the settlement of claims.
It is purposed to develop a system of purchasing through purchasing agents with headquarters in one or more of the large commercial centers, and to make arrangements for the elimination of certified checks, contracts, and bonds, and to provide for the settlement of all bills within discount periods—certainly not exceeding thirty days from delivery.
The cost of inspection (inspectors are now hired at $10 per diem and expenses) will be eliminated, as the goods will be bought principally f.
At least 50 per .
Allotments.
It has been expected, by the allotment of lands to the Indians in severalty, to largely solve the Indian problem, the theory being that when an Indian received his allotment he would make his home on it, and become a self-supportiņg citizen.
In a measure this result has been attained and the allottee eliminated from further consideration.
On the other hand, a large proportion of allottees have not become attached to their allotments, but have continued their hereditary practice of roaming from place to place and securing their livelihood by hunting and fishing.
This is partly accounted for on the ground that in the allotting work the personal preferences of the Indians have not heretofore been taken into consideration.
At present, the allotting work is being more thoroughly done, and the allotting agents are instructed to consider the individuality and personal preference of each allottee, and to adapt the allotment as nearly as practicable to his needs.
Another reason for many of the Indians not living on their lands is that they have not advanced sufficiently in civilization to abandon their tribal practice of living in a communal manner, and have not adopted the idea of separate ownership in lands.
Indians who are allotted lands but fail to live on their allotments can not be treated as beyond further consideration by the department, and it is a far more difficult matter to provide for them after being allotted their lands than before.
Prior to allotment they could be cared for on the reservations, but after the surplus lands have been disposed of, there is no place on which to care for them.
The total number of allotments, exclusive of those to the Five Civilized Tribes, made by the Indian Office during the last two years aggregates 42,364.
The total number of allotments made prior to that time aggregates but 58,349.
Cooperation with other bureaus.
I wish to commend the various bureaus of the department for their efforts at practical cooperation and the elimination of duplication of work so far as consistent with the law and efficient service.
In all cooperation, however, with other bureaus 'affecting the Indian Office, it is important that the Indian Office retain that jurisdiction and supervision which will at all times safeguard the interests of the Indian as paramount, and of which this service has the superior knowledge.
A law authorizing the Secretary of the Interior to lease, for periods not exceeding three or five years, lands within Indian reservations created for the occupancy of Indians by executive order, valuable for grazing or for business purposes in connection with the development of miscellaneous industries.
No such authority exists at present, and a law of this kind would not only result in financial benefit to the Indians, but would permit the department to require the improvement of the lands by the building of fences, and justify lessees in developing water upon the grazing lands.
A law authorizing this department to cut and sell the mature timber on Indian reservations and to authorize, under the supervision of the department, the sale of such timber by Indian allottees.
When the timber has reached its maximum growth, it will necessarily deteriorate thereafter, and should be cut for that reason and to make way for new growth.
It would also enable the department to supply the demand for timber from white settlers and business enterprises in the vicinity of reservations and allotments.
The only material change which has occurred during the past year affecting the Five Civilized Tribes has resulted from the act of Congress approved May 27, 1908, which became effective July 27, 1908.
Under the provisions of this act all lands of intermarried whites, freedmen and citizens of less than one-half Indian blood, including minors, and the surplus lands allotted to those having one-half or more and less than three-quarters Indian blood, are unrestricted.
The homesteads of those enrolled as mixed bloods having one-half or more Indian blood, including minors, and all allotted lands of those enrolled as having three-quarters or more mixed Indian blood, and full bloods, including minors, are not subject to alienation prior to April 26, 1931, except with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
Under the provisions of this act restrictions were removed from lands aggregating about 8,000,000 acres.
The total number of persons enrolled in the Five Civilized Tribes is 101,474.
The lands of only about 30,000 of these are still nonalienable without the approval of the Secretary.
The work of the allotment of the lands of the Five Civilized Tribes is practically complete, although there remains considerable to do incident to field investigation and the location of such Indians as remain unallotted and are unaccounted for, together with surveys which must be made to accurately describe reservations for schools, churches, and cemeteries.
Much work will also be required in connection with the appraisement and disposition of the unallotted surplus lands, which will aggregate, including the segregated coal and asphaltum lands of the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations, about three and one-half million acres.
I recommend that the Commissioner to the Five Civilized Tribes be continued until June 30, 1911, and that the work then incomplete be turned over to the agent at the Union Agency.
Choctaw and Chickasaw lands.
Of the lands of the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations, comprising 11,660,952.35 acres, 8,267,462.97 acres have been allotted to 37,572 citizens, which leaves from the total enrollment of 37,829 Indians 257 yet to be allotted.
Of the remaining area of these tribes, 1,373,324.62 acres are reserved from allotment for a proposed forest reserve, and 507,607.95 acres reserved for coal, asphalt, town sites, railroad rights of way, churches, schools, and cemeteries.
This large area, except the small portion for townsites, etc., with the 1,512,556.81 acres, a portion of which will be allotted to the 257 citizens above mentioned, will have to be disposed of before the completion of the work.
The closing of the allotment work of the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations has been retarded by the so-called Fleming case.
This case involved the rights of about 2,500 persons to be enrolled as citizens; it has just been decided by the Supreme Court of the United States adverse to their contention and will therefore no longer be a bar to closing up the work of allotment in this nation.
Cherokee lands.
Of the 4,399,067.73 acres comprising the Cherokee Nation, available for allotment, 4,351,172.02 acres have been allotted to 40,182 citizens, leaving a balance of 47,895.71 acres unallotted, and, considering that practically every acre of this land is unsuitable for allotment, and with 1,623 citizens unallotted, I recommend that necessary legislation be enacted which will admit of the sale of such surplus lands, and that the proceeds arising therefrom be made a part of the tribal moneys to be used in completing allotments by payment of twice the appraised value of an allotment, or $651.20 in lieu of a selection of land, as provided by the act approved April 26, 1906.
The allotment work in this nation has also been delayed by litigation of various kinds.
Creek lands.
Of the 3,063,083.08 acres comprising the Creek Nation, available for allotment, 2,994,598.21 acres have been allotted to the 18,716 citizens, leaving a balance of 68,484.87 acres.
However, under the Creek agreement, there was an allotment of 160 acres regardless of the appraisement of the land and an equalization was to be made on a valuation of $1,040 to an allotment.
To make this equalization, approximately the sum of $6,900,000 will be necessary, while about $3,000,000 is available as tribal funds, which sum will be increased by thę sale of the unallotted lands.
Under the act of Congress approved March 3, 1909 (35 Stat. L., 791,805), it was provided that $800 should be taken as a basis for the equalization of allotments in this nation.
It was further provided that as a condition precedent the Creek national council should pass an act in form, approved by the Secretary of the Interior, discharging the United States from all claim and demand on such account.
However, such tribal council by resolution recently rejected such legislation; consequently, before action can be taken to complete allotments to this tribe, this question will have to be settled by legislation.
Seminole lands.
The land of the Seminole Nation, comprising 363,851.67 acres, has been allotted to the 3,124 citizens entitled to participate in the division thereof.
There remain 2,606.64 acres of unallotted land in this nation to be disposed of, which, together with the eight 80-acre tracts and the twenty-eight 1-acre school tracts, are now being appraised preliminary to sale under existing law, which will complete, except as to the distribution of the funds, the allotment work of this nation.
No further legislation is needed at this time concerning the Seminole Nation.
Choctaw forest lands.
With the idea of establishing a forest reserve in the Choctaw Nation, a large area was withdrawn from allotment in December, 1906, and has been so held since that time, with some deduction of area, for congressional action.
This tract is mountainous and sparsely inhabited, scattered portions of it were allotted and the timber thereon alienable, and it is peculiarly subject to timber depredations.
A vigorous prosecution has been inaugurated against these timber trespassers.
Fifty-nine indictments have been secured; several actions in replevin have been instituted for lumber taken, and the summary removal of all sawmills and like plants has been directed.
The matter is well in hand though it is still necessary to maintain a force of inspectors.
Some action should be taken looking to a definite disposition of these lands in the interest of the Choctaw Nation.
Litigation to remove clouds.
On May 27, 1908, Congress appropriated $50,000 to be expended by the Attorney-General to cover the expenses of suits to be brought at the request of the Secretary of the Interior in the eastern district of Oklahoma to remove clouds from the allotted lands, which arose from deeds, contracts, mortgages, and other instruments executed by restricted Indians without the authority, of the Secretary of the Interior.
Nearly 30,000 suits were brought in the name of the United States.
United States Judge Campbell, of the district court, has sustained demurrers to these suits, holding that the United States did not have a sufficient interest, either in the person or the property, to maintain the actions but that they should have been brought in the names of the allottees.
Therefore, very little practical result has been accomplished by the suits, although they were apparently necessary and involved a vast amount of work by the Commissioner to the Five Civilized Tribes and his force.
District agents.
After the experience of a year the district agency service, created by the act of May 27, 1908, has proved, beyond question, the wisdom of such legislation.
The most important work of the district agents is the investigation of cases of guardianship which includes the appointment, the dismissal, and examination of the reports of such trustees, and it is probable that, under the last branch of such work, a saving of $300,000 has been made to Indian wards.
Another saving has been made through them of not less than $200,000 in the collection of back rentals upon leases.
Other than these duties these agents have heard intruder cases, assisted in the delivery of patents and deeds, located allotments, furnished information to the special assistant to the Attorney-General engaged in the institution of suits to clear the cloud from the title of Indian lands, and taking applications, and performing the work incident thereto, for the removal of restrictions.
In connection with the work of the district agents, and vitally concerning the welfare of the restricted allottees, is the leasing of lands.
Under the present system the lands of full bloods may be leased for one year for grazing purposes and five years for agricultural purposes, without the approval of the Secretary of the Interior; consequently, these persons who are incompetent to dispose of their lands naturally make leases for grossly inadequate considerations and, even after complaint to the district agent or some other authority and formal request of him that the necessary action be taken to secure a cancellation of such lease, the Indian is importuned in one manner or another until he revokes the authority theretofore given, and, consequently, any work which has been begun is a mere waste; second, after the application of an Indian for the removal of restrictions a lease is promptly secured covering the land, consequently there are no purchasers when the same is offered for sale, as possession can not be obtained for a period of five years and thus the land remains restricted at the will of the persons who would resort to such action.
I recommend that appropriate legislation be enacted providing that all grazing and agricultural leases executed shall not bevalid unless approved by the district agent under rules and regulations promulgated by the department.
Oil.
There were 1,378 mineral leases, practically all of which were for oil and gas, filed with the United States Indian agent during the year, which shows a material decrease compared with previous years, which is accounted for by the removal of restrictions from certain classes of Indian citizens by the act of Congress approved May 27, 1908.
These leases are made with individual allottees whose lands are restricted and are not valid until approved by the Secretary of the Interior.
Such leases formerly provided a royalty of 10 per cent, but the regulations now provide for a royalty of not less than 121 per cent and in practically all cases where leases were entered into on a basis of 10 per cent royalty, the same has been increased to 121 per cent.
From the best information obtainable the amount of oil held in storage in the Creek and Cherokee nations on June 30 1909, was 42,654,403 barrels.
There are approximately 7,812 producing oil wells, 600 gas wells, and about 1,000 dry holes in the territory of the Five Civilized Tribes, practically all of the same being in the Creek and Cherokee nations, the drilling of which cost about $20,000,000.
The royalty collected by the United States Indian agent on oil and gas was $1,813,460.28 as compared with $1,692,627.55 during the previous year.
The royalty so collected is held to the credit of the individual allottees and paid out to them under regulations by the department.
The pipe lines for transporting oil out of Oklahoma are inadequate to handle the production of oil.
One new pipe-line franchise was granted to the Prairie Oil and Gas Company during the summer.
This company is actively engaged in building its new line to the Gulf and it ought to afford means of handling a large part of the surplus oil.
The price which the restricted Indian gets for his oil is entirely inadequate compared with prices which obtain in other sections of the country.
It is difficult to see an adequate remedy.
Practically seven-tenths of the oil field belongs to unrestricted Indians.
These Indians make leases which bring them inadequate prices.
As long as the producers are able to get cheap leases from the unrestricted Indian, they are not inclined to enter into leases with the restricted Indian when the Government is undertaking to secure a more adequate price.
The question is difficult in the extreme.
The Government in its supervision over the oil fields is practically in the position of a minority stockholder.
There has been, as usual, a marked increase in the volume of business in the Patent Office, particularly in the case of applications for patent for inventions.
The number of trade-marks registered was less than during the preceding year.
The total money receipts from all sources were $1,975,919.97; the expenditures, $1,887,443.35, leaving a net surplus of $88,476.62.
The total of receipts over the expenditures for maintaining the bureau from 1836 to June 30, 1909, is $7,060,547.
The present force of examiners in the Patent Office has enabled the commissioner to bring up the work so that it is now practically current in nearly all of the examining divisions, but future increases in the volume of business will render additions to the force necessary.
The models of inventions, which had been stored in the basement and on the first floor of the Patent Office building during the last year, have been removed to a fireproof warehouse.
In order to make room for the working force of the office, it was necessary to assign additional rooms, which I did, with the result of inconvenience and overcrowding of the employees of the office of the Secretary.
The rapid growth of the Patent Office will inevitably require, in the near future, more space than the building now occupied can afford.
The removal of the Patent Office to a new building would enable the Secretary of the Interior to utilize the present building to advantage for his own immediate force, and for the housing of other bureaus and offices of the department now occupying rented quarters.
I accordingly recommend that Congress be asked to appropriate a sufficient fund to obtain a site, and authorize the construction of a suitable building in which ample room can be had to properly transact the present and future business of the Patent Office.
In respect to needed legislation pertaining to patent matters, I refer to and indorse the suggestions of the Commissioner of Patents in his annual report for the year ending June 30, 1909, directing particular attention to the recommendation for the enactment of a law which would eliminate one appeal in the Patent Office, and thus diminish materially the expense and time now required in obtaining a final adjudication.
Since the foundation of the Government, there has been disbursed for pensions to soldiers, sailors, and marines, their widows and dependents, the sum of $3,913,082,513.73, of which amount $96,445,444.23 was disbursed prior to June 30, 1865.
Since that date, pension disbursements have increased from $15,450,549.88, in 1866, to $161,973,- 703.77, in 1909, the latter amount being the largest sum ever disbursed for pensions in any one year.
This increase in disbursement was principally due to the number of pensioners placed upon the rolls under the act of February 6, 1907, granting pensions of $12, $15, and $20 per month to the survivors of the war with Mexico and the civil war on reaching the ages of 62, 70, and 75 years, respectively.
The last surviving soldier of the Revolutionary war died April 5, 1869, and the last surviving widow of that war died November 11, 1906.
The name of one daughter of a soldier of the Revolution, pensioned by special act of Congress, still remains on the roll.
The last pensioned soldier of the war of 1812 died May 13, 1905, but the pension rolls still contain the names of 395 widows of soldiers of that war.
Since 1861 there have been granted by special acts of Congress 26,377 pensions and increases of pensions, of which 16,407 were on the rolls at the close of the fiscal year, with an annual value of $4,846,126, a little more than one-half of which amount is in excess of what could have been granted under the general laws.
The number of special acts granting pensions and increases, passed during the second session of the Sixtieth Congress, was 3,021.
The increase in the annual expenditures resulting from those special acts was $454,722.
The number of pensioners on the roll at the beginning of the year was 951,687, to which was added during the year a total of 46,088; 51,581 names were dropped from the roll during the year, because of death and other reasons, leaving the total number, 946,194 at the close of the fiscal year 1909, a net decrease of 5,493.
During the year ending June 30, 1909, 6,013 appeals and motions were received, making the total of cases pending and filed 6,520.
During the year there were disposed of 5,864 cases, leaving 656 undisposed of at the close of the fiscal year.
The work in this branch of the department has steadily progressed and may be said to be practically current.
In July, 1909, I caused this bureau to be removed from the rented building which it had occupied during the past thirty-five years to more commodious and comfortable quarters in the building formerly occupied by the Post-Office Department, now occupied in part by the General Land Office.
The removal has added largely to the efficiency of the administration of the office and to protection of the library from fire, and will effect an annual saving to the Government of $4,623.20 in rent and expenses of heating and lighting.
A complete inventory of the bound volumes in the library has been made.
The number of bound volumes therein is 47,230, and the unbound materials, pamphlets, and publications number about 80,000.
The systematic recording of accessions to the library has been put into effect, and in future more exact account may be kept of the contents of the collection than was possible in the past.
Each of the 50 States and Territories supporting colleges of agriculture and mechanic arts has received, for the year ending June 30, 1910, $40,000, making the total amount paid out under the acts of Congress approved August 30, 1890, and March 4, 1907, for the support and endowment of such institutions, $2,000,000.
Sixty-nine United States public schools for natives of Alaska were maintained during the year ending June 30, 1909, with an enrollment of 3,809 and an average attendance of 1,521.
Instruction in sewing, cooking, and carpentry has been generally introduced into these schools, and an effort is being made on the part of the bureau to introduce sanitary methods of living in the native villages.
A law conferring upon the Secretary of the Interior authority to frame a sanitary code for the natives and making failure to comply with its provisions a misdemeanor, would aid teachers and physicians of the bureau in enforcing obedience to sanitary instructions.
The amount expended from the fund for education of natives in Alaska during the year 1909 was $200,000.
Eight new reindeer herds were established during the year, making the total number of herds in Alaska 31.
In compliance with the provisions of sections 681 and 683, Revised Statutes, and the acts of February 12, 1889 (25 Stat., 661), and July 1, 1902 (32 Stat., 630), 2,273 volumes of the United States Reports, 1 volume of the Lawyers' Cooperative Publishing Company's Digest, and 15 sets of the reports published by the Lawyers' Cooperative Publishing Company were received by the department and distributed to executive and judicial officers of the Government.
As provided in section 5 of the act of July 1, 1902 (26 Stat., 630), 80 sets of Revised Statutes of the United States and Supplements were distributed to Senators and Representatives.
It is hereby ordered that on and after May 1, 1909, all official communications or reports from and to executive officers of the Territories and territorial possessions of the United States, viz, Arizona, Hawaii, New Mexico, Porto Rico, Alaska, Samoa, and Guam, and all official communications or reports relating to territorial matters from and to all executive officers of the United States stationed in such Territories and territorial possessions, shall be transmitted directly to the heads of the departments of the Government as provided by law, and in all cases where the acts of Congress do not specifically designate the department to which reports shall be transmitted, the same shall be forwarded to the Secretary of the Interior in such manner and under such regulations as he may prescribe.
The permanent white population of Alaska is estimated at 33,000, 7,000 white persons employed in the mines, canneries, and in railroad construction, who are transients, and about 35,000 natives.
The total value of merchandise shipped from the United States to Alaska during the fiscal year was $17,186,445, an increase of more than a million dollars over the preceding year.
The aggregate value of exports to the United States was $34,335,435.
Gold mining continues to be the most important industry, the value of gold produced during the year 1908 being $19,292,818.
The production of copper amounted to $605,267.
Coal is widely distributed throughout the district, but up to the present time practically no production has occurred and no patents for coal lands have been issued.
The next most important industry to mining is the canning of salmon, the exports to the United States for the year being valued at $9,972,316.
The pack during the year was about 2,278,000 cases of 4-dozen 1-pound cans.
The white and mixed-blood schools are, by the terms of the act of January 27, 1905, under the supervision of the governor, and have been successfully administered.
The amendment of the act so as to authorize the establishment of schools in districts where there are as many as 15 pupils is desirable, there being ample funds for the purpose.
The education of the natives, under the supervision of the Bureau of Education, has received mention in another part of this report.
One hundred and sixty-five miles of wagon roads, 383 miles of sled roads, and 241 miles of trail have been constructed, at an approximate cost of $690,000.
The service afforded by the military cable and telegraph is excellent.
The rapid development of the mineral wealth of Alaska and the establishment of transportation facilities is attracting and will continue to attract a constantly increasing permanent population to the district.
This creates an increased demand for agricultural products, which can be met in part by local production provided suitable encouragement is given to the settler to enter, improve, and develop lands suitable for agriculture and grazing.
The approximate area of agricultural and grazing lands ranges from 16,700 to 28,000 square miles, and the known coal fields embrace about 12,000 square miles, of which about 7,000 square miles could be covered by a system of surveys planned to include the agricultural and grazing lands mentioned.
It is very important, in the interest of agricultural development, that the system of public-land surveys be extended over lands of this character, as, in the absence of such surveys, the present cost of acquiring title under the homestead laws is prohibitive except in the most favored localities.
The lands described are widely distributed over a region containing some 200,000 square miles; the cost of surveys in this field will be large because of the high cost of transportation and the shortness of the open season, and to promote the development and encourage the settlers it is important that results should be obtained at the earliest possible date.
Many of the difficulties which would attend the execution of surveys in the manner now in vogue in the United States proper can be avoided by providing for a geodetic control of surveys through triangulation.
This will enable the taking up of subdivisional work in the most important areas first, and yet the entire area can be included in one system of surveys.
With a slight additional cost the triangulation can be extended into the important mining districts and monuments established to which all private surveys for land may be connected, thus avoiding litigation and confusion in future upon questions relating to boundaries.
The geodetic methods of survey have been applied in the subdivisional survey work of various Indian-land surveys during the past twenty years and have worked expeditiously and successfully.
Excessive costs of surveys in this field would render it impossible to make the surveys under the contract system unless the maximum rate now allowed by law is largely increased.
Complete topographic surveys should be executed at the same time that the subdivisional work is being carried on, as this can be done most economically in connection with the land surveys and will be of very great value to the agricultural and mining interests.
The cost of running base and principal meridian lines is estimated at from $30 to $40 per mile, except in districts along the seaboard, where rugged topography and dense timber may in some instances increase the cost to $100 per mile.
It is believed that the subdivisional work can be done at a cost of from $2,500 to $3,000 per township.
With an accompanying complete topographic survey the cost would range from $1,000 to $1,800 per township more.
It is estimated that the cost of the first season's work for surveying parties to run out from 800 to 1,000 miles of base and meridan lines and connect them by triangulation with established points would be $100,000.
Subdivisional surveys could follow during the next year, when seven or eight surveying parties could be placed in the field, at a total cost of about $100,000.
This would enable the work to be kept well abreast with the demands of settlers.
I therefore respectfully recommend that the necessary appropriations be made for the initiation of this most important work, and that the Secretary of the Interior be authorized to carry on these surveys by engineers in his department.
Care of insane.
Under the act of April 28, 1904 (33 Stat., 526), a contract was entered into on January 16, 1905, with the Sanitarium Company, of Mount Tabor, Portland, Oreg.
This contract expires January 17, 1910.
On October 16, 1909, 124 patients were being treated under this contract.
In pursuance of the act approved February 6, 1909 (35 Stat., 601), and after due advertisement, a further contract was entered into with the Sanitarium Company on April 28, 1909, for the care of the Alaska insane for a period of five years from and after January 16, 1910, at the rate of $330 per annum for each patient, the right being reserved, upon conditions therein set forth, to cancel the contract at the expiration of two years from the date thereof.
In my judgment, provision should be made for the care within Alaska of its insane, and I therefore recommend that an adequate appropriation be made by Congress for the erection of a suitable hospital for the insane, and for its maintenance, at some convenient point in that district.
The present population of the Territory is estimated to be about 200,000, the bulk of the immigration coming from the Eastern and Middle Western States.
The past year has witnessed a substantial increase in the output of the mines and the products of the soil.
The receipts for the year ending June 30, 1909, were $917,490.20, as against $882,827.58 for the preceding year.
The expenditures for the year amounted to $980,961.05, leaving a cash balance in the Treasury June 30, 1909, of $376,704.88.
The bonded city, county, and territorial debt, segregated June 30, 1909, amounted to $3,098,275.29.
The output of the mines during the year 1908 was the largest in the history of the Territory, there having been produced 289,523,267 pounds of copper, 117,647 ounces of gold, 2,808,450 ounces of silver, 2,928,000 pounds of lead, and 304,000 pounds of zinc.
This Territory, which consists of eight principal islands having an aggregate area of 6,640 square miles, has an estimated population of 175,000.
Of this number about 75,000 are Japanese, 18,000 are Chinese, and 5,000 are Koreans.
The Hawaiians and part-Hawaiians number about 35,000.
Of the remainder, about 14,000 are Americans, British, or Germans, 23,000 are Portuguese, and 5,000 are Spanish, Porto Ricans, and miscellaneous.
The number of Japanese resident in the Territory decreased during the year; the number of Portuguese is increasing.
An additional income tax has been imposed, from the proceeds of which several hundred thousand dollars will be available for the encouragement of desirable immigration.
The receipts for the year were $3,051,526.81, an increase of $381,778.49 over the preceding year.
The expenditures were $2,934,- 984.10, an increase of $117,605.24.
The surplus of receipts was $116,542.71.
The cash on hand July 1, 1909 (current account), was $453,106.76, and there were outstanding warrants amounting to $170,718.57, leaving the net available cash balance $282,388.19.
The bonded debt at the close of the year was $3,959,000, a reduction of $20,000.
The imports amounted to $21,424,980, an increase of $1,439,256.
Those from the continental United States amounted to $17,391,406, an increase of $2,088,081.
The exports amounted to $40,521,504, a decrease of $1,666,951.
The decrease in exports was due largely to delay in harvesting the sugar crop.
The customs receipts, which go to the Federal Treasury, amounted to $1,396,379.91, a decrease of $153,777.41 from the preceding year but larger than for any year except the last two.
The 1909 crop of sugar is estimated at 530,000 short tons, valued at $40,000,000.
Attention is directed to the importance of amending the land laws of the Territory so as to encourage in every way practicable the disposition of lands in small parcels to actual settlers, and to prevent such lands from falling under the control of associations or corporations.
The through steamers which make Honolulu a port of call are generally in foreign ownership and under the coastwise navigation laws can not transport passengers between the Territory and the mainland.
The result is that the present transportation service is inadequate.
It is accordingly suggested that said laws be suspended for a limited period as to passenger traffic between Hawaii and the mainland.
The estimated population of the Territory is now 470,000, an increase of about 20,000 over last year.
The additions to the population have been mostly from the Middle, Northern, and Middle-Western States, the foreign immigration being less than 1 per cent.
The finances of the Territory are in good condition, the net bonded indebtedness on May 31, 1909, being $912,420.51; the net receipts for the eleven months ending May 31 were $1,611,159.83, and the expenditures during the same period were $1,083,934.67, leaving a balance on hand, June 1, of $527,225.16.
All territorial funds are deposited with approved depositories, are protected by ample bonds, and draw interest at the rate of 3 per cent per annum on daily balances.
The coal mines have produced more coal and coke than in any preceding year, 2,708,624.48 tons having been shipped from the mines, of which 682,772.21 went to the coke ovens and the rest to the market.
The total value of the coal and coke was $3,881,508.57.
The total number of persons employed in and about the coal mines was 2,231, and the fatalities were reduced from 0.926 per cent of the persons employed, in the preceding year, to 0.556 per cent in the fiscal year ending June 30, 1909.
The total valuation of public-school property exceeds $1,000,000.
The total expenditure for school purposes exceeded $600,000.
Fortyseven thousand nine hundred and eighty-seven pupils were enrolled in the public schools.
AN ACT To amend an act entitled "An act temporarily to provide revenues and a civil government for Porto Rico, and for other purposes," approved April 12, 1900.
And provided further, That if at the termination of any fiscal year the appropriations necessary for the support of government for the ensuing fiscal year shall not have been made an amount equal to the sums appropriated in the last appropriation bills for such purpose shall be deemed to be appropriated; and until the legislature shall act in such behalf the treasurer may, with the advice of the governor, make the payments necessary for the purposes aforesaid."
That all reports required by law to be made by the governor or members of the executive council of Porto Rico to any official in the United States shall hereafter be made to an executive department of the Government of the United States to be designated by the President; and the President is hereby authorized to place all matters pertaining to the government of Porto Rico in the jurisdiction of such department.
Under the provisions of section 2 of this act hereafter all reports required by law to be made by the governor or members of the executive council of Porto Rico to any official in the United States will be made to the War Department, and all matters pertaining to the government of Porto Rico are placed in the jurisdiction of that department.
The business of the department pertaining to civil government in Porto Rico is, pursuant to section 87 of the act of July 1, 1902, assigned to the Bureau of Insular Affairs.
This act was passed pursuant to the special message of the President of May 10, 1909.
The reports of the Commissioners of the Interior and Education, which were formerly required by law to be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior, have been transmitted under the foregoing authority to the Secretary of War.
The naval officers who act as governors of Guam and Samoa, respectively, have submitted their reports to the Secretary of the Navy, as required by law.
My inspection of the Yellowstone and Yosemite national parks during the past summer convinces me that the Government should adopt a more advanced policy respecting their maintenance, improvement, and operation.
1) A continued extension of roads, trails, and structures for public travel and convenience are required to enable the tourist to obtain the benefits of the scenic beauties of these natural playgrounds the most wonderful in the world.
2) These parks have ceased to be experimental as to the operation of transportation lines, hotels, and other concessions, because of the steady stream of travel frequenting them, and the large profits in most cases should require the devotion of a reasonable share thereof to the maintenance of the parks.
I have therefore determined to impose upon all the concessionaires, so far as existing contracts will permit, a franchise or use tax, based upon their gross earnings, for the enlargement of the maintenance fund, and where new leases are executed, to advance the rental and franchise charge proportionate to the privilege enjoyed.
A definite system of accounting and inspection will be installed for the Government's protection in this behalf.
The system of maintaining regular troops in the Yellowstone and Yosemite parks is a highly satisfactory method of patrol.
The moral effect and the saving of expense in administration alone justify their assignment.
As to the park roads, I would recommend that future appropriations for their construction and maintenance be given to this department for disbursement rather than to the War Department, thus clothing the Interior Department with their control and supervision.
In the Yosemite National Park special attention is directed to the necessity for the establishment of a permanent water and drainage system to protect the health of the tourists and campers, and those stationed in the park.
A board of government experts should be selected to submit proper plans for solving this pressing problem.
It is also advisable, as this is an " all-year" park, to establish a permanent military post in the park, instead of the temporary camp maintained during the summer months.
The satisfactory enforcement of park regulations can be carried out in no other way.
I would also urge that Congress authorize the acquisition of private holdings in this park of both lands and toll roads.
The large private fenced areas in which cattle are grazed require constant supervision because of breaches of regulations.
The private lands containing merchantable timber, if logged off, would greatly mar the beauty of the park.
None of the hotels or public convenience structures in the park are adequate for the accommodation of the tourists, or are in keeping with the scenic surroundings.
They are old frame structures of the "wayside inn" type.
I would favor the erection by the Government of a permanent tavern or hotel on the floor of the Yosemite Valley canyon and one at Glacier Point, to be leased for reasonable periods.
The electric plant should be condemned as unsafe and a new one installed.
As above stated, private toll roads should be extinguished, and all roads in the park placed under the control of and maintained by the Government.
Extensions of road construction are important to give the public easy access to many of the natural wonders of the Yosemite and its adjacent valleys, such as the Hetch Hetchy, and Grand Canyon of the Tuolumne, and a new road is feasible and most desirable along the south crest of the valley canyon to Glacier Point.
I have requested the Director of the Geological Survey and Engineers Hill and Hopson of the Reclamation Service to make report upon several of the features here mentioned, which will be submitted to you when received.
Attention is invited to the reports of the superintendents of these and other national parks.
The Grand Canyon of the Colorado was established as a national monument on January 11, 1908.
Its status is not such as would authorize the granting of concessions or of controlling travel and conveniences therefor which its growing importance requires.
I would therefore recommend that legislation be had establishing it as a national park.
The revenues from all sources for the fiscal year were $34,475, an increase of $6,385 over the preceding year.
The total expenditures for salaries, improvements, etc., during the fiscal year 1909 were $19,699.27, a decrease of $1,309.51 from the preceding year.
The balance in the Treasury to the credit of the Hot Springs fund on June 30, 1909, was $28,739.53.
During the year a new cement cooling-tank, with a capacity of 14,600 gallons, was installed in the free bath house, and other minor improvements made.
The demand for accommodations at this bath house is steadily increasing and a more modern building with up-todate bathing arrangements will be needed in the near future.
Other improvements upon the reservation, consisting of repairs to roads, retaining walls, etc., have been made.
By the sundry civil act approved March 3, 1901 (31 Stat., 1188), the Secretary of the Interior was directed to determine the value of certain condemned buildings formerly located on the Hot Springs Mountain Reservation, which were destroyed by fire on the night of March 5, 1877, and to pay the amount of claims found due in connection therewith, reporting to Congress his action in the premises.
Thirty-two claims have been presented under the act, of which 19 have been allowed aggregating in value $48,257.52; 2 claims have been rejected, and 11 are under consideration.
By an act approved June 8, 1906, entitled "An act for the preservà- tion of American antiquities." the President of the United States is authorized, "in his discretion, to declare by public proclamation historic landmarks, historic and prehistoric structures, and other obiects of historic or scientific interest that are situated upon the lands owned or controlled by the Government of the United States to be national monuments."
National monuments administered by Department of Agriculture.
Permits for the excavation of ruins, the excavation of archæological sites, and the gathering of objects of antiquity will be granted, by the respective Secretaries having jurisdiction, to reputable museums, universities, colleges, or other recognized scientific or educational institutions, or to their duly authorized agents.
During the year five permits were granted for examination, excavation, and gathering of specimens in Alaska, on the Navajo Indian Reservation, Ariz., Santa Clara Indian Reservation, N. Mex., the public lands of Southern Utah and Colorado, and the Navajo National Monument, Arizona; two permits were issued for the retention of collections obtained on the public lands without proper authority in advance; and three permits for the gathering of silicified samples of wood from the Petrified Forest National Monument, Arizona.
Five applications for the latter purpose were denied.
A number of the largest archæological institutions claim that the uniform regulations should be amended so as to remove certain restrictions which they now regard as oppressive, and these restrictions may account for the limited number of applications received for archæological permits.
The matter of revision is now under consideration by the department.
Bird reserves enlarged.
On June 30, 1908, there were 2,733 patients in the hospital, and during the year ending June 30, 1909, 691 were admitted, making the total number under treatment during the year 3,424.
The number of persons discharged, including deaths, was 572.
The average daily population was 2,801.66, an increase over the preceding year of 136.96 persons.
Of the patients admitted during the year, 187 were from the army, 97 from the navy, 6 from the Public Health and Marine-Hospital Service, and 401 from civil life.
Numerous repairs and improvements to the buildings and grounds have been made during the year, and work has been commenced upon the consolidated power plant which will supply all of the power and heat for the institution.
The male nurses' home and the Oaks building have been remodeled, a new barn constructed, and the amusement hall completed.
Buildings for an epileptic group, a new dairy barn, an entrance and gatehouse at the hospital, and an iron fence along the front of the hospital grounds on the east side of Nichols avenue, and additional lands for hospital purposes are needed.
Twelve nurses were graduated from the training school, of whom 10 were women and 2 were men.
It is proposed to improve the training course by incorporating therein more practical instruction.
Work in the psychological, pathological, and histopathological laboratories has been actively prosecuted with marked good results.
Two thousand seven hundred and twenty-one patients were treated in this institution during the year, of whom 1,836 were residents of the District of Columbia and 885 admitted from various States.
Two thousand five hundred and ninety-two were discharged, of whom 1,288 recovered, 915 were improved, 121 were unimproved, 7 were not treated, and 261 died.
The number of patients remaining in the hospital at the close of the year was 129.
Of the deaths reported, 57 were in cases which were beyond human aid when received.
In the outpatient department 3,358 persons were treated.
Eight hundred and seventy-seven surgical operations were performed, a larger proportion, than ever before, being of a major nature.
The bills rendered for the care and treatment of patients admitted from the District of Columbia amounted to $38,846.40, or $13,346.40 more than the appropriation made by Congress for this purpose.
Future estimates for payments to the hospital for the care and treatment of these indigent patients from the District of Columbia should be based upon the number of such persons treated during the previous year at contract rates.
The demand for admission to the hospital by those who are able and willing to pay for medical and surgical services has been large, and, as the institution is now in position to care for such patients, I recommend that authority be given the Secretary of the Interior to receive and provide for pay-patients at the hospital under appropriate regulations prescribed by him; the moneys received from this source to be annually reported to Congress, used in the administration of the institution, and disbursed in accordance with regulations governing federal appropriations.
Under regulations approved by me May 3, 1909, the clinical material which this institution affords was made available to the medical students of Howard University.
While the hospital and university are separate and distinct institutions, they are closely related in the advancement of the interests of the colored race, and the privilege accorded under the regulations is of material aid to the medical department of the university.
The high standard of the work of the Training School for Nurses has been maintained, and the number graduated in 1909 was 14, an increase of 1 over the preceding year.
This institution is supported by appropriations made by Congress and by contributions from societies and individuals.
It has 1,205 students enrolled, 103 of whom are from foreign countries.
The school of theology is supported independently of government appropriations, and is undenominational in character.
The school of medicine takes high rank, and, because of its close connection with the Freedmen's Hospital, affords ample clinical facilities for the study of diseases of the colored race.
There was received for the support of the institution during the fiscal year from all sources $160,972.52, including $63,081.32 from the government appropriation; $154,845.04 was expended for the university, leaving on hand an available balance of $6,127.48.
The number of students and pupils of all classes in the institution since July 1, 1908, has been 188.
In the collegiate department there were 132 students representing 36 States of the Union, the District of Columbia, Canada, and Scotland.
In the primary department there were 35 pupils from the District of Columbia.
During the fiscal year 44 students and pupils were discharged by graduation and otherwise.
The standards for admission and graduation have been advanced one year, and imiportant changes have been made in the course of study in the collegiate department.
At the anniversary of the collegiate department in May, 4 candidates were presented for the degree of bachelor of letters; 2 for the degree of bachelor of philosophy; 4 for the degree of bachelor of arts, and 6 for the degree of master of arts.
The total receipts for the institution from all sources amounted to $86,160.45, of which $73,000 was appropriated by Congress for general support; $5,000 for special repairs; $2,500 for improvement and inclosure of grounds, and $5,660.45 was received from private sources for board, tuition, etc.
The expenditures for current expenses were $77,821.92, special repairs $5,000, and $2,500 for improvement and inclosure of grounds, leaving an unexpended balance of $838.53.
Section 2 of the act of Congress approved May 29, 1858 (11 Stat., 294), authorizes the Secretary of the Interior to place for instruction in an institution for the blind, in the State of Maryland or some other State, the indigent blind children of teachable age who are children of persons actually engaged in the military and naval service of the United States, and under section 4869, Revised Statutes of the United States, the blind children of teachable age belonging to the District of Columbia.
The act of May 26, 1908 (35 Stat., 295), making appropriations for the District of Columbia, provided that after July 1, 1908, a contract should be entered into by the Commissioners of the District of Columbia for the instruction, in Maryland or some other State, of indigent blind children of the District, appropriated $6,000 for the purpose, and repealed the permanent indefinite appropriation under section 3689 of the Revised Statutes.
Inasmuch as the Secretary, by section 2 of the act of May 29, 1858 (11 Stat., 293), was also charged with providing for the instruction of the blind children of all persons in the military and naval service of the United States while such persons are actually in such service, the expense to be defrayed from the permanent indefinite appropriation above referred to, the question was submitted to the Comptroller of the Treasury as to whether that appropriation was repealed so far as to be no longer available for the instruction of this class of beneficiaries.
In an opinion rendered October 27, 1908, the Comptroller of the Treasury held that the act of May 26, 1908, supra, only repealed the provisions of section 3689 of the Revised Statutes to the extent that said section provides for the education of the blind children of the District of Columbia, and that the permanent indefinite appropriation in question is still available for instructing the blind children of all persons in the military and naval service of the United States, in some institution in Maryland or some other State, and that the Secretary is authorized to continue to issue permits for the instruction of such children.
No permits for this class of beneficiaries were issued during the past year.
In pursuance of recommendation made by my predecessor in his report for the year ending June 30, 1908, Congress, by the act of March 3, 1909, placed this institution under the supervision and control of the Commissioners of the District of Columbia.
The Senate Office Building was so far completed that on March 5 the building was turned over to the Senate Committee on Rules for the allotment of rooms, and the building was occupied through the extra session of Congress.
This building, as well as the House Office Building, will, it is expected, be heated and lighted during the coming winter from the new heating, lighting, and power plant, which plant is also designed to furnish heat, light, and power to the Capitol Building, the Congressional Library, and such other government buildings as may be erected adjacent to the Capitol grounds.
Numerous improvements and repairs have been made during the year at the Capitol, the engine house, Senate and House stables, District of Columbia court-house, Court of Claims building, and Botanic Garden, and work is progressing upon the extension to the building for the District of Columbia court of appeals.
This corporation, which was created by act of Congress approved January 12, 1903, has for its object the promotion of education within the United States.
The corporation owns no real estate, its property consisting of securities and money divided into various funds according to the purpose for which it is to be used.
The total capital on June 30, 1908, amounted to $38,313,100.29.
On June 30, 1909, the general fund amounted to $10,908,355.53, of which $10,845,585.13 was invested in railroad and industrial securities and $62,770.40 was in bank.
The principal account of the John D. Rockefeller foundation fund amounted to $10,672,870.02, of which $10,669,697.41 was in securities and the remainder, $3,172.61, in bank.
Three special funds amounted, respectively, to $16,955,841.11, $1,037,130.91, and $250,000.
The fund of the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research amounted to $2,621,105, and the balance of principal and income of an annuity fund amounted to $12,260.97.
There is also a special fund known as the "Anna T. Jeanes fund," for negro rural schools, amounting to $200,000.
From the income of this fund the sum of $9,367.82 was appropriated during the year.
The act of May 17, 1862 (12 Stat., 389), required the Washington and Georgetown Railroad Company (Capital Traction Company, successor) to "lay upon the line of its road rails of the most approved pattern, to be determined by the Secretary of the Interior."
The act of Congress approved May 24, 1870 (16 Stat., 136), incorporating the Columbia Railway Company, provided for the submission of yearly reports to Congress or the Secretary of the Interior.
The property and franchise of this road have been transferred to the Washington Railway and Electric Company, report by which is submitted directly to Congress.
The act of Congress approved June 23, 1874 (18 Stat., 277), required the Washington Gas-Light Company to annually furnish the Secretary of the Interior with a statement of all its coal contracts or purchases for the ensuing year, excepting the Ritchie mineral and the Richmond coal.
The act of March 3, 1903 (32 Stat., 959), provided for the appointment of an inspector of gas and meters by the Commissioners of the District of Columbia.
The Washington Gas-Light Company has no connection whatever with this department other than to render the report hereinbefore specified.
In view of the fact that none of the corporations above mentioned are in other respects connected with or under the supervision of the Secretary of the Interior, I renew the recommendation of my predecessor that so much of the several acts as imposed duties upon the Secretary of the Interior be repealed, or so modified as to impose the duties prescribed by the acts upon the Commissioners of the District of Columbia, and to provide that the reports required be made directly to Congress.
Section 6 of the act of Congress approved February 20, 1889, entitled "An act to incorporate the Maritime Canal Company of Nicaragua," requires said company to report on the first Monday of December in each year to the Secretary of the Interior.
The report of this corporation will be submitted to Congress as soon as received.
By act approved May 27, 1908, Congress authorized and directed the Secretary of the Interior to aid the people of the District of Alaska and the Territory of Hawaii in providing and maintaining exhibits of the products and resources of those Territories at the exposition.
The total appropriation for the Alaska exhibit was $100,000.
The appropriation for the Hawaiian exhibit was $25,000, to which the Territory added a like amount.
Section 11 of the same act provided for a government exhibit at the exposition and appropriated $200,000 for the selection, purchase, appropriation, transportation, arrangement, exhibition, and return of the articles exhibited.
Under the provisions of the act, the President appointed a government board of managers, composed of three persons, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior, Hon.
Jesse E. Wilson, being designated as chairman of the board.
Creditable exhibits were made for the District of Alaska and for the Territory of Hawaii in buildings erected for that purpose.
A large building was erected for the display of the general government exhibit, which was pronounced by competent judges as the best and most interesting exhibit of that character ever displayed by the Government at any exposition.
The various government officers who assisted in collecting, preparing, installing, and maintaining the several exhibits are to be commended for their efficient work.
During the entire period covered by the exposition, the officers and members of the Alaska-Yukon-Pacific Exposition Company cooperated in every way with the Government in its work.
Until the work connected with the packing, shipping, and return of the exhibits to their proper places, and the liabilities are all ascertained and accounts adjusted, an exact statement of the status of the various appropriations can not be made.
It would appear, however, that all such liabilities and expenses will be well within the funds available.
All reports available from the officers of the exposition company indicate a successful financial management.
I respectfully refer to the annual reports of the chiefs of the various bureaus and other officers of this department for detailed information.
Secretary.