MY DEAR MR. PREsiDENT: The Department of the Interior wrote a memorable record in the 12 months ending June 30, 1940.
As is well known, the Department deals with problems of wide scope and great complexity.
To mention but a few examples: The Department of the Interior markets electric energy from the Columbia River.
It opens irrigated areas in the semiarid regions for settlement.
It serves as guardian of the Indians and protects their property.
It locates and analyzes useful deposits of strategic and critical minerals.
It cooperates with States in the conservation of petroleum and natural gas.
It watches over our fish and wildlife.
It develops better methods for the production and utilization of minerals and metals.
It helps to improve technical processes in mining.
It manages great forests and controls the public domain.
It aids in the stabilization of the economy of Hawaii, Alaska, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands; it has specified duties with respect to the Philippine Islands.
It rebuilds and regulates the livestock ranges of the West.
It preserves historic buildings and recreational lands in national parks.
It fixes the minimum prices for bituminous coal.
It conserves the Nation's water resources above ground and below the surface.
Through all of these activities runs a central thread-the conservation of our natural resources.
The efforts of the Department are directed toward the improvement of the general welfare of our people through the intelligent development and use of our basic resources.
One of this Department's most significant social and economic achievements during the last year has been the placing on the public market of electric energy from the Columbia River.
In December 1939 the first hydroelectric power from the generators of Bonneville surged over transmission lines into the Vancouver substation and thence across the river into Portland, and a great vision of years became an actuality.
Under the direction of the Bonneville Power Administration, Bonneville power is vitalizing new defense industries, lighting homes, running factories, electrifying farms, producing new electrochemical and electrometallurgical plants, and seems well on the way toward stimulating a substantial development of the metals industries on the West coast.
Bonneville and Grand Coulee power, marketed by a single agency, is destined to remake the economy of the Pacific Northwest.
The ultimate results which can be produced by this enormous reservoir of power, unequalled anywhere in the world, are incalculable.
Work likewise was pushed successfully on two other great projects.
One of them is the Columbia Basin project, of which Grand Coulee Dam is the keystone.
This project will provide water for the irrigation of 1,200,000 acres of land in Central Washington, in addition to creating huge blocks of hydroelectric power.
It will create a new region of stabilized farms in what is now a desert.
The second huge project is the Central Valley development in California.
Inequalities of moisture, intrusion of salt water, and floods have threatened this verdant valley with ultimate destruction.
This is the largest restoration project that we have ever undertaken, and it is progressing rapidly.
Shasta and Friant Dams, located at each end of the valley, will regulate both the Sacramento and San Joaguin Rivers and provide adequate water to rescue approximately 2,000,000 acres of highly developed lands.
These dams, moreover, will provide additional large blocks of hydroelectric power for the West coast.
In another sphere of activity our progress has been likewise steady.
The sprawling bituminous coal industry is being stabilized as quickly as possible.
The Bituminous Coal Division in the Department of the Interior went forward with the task of establishing minimum prices for bituminous coal.
Stabilized prices in this vital industry will put it in a strong position to meet the demands of the defense program.
I regard our work with the bituminous coal industry to be a form of economic buttressing which, in the long run, will prove to be of lasting benefit.
Another defense task which the Department was able to push forward during the vear was the search for deposits of strategic and critical minerals.
This work was undertaken jointly by the Geological Survey and the Bureau of Mines.
Using the basic data accumulated by the Geological Survey, field parties made a careful investigation of deposits of those necessary minerals in which the United States is deficient and dependent upon imports for its supply.
First results were more encouraging than was anticipated.
We have undertaken some changes in the Bureau of Mines.
As a result of an alarming increase in coal-mine disasters, the Bureau of Mines changed its methods of reporting such accidents.
The Bureau used to report the results of its investigations only to the industry, hoping that the latter would change its mining methods to reduce accidents.
That system seemed to me not to be working.
When the Bartley, W. Va., disaster took 91 lives in January 1940, I ordered that the Bureau make public the result of its findings.
The factors in this frightful explosion were thus exposed to the public gaze.
Other disasters were likewise reported publicly, and their causes placed on public record.
The year's mining casualty record was appalling.
Within 8 months, 3 terrible disasters occurred, with a loss of 226 lives.
Our investigations showed that, if recommendations of the Bureau of Mines had been followed as thoroughly as they should have been, all of these disasters could have been avoided or at least greatly reduced in severity.
The failure of coal-mining companies to enforce the safety practices which the Bureau of Mines has recommended to them, is, in my opinion, sufficient to warrant the enactment of Federal legislation giving power to the Government to enforce necessary safety measures.
In the preservation of natural areas and in the increase of our national parks, we enjoyed a successful year.
Kings Canvon, Calif., and Isle Royale, Mich., were added, and an additional section was secured for Olympic National Park, Wash.
Travel to the parks and public areas continued to increase at a phenomenal rate.
An important step in the consolidation of Federal conservation activities was taken early in the year.
In pursuance of your reorganization plans, the Bureau of Biological Survey was transferred to this Department from the Department of Agriculture, and the Bureau of Fisheries from the Department of Commerce.
These transfers, together with the establishment of the Bituminous Coal Division, vice the Bituminous Coal Commission, constituted an important three-ply conservation addition to the Department.
The similarity of the work of the Biological Survey and that of the Bureau of Fisheries was such that it was possible to merge them.
By the end of the year, they were coordinated and welded into a single unit, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
Many of the achievements of our Bureaus are worthy of detailed review.
Nearly all contributed to the important program of national defense.
During the fiscal vear, Federal irrigation projects were prepared to serve more than 106,000 additional acres of new land.
More than 23,000 acres were opened for settlement, providing new homes for approximately 261 farm families, dislocated by drought or other misfortune.
The demand for this new land far outran the ability of the Bureau to supply.
Since the Bureau was established, irrigation works have been placed in operation to serve nearly 4,000,000 acres of land, supporting approximately a million people.
Under the present construction program, the largest in the Bureau's history, water will be provided for about 2,500,000 additional acres of new land and about 3.500.000 acres of insufficiently irrigated land to support another million people.
The Bureau estimates that as many as 20,000,000 additional acres can be irrigated with water resources as yet undeveloped, under policies now in effect.
Power, an important byproduct of reclamation, loomed with fresh significance in connection with the national defense program during the year.
The installation of power equipment and the construction of transmission lines were speeded up to furnish power for the manufacture of airplanes and for other defense industries.
Known deposits of strategic minerals, the development of which might require large blocks of power, are located within transmission range or economical transportation distance of Grand Coulee Dam, Shasta Dam, and Boulder Dam.
This fact brought special emphasis to power development in those regions.
As has been said, the Bureau's largest construction program is under way.
At the close of the year, work was in progress on 27 projects in 13 States.
Nine dams were under construction, with four storage dams and a diversion dam newly completed.
Five of our dams rank as the world's largest concrete dams.
They are Grand Coulee Dam of the Columbia Basin project; Shasta and Friant Dams of the Central Valley project; Boulder Dam, and Marshall Ford Dam of the Colorado River project in Texas.
Grand Coulee Dam, key control feature of the Columbia Basin project, was nearing completion at the close of the year.
Economic investigations and soil surveys of the irrigable lands of the project were being successfully pursued.
The construction of the Leavenworth station for the conservation of migratory fish in the Columbia River is almost completed.
Excavation work at both Shasta and Friant Dams progressed at a rate that made possible the pouring of concrete.
These two dams will regulate both the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers.
With eight of the large 115,000 horsepower and one of the smaller 55,000 horsepower units in operation at the Boulder Dam Power Plant, output was almost doubled during the fiscal year.
The gross income during the year, including power receipts and payments on power machinery by the lessees, totaled $5,360,000.
In California the 80-mile All American Canal was practically completed, and progress was made on the 130-mile Coachella Branch Canal, one 40-mile section being completed and work advancing on another 40-mile section.
Together these two canals will carry water from the Colorado River to irrigate 1,000,000 acres of rich land, in the Imperial and Coachella Valleys in southern California.
In Colorado, work was under way on Green Mountain Dam and the Continental Divide tunnel, two important features of the Colorado-Big Thompson project.
This will provide a supplemental water supply for 615,000 acres of land now under cultivation, situated east of the Rocky Mountains.
Funds appropriated for the fiscal year 1941 make possible the continuation of the work at Marshall Ford Dam on the Colorado River to a height of 271 feet for flood control and power generation.
The construction of the dam to the 190-foot height was advanced to 97 percent of completion, and bids had been received for the additional height at the end of the year.
The vear's work brought the accomplishments of the Bureau to impressive totals.
In its 38 years of existence, the Bureau has completed a program embracing 161 storage and diversion dams; 51 powerhouses: 3,058 buildings; 20,575.9 miles of canals, ditches, and drains; 878 miles of tunnels; 4,802.5 miles of telephone lines; 300.5 miles of dikes; 6,377 flumes; 21,525 culverts; 13,912 bridges; and 202.491 other irrigation structures.
Reservoirs of the Bureau have a combined capacity of 51,215,000 acre-feet of water.
Crops valued at $114,082,794 were produced, an increase of $619,334 over the previous year.
The reclamation fund is decreasing.
By the close of the 1941 fiscal vear it will be so depleted that the Bureau will be unable to carry on the construction of its projects.
Either the reclamation fund should be increased by an advance from the general fund of the Treasury, or certain of the more costly projects now being constructed should be financed by appropriationsfrom the same source, or some other source of revenue should be found.
On June 30, 1940, the Bureau of Mines completed its first three decades of service.
Since its establishment in 1910, it has undertaken a flexible program to promote safety in the mineral industries, to conserve mineral resources, and to conduct investigations of the mining, preparation, and utilization of minerals.
This year these activities paid remarkable dividends.
As in the emergency of 1917–18, the Bureau of Mines was able this year to devote much of its effort to preparations for the national defense.
The Bureau, in cooperation with the Geological Survey, examined 163'deposits containing ores of strategic minerals and sampled 10 others, representing possible sources of antimony, chromium, manganese, nickel, tin, and tungsten.
Three deposits disclosed important quantities of strategic minerals.
Moreover, in antimony and mercury this country may become self-sufficient, if foreign supplies should become inaccessible.
The Bureau's work was not confined to the prospecting and sampling of deposits, however.
Utilizing the tremendous, newly developed hydroelectric facilities of the West, the metallurgical staff made notable advances in developing processes for the recovery of strategic metals (ineluding chromium, manganese, and magnesium) from lowgrade or off-grade domestic ores.
The Bureau of Mines compiles statistics on the source, production, consumption, and stocks of minerals.
This makes it possible to supply up-to-date, quick, and reliable data to the Army and Navy Munitions Board (especially in connection with stock-piling plans) and to the Advisory Commission to the Council of National Defense, as aids in determining defense policies.
Few people realize the care with which the Bureau is handling the Nation's motor-fuel problem.
The Bureau's petroleum engineers are trying to make America's oil resources last as long as possible by showing the industry what it must do to avoid waste.
The Bureau is also testing painstakingly all sorts of low-rank American coals to determine their suitability for treatment by the hydrogenation process to yield gasoline.
The importance of synthetic gasoline plants to a motorized army is seen from the fact that Britain's Royal Air Force is persistently bombing such plants in Germany.
The Bureau of Mines, Amarillo plant, which enjoys a world monopoly on the production of the lightweight, noninflammable helium gas, completed production of its first 100,000,000 cubic feet about the end of the fiscal vear.
It is now in a position to supply any military demands that might be made.
Its present capacity, which can be expanded, is 2,000,000 cubic feet of helium a month.
Helium was utilized first to lift lighter-than-air craft, but is now being applied also to an increasing variety of humanitarian uses, including the treatment of respiratory diseases, administration of anaesthetics, and the prevention of ear block after work at high pressures.
It is of interest to note that we are able to sell helium at its cheapest non-Government rate for medical use—$12.80 per thousand cubic feet compared to as high as $150 before the act of September 1, 1937 was passed.
For generations, American manufacturers of sanitary and refractory wares and other ceramies have firmly believed that other countries, principally in Europe, were the only sources of satisfactory raw materials.
Now that deliveries from abroad are uncertain and, indeed.
Mines has been steadily improving methods of preparing clays and other raw materials from American deposits.
It has been conducting successful firing tests on refractories, china, and sanitary wares in the Pacific Northwest, where hydroelectric power from the Grand Coulee Dam is available, and in Tennessee, which is served by the Tennessee Valley system.
Over 1,360,000 first-aid and mine-rescue courses have been given by the Bureau of Mines in its first 30 years, including 986,000 in the coal-mining industry alone.
In an endeavor to comply with the requests of the mining industries, the Bureau has emphasized training activities.
The unusual number of coal-mine disasters in the past few months, however, points to the need for focusing increased attention on accident prevention.
During the first 8 months of 1940 there have been a number of unfortunate disasters in the coal-mining industry.
While 1939 had but one major explosion with a total of 28 deaths, there were three explosions in the bituminous coal mines in the first 8 months of 1940: one, in January, in West Virginia with 91 deaths; one, in March, in Ohio with 72 deaths: and one, in July, in Pennsylvania with 63 deaths.
This makes a shocking total of 226 fatalities up to July 15—the greatest number since 1928, when there were 14 major disasters with a total of 326 deaths.
The excessively high average number of fatalities per disaster is as disheartening as it is inexcusable.
There is absolutely no question that if known safety procedures were followed in bituminous mines, widespread explosion disasters would be reduced to the vanishing point.
Another disturbing trend in connection with major disasters since 1933 is that, of six coal-mine explosions with a loss of 25 or more lives, all have occurred during the past 3 years.
Moreover, five of the six have been in highly mechanized mines.
In four of the five the explosion was caused by the blasting procedure; and the sixth (at Sonman, Pa., which occurred in a hand-loading section) was initiated by a machine (a trolley locomotive).
This very strongly indicates that while mechanization of coal mines has many undoubted advantages, it also present hazards which are not being safeguarded as adequately as they should be.
On December 1, 1939, the Bonneville Power Administration's first high tension transmission lines, two 40-mile circuits between the Bonneville Dam and Vancouver, Wash., were completed.
Afew hours later electric power from the Columbia River was being delivered to the Portland metropolitan area.
The vision of years—the harnessing of the Columbia River—had become an actuality, and the latent energy of this great western stream had been put to work to produced public power for the people of its territory.
Years of intensive preparation at Bonneville bore dramatic results during the 1940 period.
At the beginning of the year, major transmission lines were only partly constructed or existed upon engineers' blueprints.
At the end of the period, two 43,200-kilowatt generators were in operation; two 54,000-kilowatt generators were being installed: 660 circuit miles of transmission line were in operation; 449 additional miles of line were under construction, and 189 miles were ready for contract.
A total of 101,350 kilowatts of firm power had been contracted for by industries, municipalities, public utility districts.
Power was surging over the wires at the lowest wholesale rate in America—$17.50 a kilowatt year at any point on the line.
Deliveries ranged as high as 91,000 kilowatts—more than the rated capacity of the generating units.
The power contracted for was in excess of the installed capacity at the powerhouse.
With the delivery of power came its corollary-industrial development.
Attracted by the large amounts of cheap power which the project is making available, came important metal and chemical industries.
The construction of the first aluminum reduction plant west of the Mississippi River was put under way by the Aluminum Co. of America.
Shortly after the close of the fiscal year, actual production of aluminum was started with Bonneville power.
This, of course, meant a new source of aluminum supply for the country's defense needs and for peacetime use.
Most of the first produetion was for use in airplanes for the Army and Navy.
Thus one of the first dividends to be paid back to the people of the United States on their investment in this project was in the form of modern equipment for national defense.
The Aluminum Co.'s first demand of 27,000 kilowatts of energy will be increased progressively until it will be producing on a basis of 60,000,000 pounds of metal a year.
Estimates indicate that this amount of aluminum, if converted to airplanes, would provide for the manufacture of any of the following groups of planes: 1,500 Boeing Flying Fortresses; 13,000 Curtis Hawk 75's; 9,200 Douglas Attack Bombers; 7,000 Twin Engine Attack Bombers; 12,000 North American Dive Bombers; 13,000 Sivirsky Pursuit Ships, or 20,000 Grumman Fighters.
Other industrial contracts for Bonneville power were signed with the Sierra Iron Co., which has planned a plant for pig iron production, and with the Pacific Carbide and Alloys Co., an electro-chemical firm.
The importance of this industrial expansion to the national defense cannot be overemphasized.
Eight months after the first power reached the Vancouver substation, the Bonneville Power Administration had executed 23 contracts calling for delivery of 106,850 kilowatts of energy.
Of these contracts, 5 were with public utility districts; 10 with municipalities; 1 with an R. E. A. cooperative; 3 with private utilities, and 4 with industries.
These contracts, together with prospective sales, assured the Administration revenues during 1941 of $1,880,000 and of $4,- 000,000 in 1942.
With power actually available, an increasing number of industrial inquiries were received by the Bonneville Administration relative to possible location of plants.
The signing of a considerable number of additional industrial contracts may be expected during 1941.
The extension of the Federal transmission system into all sections of the Pacific Northwest is a guarantee that Columbia River power will be available to all types of distributors and industries at the same low wholesale rate.
The interconnection of the Federal system with other generating plants, both private and public, will assure the Pacific Northwest one of the most dependable supplies of power in the United States.
When all the generators are installed at Bonneville and Grand Coulee, they will produce more than 2,400,000 kilowatts.
This is more than a million kilowatts greater than will be available from all 10 dams of the Tennessee Valley Authority.
It became apparent during the year that the proximity of the Bonneville and Grand Coulee Dams made it desirable that some common method be established for marketing the large amount of power that the two will produce.
Both dams serve the same general area and their location and interconnection will make possible complete service for the Pacific Northwest area.
Shortly after the close of the vear the organization along these lines was so far advanced that it was possible to promulgate your Executive Order designating the Bonneville Power Administration as the common marketing agency for the power from both projects.
The social and economic significance of the development of 2,400,000 kilowatts of cheap electric energy in the Northwest is enormous.
It is impossible at this time to foresee the final results, but the general shape of the things to come in that part of the Nation may be discerned from present trends.
Properly administered, this source of energy should have a profund effect in promoting a better physical distribution of industries in this country.
It can help to disperse the heavy concentration of industry in the northeast corner of the Nation by making it possible for it to go elsewhere, thus helping to relieve a potentially dangerous military situation inherent in a geographically concentrated industry.
With intelligent direction and proper use, it will bring a whole section of the Nation closer to self-sufficiency and will modify the present dependability of that area upon distant centers of industrial production.
It will make possible local processing of the natural resources of the northwest and open new avenues for the general betterment of our people.
With the transfer of the Bureau of Biological Survey from the Department of Agriculture, in accordance with your Reorganization Plan No.
II, the Department became primarily responsible for administering the wildlife of.
This national resource, wisely managed, makes important, though in many respects intangible, contributions toward a national strength that is more essential than ever in times of emergency.
That country is worth dying for which is worth living in.
Conserving wildlife is one way of making a country worth living in.
Vacations spent outdoors, in hunting and fishing or in studying and photographing wildlife, develop healthy, happy citizens with a genuine regard for liberty.
The Department has made much progress this year toward perfecting an organization that will promote efficiency in wildlife conservation.
The wildlife division of the National Park Service was transferred to the Biological Survey, and there has been a closer coordination of the Survey's work with other agencies of this Department.
Arrangements for continuing the Bureau's cooperation with its former associate agencies in the Department of Agriculture were effected.
And, finally, on the last day of the fiscal year, in accordance with Reorganization Plan No.
III, the Biological Survey and the Bureau of Fisheries were consolidated to form the Fish and Wildlife Service.
As a result of these changes the Federal Government enters the fiscal vear 1941 better organized than ever before to carry on work in wildlife conservation.
Activities of the vear were largely concerned with the prosecution of programs already under way, with the result that wildlife conditions in general were again better at the end of a year than at its beginning.
This indicates that the Nation is at last on its way toward the restoration of this once abundant natural resource.
The most recent of the major programs, providing Federal aid to the States in wildlife restoration, increased in effectiveness during this, its second year.
Appropriations were increased from $1,000,000 to $1,500,- 000, and the wildlife conservation projects undertaken by the States grew from 57 in the first year to 237 in 1940.
These new refuges were added to the national wildlife refuge system, bringing the total to 263, with an acreage of 13,635,363.
In these areas there were noticeable increases in the wildlife populations.
Partly as the result of this refuge program under favoring climatic conditions, but largely as the outcome of the careful regulation of hunting and the strict enforcement of the game laws, a general increase in migratory birds was noted for the fifth consecutive year.
The same intensive scientific investigations that revealed these increases, however, also indicated that some species, notably woodcocks and doves, had suffered severely from winter storms during their stay in the South.
Precautionary measures were taken to give these birds additional protection during coming seasons.
Wildlife administration has continued to include not only encouragement of desirable species but also intelligent restraint of species that do damage, Control of destructive mammals and birds, carried on more efficiently than ever as a result of the operations of and demonstrations by the Biological Survey, takes on added significance during a national emergency in which food supplies become of critical importance.
However, it must be the recognized policy that control should never exceed the demonstrated need for it.
It is to be borne in mind that, although intelligent wildlife administration can further the purposes of national defense, there is need, as with other resources, for extreme caution against a perversion of patriotic zeal that might endanger an important endowment that must be defended.
Wildlife conditions in the United States are not yet what they should be.
The favorable conditions that do exist are the result of vears of planning and of carrving out corrective measures that were sorely needed as the result of unheeding exploitation.
The wildlife resource is not a storehouse to be exploited during any presently conceivable period of stress.
In emergencies as well as in all future vears, the Nation must continue to maintain its now firmly established purpose of restoring wildlife to something approaching its former abundance.
It must prudently conserve this great natural resource as one of the American requirements for good living.
Throughout the past vear the Bureau of Fisheries has continued in its efforts, by precept, example, and regulation, to maintain the fisheries of the United States and its possessions at a level of abundance sufficient to care for current needs and to assure future supplies.
To this end the Bureau has conducted investigations and made recommendations which have made possible a more complete utilization of fishery products and byproducts, improved methods of controlling natural enemies of commercially important species, and the adoption of gear and methods of fishing which make possible an escapement sufficient to perpetuate the resource.
During 1938, the most recent year for which complete statistical data on the commercial fisheries are available, the landings of United States fishing craft totaled over 4,250,000,000 pounds.
The wholesale value of the products derived from the fisheries was in excess of $251,000,000.
About 250,000 persons were employed in the capture, processing, and wholesaling of the catch.
Throughout the vear the Bureau operated 110 fish-cultural stations which produced.
While the major portion of this output was in connection with the conservation of commercial species, more than 151 millions were of the various species which almost exclusively concern sport fishing.
Although statistics of sport fishing for the year are not yet complete, available figures indicate that there has been a substantial increase over the 1937-38 period when it was estimated, from figures supplied by various State agencies, that more than 12 million persons engaged in sport fishing.
These figures also indicate that the total expenditures of sport fishermen during that period—fishing licenses, fishing tackle, special clothing, transportation, meals and lodging, boat and guide hire, and the like—were in excess of 875 million dollars.
The Fishery Market News Service, whose function is the regular dissemination of important fishery market information, continued to expand its services.
It opened an office in New Orleans, La.
This new unit constitutes the sixth of a series of offices which have been set up in carefully selected localities throughout the country.
Through these offices it has been possible to release market data covering about one-half of the annual domestic catch of edible sea foods.
Additional market news offices will be established from time to time as funds permit, and in the order of their possible service, not only to commercial interests, but to consumers as well.
Through the issuance of daily and monthly published market reports on landings, cold-storage holdings, movements, prices, and other pertinent market data, and through daily radio reports, the Fishery Market News Service is promoting the orderly production and distribution of sea foods.
Not only does the fish industry realize the many benefits and opportunities which result from this comprehensive and dependable service, but producers and consumers likewise benefit from it.
Bureau maintains and operates a fleet of 20 vessels, totaling 1,718 gross tons, which, during a national emergency, could be converted into naval auxiliary craft and be placed at the disposal of the Navy.
This fleet is supported by numerous small speed and other types of boats which might also serve in some defense capacity, should the need arise.
Continuing its authorized investigations in scientific and engineering fields, the Geological Survey stressed those features of its work most important to national defense.
In geologic and related investigations, for example, the Survey carried forward its regular program, and with the aid of a small appropriation which became available on August 10, 1939, made special studies of strategic minerals.
These included manganese, antimony, quicksilver, chromite, and others that are so essential in defense but of which our domestic supplies are inadequate in quantity or low in grade.
During the year brief reports were prepared on eighteen special strategic-minerals projects.
By committee service, and in other less formal ways, the Survey's specialized information in the mineral field was made available to the defense agencies.
Shortly before the close of the fiscal year Congress appropriated a little less than $2,000,000 for making topographic surveys and maps in strategic and other areas during 1941.
This is a slight increase over the amount available in 1940 and it is hoped that it is indicative of a trend toward an accelerated mapping program by the Geological Survey.
However, it is less than half the amount immediately needed and recommended by the Interior and War Departments.
Adequate topographic maps are important under any conditions in all planning and development that involves the use of the land, but they are particularly essential to successful military operations.
About 25,000 square miles in the United States and its dependencies were mapped in 1940.
Spectacular floods and droughts in recent years have continued to hold national attention to the role of water in the national economy.
Direct destruction by floods, and the shift of populations brought about by droughts, have greatly disturbed what had come to be regarded complacently as normal developments.
They have forced whole regions to recognize that they had been forming conclusions from an inadequate foundation of fact; from an insufficient knowledge of water supplies.
This in turn has led to inereased demands for knowledge about stream flow and underground water sources.
As a result, each year larger sums have been made available to the Survey for obtaining and analyzing the technical basie data necessary to the proper control and sound utilization of water.
Work done for the Army engineers, who supervise flood-control investigations, in 1940 exceeded the record of any previous year.
A special detailed mapping project in Alaska was undertaken at the request of the War Department.
The Geological Survey's staff of specialists in Alaskan work also made examinations of strategic minerals in the Territory.
The Survey's work in administering the land classification and mineral leasing laws was also of great importance.
In 1940, the Survey made more than 7,500 reports regarding the mineral resources, water power, or storage possibilities of public lands and at the same time safeguarded great Government reserves of coal, oil and gas, potash, phosphate, and other minerals.
About $8,000,000 were received by the Federal Government from lessees and permittees operating on publie and Indian lands and from naval petroleum reserves supervised by the Geological Survey.
The National Park Service has had an exceptionally successful year.
The number of units in the Federal park system was increased during the 1939-40 period from 154 to 161.
The addition of new units and adjustments of boundaries of existing parks inereased the total area from 20,817,228 to 21,550,783 acres.
More than 15,450,000 persons visited the parks during the travel year ending September 30, 1939.
The travel for the period from October 1939, through September 1940, reached the all-time high of 16,741,855 persons.
Winter-sports travel was exceptionally heavy.
The United States Travel Bureau, which promotes and encourages travel to and within the United States, was placed on a statutory basis by legislation signed by the President on July 19, 1940.
Outstanding conservation achievéments were the establishment of the Kings Canyon National Park, Calif., the Isle Royale National Park, Mich., and an important addition to the Olympie National Park, Wash.
The creation of the Kings Canyon National Park brought to a successful conclusion a 60-year conservation effort.
Absorbed in the Kings Canyon was the 4-square-mile General Grant National Park.
Abraham Lincoln's birthplace, in Kentucky, formerly classified as a national park, was designated the Abraham Lincoln National Historical Park, and Fort McHenry National Park in Maryland was given the more appropriate status of national monument and shrine.
In the District of Columbia the National Capital Parks system and its appurtenances continued to expand in areas and in services to the public.
Work continued on the historic Chesapeake and Ohio Canal to develop its unusual recreational potentialities.
Additional lands were added to the George Washington Memorial Parkway.
With these recent developments, and others pending as the fiscal year came to a close, the park system of the National Capital will be the largest of any city in the United States.
If Washington is to continue to merit the distinction of being one of the world's most beautiful capitals, it is imperative that additional funds be available for the maintenance and operation of its parks and national memorials.
Preservation of historic Cumberland Gap, in Virginia, Kentucky, and Tennessee, was authorized by Congress, with the proviso that the lands within the approved boundaries be donated to the United States.
Excellent progress was made on the Blue Ridge and Natchez Trace Parkways.
The Skyline Drive in Shenandoah National Park, Va., connecting with the northern terminus of the Blue Ridge Parkway, was completed.
Information concerning the National Park Service and its activities was disseminated to a world-wide audience through the press, by radio, illustrated lectures, literature, and picture service.
Wildlife research activities of the National Park Service on January 1 were transferred to the Bureau of Biological Survey.
Improvement of wildlife range conditions continued to be the chief wildlife management activity in the Federal park system.
In cooperation with P. W. A., work was continued on the important Historic American Buildings Survey, the purpose of which is to measure and photograph historic structures or those of architectural importance.
Engineering research resulted in the development of a new type of radio antennae for park-ranger patrol cars.
Airplane patrols supplemented the customary dog-sled surveillance in Mount MeKinley National Park, Alaska.
Insect- and tree-disease control was continued.
The importance of this activity may be understood when it is considered that the White-pine blister rust in the sugar-pine forests of California ranks next in importance to fire as a menace.
The broad program of conservation and recreation development was continued with the assistance of 310 continental C. C. C. camps in 90 national parks and monuments, 22 recreational demonstration areas, and 198 State, county, and metropolitan parks.
The major problem facing the National Park Service at this time is a shortage of permanent civil-service personnel.
The many new activities and additional areas coming to the Bureau have been manned largely by excellent but temporary non-civil-service personnel, principally from W. P. A., P. W. A., C. C. C., and E. R. A. The gradual reduction of such personnel during the past three years leaves the Service not only undermanned, but facing a loss of more than half of its present operating personnel should the emergency programs be closed suddenly.
On June 30, 1940, the total personnel was 7,340 employees.
Of these, 3,956 held emergency non-civil-service appointments.
With employee reductions occurring periodically—frequently several times a year—it is urgent that the Service be placed on a firmer basis with regard to personnel if it is to continue to maintain and operate the Federal park system in accordance with the purposes of Congress.
At the close of the year, Director Arno B. Cammerer was forced by ill health to request that he be relieved of the heavy duties of the directorship of the Service.
He was replaced by Newton B. Drury of California.
At a time when totalitarian governments abroad are crushing individual conscience and will, it is heartening to witness the tenacious clinging of the Indian to his local democratic institutions.
In the United States (and throughout most of the Americas) the Indians have suffered repression for more than 200 vears, but in spite of this the local democracy of the Indians has not been destroved, nor have their institutions been fundamentally modified.
Now that these repressions are being lifted, under wise government policies, the Indians of the Americas are emerging to play, in many of the countries, an important, if not a decisive, role in the struggle for the maintenance of democratic institutions.
The Indians of the United States offer an example for nation-wide conservation by their own efforts to preserve their lands.
It was no accident that the Indians turned over to the white man a continent unexploited and uneroded.
Conservation is basic in Indian cultures.
Always the unity of the Indian with his land was a unity of use, of conservative use, of planned use.
No groups in the country at present are making greater voluntary sacrifices to save their lands than are the Navajos, many of the Pueblos, the Hopis, and others.
Tribes that are most archaic in their social forms, such as that of the Acoma Pueblo, have adopted modern technologies of land conservation, range management, animal husbandry, and marketing.
The Indians are growing in numbers at a more rapid rate than any other segment of the population.
This is undoubtedly due to the efforts of the past 7 years to help them achieve economic rehabilitation, to wipe out the dread scourges of trachoma, tuberculosis, and other diseases, and to renew the spirit to live through restoring their confidence, prestige, and self-government.
This is furthered through intelligent programs of community services, better law and erder, and the encouragement of their native arts, crafts, and ceremonials.
The future of the Indian was never, since the white man came, so bright as at this hour.
For example, there has been a striking resurgence of Indian arts and crafts.
Indian-made rugs, jewelry, baskets, pottery, and other craft objects have taken on a new dignity and prestige under the program to stimulate the fashioning and sale of high quality, authentic Indian wares.
The sale of tourist knickknacks, often represented as authentic Indian goods, has in the past done much to lower the standards of value of native handicrafts.
Now, a radically different attitude toward Indian goods has been manifested throughout the country.
The campaign to stimulate the production and marketing of better Indian objects is only in its infancy, but it is a very lusty infant.
Native Indian art is advancing because traditional talents are being carefully fostered by skilled teachers.
Indians have won conspicuous artistic acclaim through some of their mural decorations, notably on the walls of the Interior Building in Washington and in public buildings elsewhere.
One Indian boy, aged 17, won the first prize in a Nation-wide competition in which more than 52,000 contestants participated.
Conservation activities have been too numerous and too diversified to make possible an itemization of recent developments.
In Alaska the Eskimos are dependent on their reindeer for food and clothing.
After careful and exhaustive studies by the Government, provision was made to purchase all of the nonnative owned reindeer and to turn these over to the natives, where under Federal guidance, proper conservation measures could be effected and pursued.
There is hope now that this splendid native people will be able to protect their way of life and become increasingly self-supporting.
On the semiarid stretches of the Navajo Reservation in Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah, a vital part of the program of conservation has been the necessity to make clear to Indians the intricacies and the importance of modern soil conservation methods.
To accomplish this, in part, a new Navajo alphabet has been developed and put into use with helpful results already manifested.
Another phase was a huge round-up of wild horses undertaken as a means of disposing of these economically unproductive animals.
To the Navajo, the horse is a symbol of prestige, and the fact that he consented to part with his horses indicates the extent to which the need for soil-saving has become apparent.
Indians are developing some remarkable abilities as businessmen.
Many tribes, some of them mistakenly considered "backward" and "primitive," have responded surprisingly to new responsibilities given to them under the Indian Reorganization Act, the Óklahoma Act, the Alaska Act, and the present general policy of giving Indians an increasing measure of self-government.
Indian judges are administering Indian law on many reservations with much of the dignity and prestige of the leaders of another day.
Indian tribal courts have been revived, increased, and strengthened and the Indians are rising to the new responsibilities involved.
Indians are being emploved in their Indian Service in steadily increasing numbers.
In striking contrast to the situation 10 years ago, there were in October 1939, 4,669 Indian men and women on the permanent employment rolls.
This number has grown considerably since that date.
In addition, 13,771 are employed in emergency jobs, including the Indian Division of the Civilian Conservation Corps, a separate segment of the C. C. C.
Numerous skills and talents have been developed among Indians and many of the more important official positions are being filled by Indians.
Many Indians trained to take jobs outside of the Service are not only being placed in positions, but are making noteworthy successes therein.
Indians of the United States are reflecting in a great many ways their awareness that for them a new day has come.
With new advantages they are acquiring new responsibilities and, thus far, they have shown willingness and capacity to meet both the problems and the opportunities.
During the year the Division continued its administrative functions of coordinating Federal activities relating to Alaska, Hawaii, the Equatorial Islands, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands.
The Philippines were brought within the Division at the beginning of the fiscal year, when they were transferred from the War Department under Reorganization Plan No.
I.
On June 24, 1940, Dr. Rupert Emerson took over the duties of Director of the Division of Territories and Island Possessions, succeeding Dr. Ernest Gruening, who was appointed Governor of Alaska.
Activities throughout the Division have expanded considerably due to the vast defense programs which have been inaugurated in some of these areas.
For Alaska, where Army and Navy air bases are being rushed to completion at various strategic points, the Department of the Interior is supporting a bill (S-3577) which would make possible accelerated development and colonization of this sparsely settled Territory.
The plan, in effect, would provide “a defense behind the defense" in the form of an active population to furnish needed supplies and services to the regular troops which will be stationed there.
It is generally conceded that new activities and industries must be developed in Alaska if the Territory's economy is to be built up and maintained.
During the year, the Division of Territories maintained a close interest in the program of sugar legislation now before the Congress, constantly attempting to secure adherence to the basic principle that Hawaii, and also Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, be accorded the same treatment as other sugar producing areas under the American flag.
Sugar remained the primary industry of Hawaii.
Shipments to the mainland were valued at $55,217,960.
In accordance with the terms of a license issued by the Department of the Interior in behalf of the United States Government, Pan American Airways, Inc., has established equipment and personnel on Canton Island in connection with the operation of its trans-Pacific air transport service.
Inasmuch as Pan American Airways contemplates permanent occupancy of Canton Island, consideration is being given to the withdrawal of the four Department of the Interior employees now stationed there.
An amendment by Congress on August 7, 1939, of the Independence Act of 1934, provides for a more orderly adjustment of the Philippine economy prior to political independence.
In the Philippines, steps were initiated to provide for three amendments to the Philippine Constitution: One, to permit the re-election of the president, and to substitute 4-year terms for the existing 6-year term; another, for the re-creation of a bicameral legislature to replace the unicameral legislature now existing; and a third for the establishment of an independent committee on elections.
These were approved by the people of the Philippines in a plebiscite held on June 18, 1940, but at the end of the fiscal year they had not been submitted to you for consideration.
Åll reports indicate that the Commonwealth government is at the present time in an excellent financial condition.
However, the Islands are faced with a tremendous problem of economic adjustment inasmuch as, under the terms of the Independence Act, they will lose the privileges of free trade with the United States in 1946.
The seriousness of this problem is well recognized in the Philippines and some steps are being taken to readjust the Islands' economy.
However, much remains to be done.
The finances of the Insular Government continued in a satisfactory condition.
Business conditions improvedduring the year, although there is still much unemployment.
This is due in part to the quota on sugar, and to the closing of needlework factories since the enactment of the Fair Labor Standards Act.
A committee has been appointed by the Wage and Hour Division to investigate conditions pertaining to the needlework industry in Puerto Rico, and to recommend minimum wage rates.
The Puerto Rico Reconstruction Administration continued its program during the year with major emphasis on projects of rural rehabilitation.
Although obligated funds available were approximately 30 percent less than in the preceding year, there was no diminution of the Administration's efforts to help the Puerto Ricans toward a sounder economy.
Substantial progress was made in soil conservation, reforestation and the construction of the Dos Bocas hydroelectric project.
Guidance was given through the central service farms looking to better methods of farming and marketing.
The continuation of the cattle tick eradication program promises a better supply of meat and milk so badly needed in the Island.
In all of this work valuable cooperation has been extended by the Agricultural Extension Service, the Insular Department of Agriculture and Commerce, and the Federal and Insular Experiment Stations.
Through its Cooperative Division, the P. R. R. A. has maintained supervision of the various cooperatives previously financed by Government loans, and has aided in the organization of three additional small cooperatives.
The production of winter vegetables for the New York market has been stimulated with good results.
The cultivation of onions, previously imported to the island, and of vanilla, another source of new income, have shown encouraging progress.
Loans have been made to needy farmers who had no other available source of credit for the growing of subsistence crops and the purchase of livestock and poultry.
The operations of the Lafavette sugar mill cooperative have been satisfactory.
The plant constructed for the conversion of sugarcane byproducts into solvents such as butyl alcohol and acetone is now in full operation.
These byproducts will not only provide income bevond that realizable under the quota restrictions applicable to raw sugar, but may be important sources of supply for elements necessary in connection with the defense program.
The 12 land cooperatives, however, to which sugar lands were sold on the credit of the Government, have not been as successful as the sugar mill cooperative, and will have to be liquidated.
It is planned to subdivide the lands and to sell them in relatively small parcels to experienced sugarcane growers, safeguarding the investment of the Government while at the same time realizing the fundamental objective of the project for more equitable distribution of sugar lands.
Despite its limited funds and authority under the Emergency Relief Appropriation Acts, the P. R. R. A. has made substantial contributions toward relieving the economic distress of the island.
No mere palliatives can solve the basic problem of a dense and ever-increasing population struggling to wrest a livelihood from exceedingly limited resources.
The unemployment situation, which still remains most serious, has been temporarily relieved to some extent by the intensified national-defense work now in progress.
Possibly the recent amendment of the Fair Labor Standards Act, providing for a special committee to study and recommend minimum wages to be paid to employees in Puerto Rico, may improve the condition of that part of the population which is dependent upon commerce as distinguished from agriculture.
This, however, will not solve the problem of how to create a sufficiently increased income to support nearly 2,000,000 people.
Further industrial and agricultural development of the island is imperative; for that development progressive leadership and capital for full utilization of the island's resources must be found.
Only in part can this be accomplished by a program of relief spending.
Nevertheless, such spending cannot be terminated unless substitutes in the way of more satisfactory remedies for permanent cure are put into immediate effect.
What the P. R. R. A. has done has at least given hope to thousands of people who otherwise would have been cast into utter despair.
Weakness of one part of our body politic may effect the health of the entire body; therefore whatever is done to help the inhabitants of this strategic outpost of defense, may well be considered not merely one of emergeney relief, but an important element in our program of national preparedness.
During the greater part of the year, there was marked unemployment in the islands.
This situation was relieved in St. Thomas by the initiation of projects in connection with national defense.
The general agricultural economy of St. Croix, however, has been at a low ebb for the past 3 years due to a severe drought, which continued during 1940.
Federal funds amounting to approximately $400,000 from appropriations made to the Work Projects Administration were made available to the Virgin Islands in 1940, for a large variety of projects.
A total of $240,000 in Public Works funds also was made available for the building of an abattoir in St. Croix, as an aid to the cattle industry, and for the construction of a public market in Charlotte Amalie.
Sales figures for the 1940 fiscal year are not vet available.
In the fiscal year 1939, the Virgin Islands Co. sold $75,607 worth of raw sugar, $88,436 worth of Government House Rum, and $14,364 worth of a special distillate.
Although the 939 growers of sugarcane in St. Croix come under the restrictive provisions of the Sugar Act of 1937, the Congress has not yet extended to them the benefit-payment provisions of the act as an offset.
St. Croix growers are the only ones under the American flag who are treated with such discrimination.
In addition, St. Croix growers, unlike other American growers, are required to pay an export tax of $6 per ton on all the raw sugar shipped to the continental United States.
It is essential that remedial legislation be enacted by the Congress to overcome these discriminations.
Strong efforts also are being made to secure the enactment of legislation to transfer to the government of the Virgin Islands all taxes collected under the internal revenue laws of the United States on articles imported into the United States from the Virgin Islands.
The facilitation of national defense and the continuation of the program for conservation of the resources of the public domain were the primary objectives of the General Land Office during the year.
The chief contribution to the defense program was to make available to the War and Navy Departments the broad areas of public lands which are suitable for military and naval purposes.
Withdrawals of the public lands and requests for withdrawals in connection with the national defense program during the year embraced more than 7,000,000 acres.
In addition, all outstanding aviation leases and beacon light permits contain provisions under which the Secretary of War may assume full control over the lands whenever the President deems them necessary for military purposes.
A total of 41,369 acres has been withdrawn for air-navigation purposes.
The food supply of the Nation is vital to national defense, and a prime factor in the food supply is potash as a fertilizer.
As a result of the war, shipments of this material from Europe and elsewhere have practically ceased.
To meet the emergency, over 6,000 acres of land, comprising the greater part of the dry bed of ancient Searles Lake in California, have been leased.
This area is rich in potash and the supply which will be available from this source, together with other potash produced in this country, largely from land leased from the Government in California and New Mexico, should be sufficient to meet all domestic needs.
For many sections of the United States, the township plats which depict the public land surveys, including the general topography, supply the only map data available for military purposes.
The rectangular system of surveys supplies a simple, concise, and definite identification of the boundaries of lands.
During the year cadastral engineering activities resulted in surveys embracing 5,693,105 acres, in addition to engineering investigations and special projects.
The surveys cover a total of 35,540 miles.
The change from the system of issuing permits for oil and gas prospecting on the public domain to the system of issuing leases, has been practically completed.
The change was designed to aid in the conservation of oil and gas resources, to prevent speculation and to secure more adequate returns to the United States from such resources.
The management of the timber resources on the approximately 2,- 500,000 acres of revested Oregon and California railroad and reconveved Coos Bay Wagon Road grant lands in Oregon was furthered by additional research, and by the inventory, classification, and establishment of improved procedures for maintaining sustained yield timber cutting.
Substantial progress was made on an inventory of the resources of the public domain, the mapping of the public-domain lands, the classification of lands, and the assembly and analysis of information concerning the economic resources of Alaska.
In order to secure increased benefits to the people from the use of the public lands, regulations were issued providing for an annual rental of $5 per mile or fraction thereof, for rights-of-way over the public lands for telegraph and telephone lines, tramroads, oil and gas pipe lines, water pipe lines, ditches, and canals.
A charge of $5 per acre or fraction thereof per annum also was imposed for the use of public lands for reservoirs, water plants, well sifes, and other like structures.
The impact of events abroad have brought to American citizens a deeper realization of the need for range conservation in the national preparedness program.
The vital importance of a continuous, adequate supply of food and clothing, based on the forage resources of the western ranges, became more clearly recognized during the year.
Conservation of the Federal grazing lands of the West, from which is derived a large part of the beef, mutton, wool, and mohair essential to our daily lives, became an integral part of our national-defense program.
The sixth year of grazing district administration by the Grazing Service witnessed sound advancement in the improvement and orderly use of the western ranges.
In response to popular demand, both locally and nationally, the program was enlarged in scope as well as in area.
Efforts were directed toward coordinated use and planning for the protection of the resources and the benefit of the people who are dependent upon grazing.
Aligned with programs for the protection and improvement of the the range was a general plan for the development of a correlated land pattern in the districts.
Many of the perplexing problems involved in a mixed ownership of interdependent land amounting to more than 250,000,000 acres were ironed out.
Cooperation with States, counties, railroad companies, and individual landowners reached a new high during the year.
An amendment to the Taylor Grazing Act on July 14, 1939 (Public, 173, 76th Cong.) welded further the mutual cooperative efforts of the stockmen and the administration.
Advisory boards, elected by the range users, functioned with greater interest and efficiency than theretofore.
During the past vear these boards were brought more prominently into the planning end of range administration.
This system of local representation encouraged direct conservation practices by the licensees and permittees.
Security in land tenure is the biggest problem facing the livestockman of the West today.
If he is to plan and manage his business successfully he cannot be constantly confronted with the hazard of competitive, unstable land policies.
The stabilization of the grazing district land pattern will go far toward meeting the stockman's need.
Three additional grazing districts were established during the year, increasing the number to 53 and the acreage of Federal range area to 140,847,900.
Grazing licenses and permits were issued to 20.609 stockmen owning 11,930,964 livestock.
Mutual cooperative efforts between the stockmen, the Service, and numerous other citizens brought about the largest possible amount of citizenship participation in the development and use of the range resources.
Studies and plans were directed toward possible emergency needs for greater facility in the production and distribution of essential livestock products.
It is a pleasure to report that the range country is now in a better position than ever before to meet present and future emergencies.
Production can be kept on a continuing basis without undue injury to the land or the forage.
With the help of 555 district advisers and the cooperation of all of the range users, the livestock business can be maintained on a high productive level consistent with wise use of the required resources.
In cooperation with the Civilian Conservation Corps, the Grazing Service operated 89 C. C. C. camps engaged in range improvement work in the Federal grazing districts.
Activities ranged from exterminating insects and rodents to fighting range fires.
Water development continued as the outstanding need in the range conservation work.Flood control, erosion control, range revegetation, and fence construction, trail building, eradication of poisonous plants, rodents, and predatory animals, all contributed to a better range and a healthier livestock industry.
Work on the ranges has developed a reservoir of men and equipment useful for any defense emergency.
Should the need arise, equipment such as trucks.
In addition, maps, showing roads, towns, and general topography are available for both civilian and military use.
Base maps of this nature already completed cover 535,680 square miles in 10 western States.
Developed primarily for use in range administration, these maps are useful in the defense program, especially in connection with air and land maneuvers and border patrols.
Within the boundaries of grazing districts are many known undeveloped mineral deposits and a number of mines producing essential war minerals.
Men and equipment in the Grazing Service could be thrown into active service to facilitate the production and transportation of such raw materials.
In the event of emergency, Grazing Service personnel is instantly available for patrol duty to guard roads.
In keeping with the national preparedness program, range conservation is one of many important "behind-the-lines" activities of today.
It is also a matter of gratification to be able to report that the forest resources under the jurisdiction of the Department of the Interior are so strategically situated and so well developed as to be able to make substantial contributions to the national defense.
These resources were under development during the World War of 1917 and contributed in full measure to our efforts at that time.
During the existing emergency, we are in a position to furnish large volumes of essential forest products.
The administrative units throughout the service are being so organized as to meet any increase in demand which may develop.
As is well known.
The Department was first among the executive establishments vested with administrative responsibilities in forestry.
Long before the creation of the first National Forest reserve in 1891 and the granting of authority to administer the National Forest reserves in 1897, the Department put forth special efforts through its various bureaus and offices to protect and promote the interests of the Federal Government in the forests of the public domain and on other Federal lands.
Because of the highly diversified conditions which characterize the public domain, the National Parks, and the Indian lands, the Department of the Interior carries on a wider range of forestry functions and activities than any other Federal Department.
It is significant that today, almost two-thirds of the area of all Federal lands in the United States proper is under the jurisdiction of the Department of the Interior.
IfAlaska is included, then Interior's jurisdiction extends over almost three-fourths of all Federal lands.
Owing to these large holdings, the activities of the Department in the field of conservation are of material importance in the determination of the Nation's timber budget and the concomitant influence of timber and forage growth.
The wide problems of public policy in regard to forestry are being studied by a Joint Congressional Committee on Forestry.
As an aid to this committee, the Director of Forests prepared a detailed report on the conservation policies of the Department.
The report recommended that Indian forest reserves be established and operated on a cooperative sustained-yield forest management.
It also urged the bringing under sustained-yield management of the unreserved public domain lands intermingled with and lying adjacent to the revested Oregon and California grant lands.
It further recommended that legislation be enacted authorizing the sale of forest products from areas within grazing districts under appropriate rules and regulations.
It found, too, that funds are needed for listing the scattered, unreserved public domain lands not included in grazing districts, and for surveying their resources.
In addition to preparing the extensive report for the Joint Committee on Forestry.
Marked progress was made in perfecting the organization of the O and C grant lands.
A large volume of Indian forestry business was handled, and two important Indian timber damage suits were brought to a successful conclusion.
Extensive assistance was rendered to the Land Committee of the National Resources Planning Board.
Advisory services were given in a large number of cases and help was forthcoming on problems of the various agencies of the Department having administrative responsibility in forest conservation.
The Division of Investigations made substantial contributions to the defense program during the past fiscal year.
The War Department was assisted in its program of national defense through the examination and classification of lands withdrawn for artillery ranges, aircraft bombing ranges, and other defense purposes, and in one case the Division assisted the Department of Justice in obtaining a restraining order to prevent mineral claimants from performing work that was interfering with the use of the land as an airplane landing field for Army bombers.
This cooperative work by the Division is continuing and will result in the cancellation of additional thousands of invalid mining claims, thus helping the War Department to protect itself from unjust claims for damages by persons attempting to hold title to the lands.
Information concerning the status of public lands, gathered through the past several years in investigations for the Grazing Service, is being made available to the Army Air Corps for the purpose of enabling it to arrive at a decision as to what lands might be desirable for inclusion within certain proposed bombing and gunnery areas.
Land classification and appraisal work by the Division has produced information of value to the Geological Survey in the location of mineral deposits vital to the national defense program.
Conservation of our petroleum resources continued to gain importance during the year as the outlines of our defense program were formulated.
The mechanical implements of defense which we propose to increase so drastically are all dependent upon gasoline and oil for their operation, and as a consequence, heavy new demands face our petroleum industry.
Warships, tanks, prime movers, mechanized units, and aircraft all need gasoline and oil.
The large additions to the Navy, the mechanization of the Army and the huge increase in our air force make an adequate supply of gasoline and oil more imperative than ever before.
The Petroleum Conservation Division has no authority to enforce Federal regulation of the oil industry and has never attempted to do so.
But within its sharply limited field of action it has been vigorous in its efforts to produce sensible conservation of our vital supplies of petroleum.
During the year it continued to aid in the administration of the Connally law and cooperated with the Interstate Oil Compact Commission, as well as with the oil and gas producing States.
The Division was active in the investigation of alleged violations of the Connally law.
Its year's activities brought the total number of cases that it carried to prosecution in the courts to 125.
Out of these, it has won 121 convictions.
Fines assessed and bonds forfeited since enforcement was started totaled $231,100, of which $50,000 were assessed during the fiscal year.
Activities in the East Texas field continued at a fast pace.
The Federal Tender Board reported a successful year with more than 98 percent of the production being accounted for to the Board.
The East Texas Board reported that, for the first time, there was a diminution in the number of new wells drilled in that field.
Fewer wells were drilled during the year than in any other year since the field was opened.
During the year, the Division cooperated with numerous Government agencies working on oil problems.
Its technical aid and expert assistance were requested on several occasions and its trained personnel were called upon to handle many defense problems relating to petroleum.
The experience of the Division in dealing with the industry and with State bodies governing petroleum production continued to show the desirability of some form of Federal regulation to assure that there should be no unnecessary wastage in the extraction of this vital—and definitely limited—resource.
The complex problems of the bituminous coal industry became a matter of concern for the Department this year with the establishment of the Bituminous Coal Division.
In accordance with your Reorganization Plan, the Bituminous Coal Division took over the functions of the old National Bituminous Coal Commission and proceeded at once with the work of establishing minimum prices and marketing rules and regulations for the industry.
In less than 4 weeks after the transfer of functions, the new Division reopened the hearings on prices which had been started by the old Commission.
Six months of continuous hearings were required to allow nearly 400 parties to make their appearance.
Working under pressure, the Division, by the end of the year, was in sight of its goalthe promulgation of prices and rules.
These were put into effect 90 days after the close of the year.
By firm application, and by strenuous and devoted effort, the personnel of the Division were able promptly to accomplish the task.
As prices did not become effective until after the close of the year, I cannot report upon experience in marketing coal under them.
It is not possible, therefore, to forecast with certainty their effect upon the conditions which the Coal Act seeks to alleviate.
The fact that we were able to make such outstanding progress with a vexatious problem, however, generated considerable optimism in the coal industry.
The objective of the Bituminous Coal Division, of course, is to bring a generally demoralized industry up to a par with American industry in general, without inflicting undue injury upon consumers.
The problems that the industry faces are many and involved.
Price demoralization is only one.
The competition of other fuels and of transportation are others.
The welfare of the coal industry is of paramount importance to the national defense.
It furnishes about 85 percent of all fuels and energy consumed by railroads, 49 percent of that used by electric utilities, and about 75 percent of that used by general manufacturing plants.
Bituminous coal is a source of basic raw material for hundreds of important commodities.
The method by which we are seeking to restore some order into the bituminous coal structure is through market stabilization.
I feel that we are at least on the track and moving.
I do not for a moment consider that what we have accomplished represents perfection, but I am certain that we have established a mechanism, which by changes and refinement, can attain wholesome results.
In setting minimum prices, the Division has not attempted, nor was it instructed, to remake the coal industry, or to set prices according to its own conception of efficiency or in keeping with a planned economy.
The prices were designed to yield the industry an income equal, as nearly as possible, to its average cost, and at the same time to preserve for the coal producers such "fair" competitive opportunities to sell their coal as they enjoyed under unregulated competition.
However, the prices were formulated with the view firmly in mind that the Coal Act necessarily eliminates the "competitive opportunity"of producers to attempt to make inroads on markets by price cutting which results in lowering the industry's income below its average cost.
The law also eliminates the "competitive opportunity" to make sales by means of dumping, the sale of"distress coal," manipulations resulting in discriminations between individual consumers in the same market, and all the other chaotic forces which were present in bituminous coal markets under free and open competition.
During the vear, the Office of the Solicitor rendered valuable assistance in the solution of problems having a vital bearing upon national defense.
The conservation.
An analysis of the work in the immediate office of the Solicitor indicates that its volume was approximately 20 percent greater than during the preceding fiscal year.
The famout Section 36 Elk Hills oil field case—one of the most important and prolonged public-land controversies ever to come before this Department or the courts—was brought to a successful conclusion during the year.
Affirmance of the decision of the District Court for the Southern District of California by the Circuit Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, and the denial of a vigorously pressed petition for certiorari by the Supreme Court of the United States resulted in the quieting of the Government's title to a square mile of valuable oil lands in the geologic center of a naval petroleum reserve.
This case also resulted in the recovery of approximately $7,137,000 from the Standard Oil Co. of California as damages for the oil and gas extracted from that section while adversely held under claim of title.
The decision of the Solicitor in a similar controversy involving section 16 in the Elk Hills field determined another square mile of oil lands, probably worth several million dollars, to be property of the United States.
Another public-land controversy of scarcely less importance, in which a favorable decision was rendered by the Supreme Court during the year was the case of United States v. City and County of San Francisco, involving the distribution of electric power from the Hetch Hetchy project in California.
The decision of the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the provisions of the Raker Act of December 19.
1913, requiring municipal distribution of electric energy produced through the use of lands and rights-of-way granted San Francisco under that act, as a valid exercise of the power of the Congress to control the disposition of the public domain.
The Court sustained the contention of the Department that the arrangements for the distribution of such energy made by San Francisco were not in conformity with these provisions.
The Division of Personnel Supervision and Management reports that at the close of June 30, 1940, there were 48,947 employees in the Department and that the total expenditure for the fiscal year for salaries and wages was $72,684,666.
Improvements and techniques in personnel administration have been introduced to keep pace with the growing needs of the Department.
One innovation worthy of special mention is the setting up of a central stenographic training center, into which new stenographers pass for a two weeks' training course in the Department's correspondence style and procedure.
Another is the preparation of a stenographers' handbook as a textbook guide for all stenographers in the Department.
Thus, the bureaus and offices have been relieved, to a great extent, of the initial training of these employees.
The personnel actions handled during the year by the Division totaled 29,568; 12,849 applications for employment were received and reviewed; 1,536 applicants were interviewed.
In recruiting employees for noncivil service positions, primarily in connection with the Civilian Conservation Corps activities, the Division operates as a miniature civil service commission in rating applicants, establishing registers, and certifving eligibles.
In this connection, 2,137 certificates of eligibles, containing 4,549 names, were issued by the Division during the year.
The average amount of annual leave used per person in the District of Columbia was 24 days; average sick leave, 8 days.
The records show that during the year 92 employees retired because of age and optional age, and 76 on account of disability.
This outline of conservation in progress indicates that our people are finally alert to the nature of the problem we face in the administration of our resources.
They have begun to weigh the social conseguences of individual action when it involves a looting of the heritage that we have received from Nature.
But much still remains to be done.
In the coming months, as the pace of defense quickens and short cuts in the form of resources raids are threatened, our conservation principles will be put to the test.
The story of what is involved for this Department is told in the full reports of our Bureaus and Offices which I herewith transmit for your consideration.
One thing is clear.
The wisdom of the policies that we have followed for the last 7 years is now bearing fruit.
We are rich in resources, because we have put our house in order.
Our natural wealth forms the sinews and muscles of our defense machinery.
We will continue to administer prudently our resources for present use, and for defense when we must, and guard them for the future, always.
Secretary of the Interior.
Bureau of Mines experts drill blast holes by hand in study of strategic mineral deposits in Idaho.
Lower: Eyes that see through rocks.
Bureau of Mines spectograph operator can determine in 30 minutes the mineral contents of rocks requiring three days of analysis by chemists.
THE fiscal year 1940 was especially significant to the Bureau of Mines because it marked completion of three decades of service to American mining.
The Bureau's organic acts (36 Stat. 369 and 37 Stat. 681) authorized it to promote safety in the mineral industries, to conserve mineral resources, and to conduct investigations on the mining, preparation, and utilization of minerals.
Although the Bureau now carries on a wide variety of activities and has established experiment stations and other feld laboratories in a number of American mining centers, its basic program still follows closely the three fundamental lines established by Congress.
Inasmuch as any program of military preparedness depends on an unobstructed flow of minerals, the Bureau of Mines, by virtue of the duties specified in congressional acts, is in reality an important defense ageney of the United States Government, a fact emphasized by many activities of the past fiscal year.
Moreover, the Bureau operates a plant that produces virtually the world supply of helium and in a war emergeney automatically supervises the licensing of explosives for nonmilitary use.
An outstanding example of the conversion of statistical data to defense purposes was utilization by the Advisory Commission to the Council of National Defense of the Bureau's long-standing files on sources, production, consumption, and stocks of strategic minerals.
In fact, the Commission's mineral consultant established headquarters in the Bureau of Mines and made its files the basis for setting up his own records.
Statistical information supplied by the Bureau also aided the Army and Navy Munitions Board in its stock-piling program; other data were most valuable to the National Resources Planning Board.
The embargo on steel serap proposed by the Advisory Commission threw the Bureau's improved serap-metal eanvasses into sharp focus.
Data were compiled for defense agenices on abrasive diamonds, asbestos, graphite, quartz crystals, mica, iodine, and other nonmetallie commodities essential to a military program.
The Bureau's foreign mineral specialist completed surveys on the mineral resources, production, and trade of Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, and Peru and assisted procurement boards to find new sources of supply for materials cut off by the European war, including tin, tungsten, chromite, antimony, mica, and the ever-important manganese.
The so-called Strategic Minerals Act authorized the Bureau to examine deposits that might be a source of strategic minerals in a war emergency.
Ten such deposits were tested by surface trenching, pitting, and diamond drilling, and 163 others inspected more briefly.
Results indicate significant quantities of strategic minerals in 3 of the deposits and the possibility that in an emergency the country could be self-sufficient as regards antimony and mercury.
Bureau of Mines metallurgical laboratories completed 11,718 analyses and other tests of samples shipped from the field.
Other Bureau of Mines activities of the past year that concerned the national defense program were: Conservation of high-rank coals by testing the combustion and carbonizing properties of low-rank coals: production of benzol, toluol, and xylol (necessary for explosives) as byproducts of the coking of coal; hydrogenation tests of American coals to find their value as a source of motor fuel; metallurgical investigations of the production of electrolytic manganese and magnesium metal; expansion of information on demolition explosives; survey of aviation gasoline; substitution of American nonmetallic minerals for a wide variety of commodities imported from abroad; and emphasis on the instruction of first-aid teachers who could train civilians in an emergency.
The Bureau of Mines, believing, with its first Director, that “True conservation is a wiser and more efficient use of our natural resources," endeavors to conserve America's minerals by improving methods of mining, preparing, and utilizing them.
No activities of the Bureau exemplify this more clearly than its work on solid and liquid fuels.
During the past year especial efforts were devoted to ascertaining the coking properties of America's low-rank coals to establish the extent to which they can replace steam and coking coals of higher rank and dwindling supply.
The Bureau also tested coals from seven States to find how readily they liquefy to produce motor fuel and useful byproducts of the hydrogenation process.
Meanwhile, the Bureau's petroleum engineers studied energy relationships to find how the greatest amount of petroleum can be produced with the least waste of natural energy, oil, and gas.
Correlative economic studies on fuel included a continuing survey of coal, petroleum, natural gas, and electricity available for consumption in the United States and Canada; summaries of the competitivefuel situation in the anthracite-consuming States; reports on the substitution of fuel briquets and packaged fuel made from fine coal for lump coal in domestic heating; monthly forecasts of the demand for petroleum; and collection of data on the consumption of fuel oil, range oil, and kerosene.
Establishment of headquarters for the Bureau's metallurgical work at Salt Lake City made laboratory and pilot-plant facilities readily accessible to mining industries of the West.
Much attention is being focused upon methods of recovering important metals from low-grade or off-grade ores.
Laboratory tests of an electrothermal process for producing magnesium metal from magnesite have been encouraging.
Preliminary investigations of the characteristics of manganese made by the Bureau of Mines electrolytie method were followed by tests of this material in a series of manganese alloys.
Economic studies of metals endeavor to promote orderly development of domestic resources by providing data on production, consumption, and stocks of virgin material as well as reporting the results of canvasses on consumption and stocks of ferrous and nonferrous scrap.
At several experiment stations the Bureau is applying ore-dressing methods to domestie nonmetallic minerals to produce satisfactory grades of ingredients for a wide variety of commodities, formerly supplied from abroad.
Almost any type of clay-working properties can be developed from domestic materials.
It is of especial interest that North Carolina alaskite has been found to be a potential substitute for British Cornwall stone and that domestic olivine can be used instead of imported magnesite in refractories.
Special economic data were compiled on nonmetallic minerals that must now be obtained from domestic sources.
The 1940 edition of Minerals Yearbook, the Bureau's annual review of sources, production, distribution, 'and stocks of minerals comprises 69 chapters, about two-thirds of which have been published as preprints.
No annual report of the Bureau of Mines would be complete without a brief summary, at least, of special services performed upon request for Federal and State agencies and the mineral industries.
This vear added burdens were entailed by work requisitioned in connection with the defense emergency.
An unusual number of requests concerned petroleum.
Bureau specialists prepared comprehensive reports on petroleum production and manufacture for a subcommittee of the House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce and for the National Resources Planning Board.
For the Biological Survey, they studied the effects of an uncontrolled oil well on a Texas waterfowl refuge and, for the War Department, the results of building a dam that would inundate Oklahoma oil-bearing lands.
Illinois, Kansas, and Oklahoma asked for help in disposing of oil-field brines.
Power-plant and fuel-efficiency surveys were made for Federal establishments and the District of Columbia Government, acceptance tests of new equipment were conducted, and shipments of coal for Government use inspected.
Twenty pieces of electrical equipment were tested for the Navy.
Small mine owners were told how to operate their properties safely and economically.
New flow sheets that would improve the recovery and quality of the products were designed for ore-dressing establishments.
Explosives were tested for safety at the request of State mine inspectors, mine operators, and manufacturers.
In cooperation with the Tennessee Valley Authority, work was continued on the electric firing of a wide range of ceramies, including brick, china, and sanitary wares.
Important statistical information was supplied by Bureau of Mines economists.
Monthly canvasses to show the domestic situation regarding five strategie minerals were undertaken at the urgent request of the Army and Navy Munitions Board, and only lack of funds and personnel prevented expansion of the series to cover all minerals on the strategic and eritical lists.
Services to the secondary-metals industries were expanded at their request.
The last 5 reports of a series of 14 on mineral technology and output per man, prepared in cooperation with the Work Projects Administration, were completed; these discussed petroleum, bituminous-coal mechanization, gold placers, iron ore, and rock drilling.
Inquiries from trade organizations and producers on the export coal trade were handled promptly.
Lists of producers and buyers of minerals were furnished on request.
The Bureau of Mines endeavors to promote safety by accident prevention and improvement of working conditions and has issued the usual series of reports on mine accidents.
Because falls of rock and coal cause a large proportion of all deaths in mines the Bureau has made searching tests to establish methods of detecting subaudible sound waves that precede collapse of mine pillars.
Dust-prevention studies and complementary investigations of respiratory devices to be worn in dusty atmospheres are continuing problems of the Bureau.
During the year X-ray methods for determining free silica were improved, and the safe handling of explosive dusts that may be used for fuel was studied.
The Bureau has also suggested the use of helium in cyelopropane anesthesia as a means of avoiding gas explosions in operating rooms and administration of helium-oxygen mixtures to avoid “ear-block" among caisson workers.
Ventilation is tremendously important to the efficiency of all workers.
In 1940 the Bureau not only considered ways of determining and guarding against harmful dusts, as mentioned above, but cheeked the efficiency of mine ventilation by analyzing 1,400 samples of mine air and gas.
Mechanized coal mining is being studied with special emphasis on safe operation of equipment.
Permissibility tests of electrical apparatus for use in mechanized mines provide mine owners with rigid standards for safe operation.
To establish more definitely the cause of mine explosions, the Bureau during 1940 made 1,619 gallery tests to determine whether samples of explosives would ignite explosive air-gas mixtures, conducted 1,050 explosives-control tests, and studied the processes by which explosives ignite firedamp.
The Bureau's safety and health personnel and equipment continued to be on call in emergencies and were in their usual demand.
At the request of the West Virginia Department of Mines a special course in rescue training was conducted for 481 applieants for coal-mine foremen's certificates.
Bureau of Mines safety instructors completed the 100-percent first-aid training asked by 205 mineral establishments, assisted at 60 first-aid meets, and attended 790 safety meetings.
During 1940, 93,878 persons were instructed in first aid and since 1910 first-aid and rescue courses totaling 1,361,465 have been given, including 986,467 to members of the coal industry alone.
Perhaps the most widely known features of Bureau of Mines safety work are its rescue and recovery operations after mine disasters, especially where lives are at stake.
During 1940 Bureau engineers were asked to give assistance at or to investigate 18 mine explosions, 28 mine fires, and 78 miscellaneous accidents.
Three of the explosions were major disasters, costing 191 lives in all; these catastrophes were all the more shocking because they followed a fiscal year in which not 1 major disaster occurred.
If the mines in which these 3 disasters took place had fully complied with the Bureau's recommendations on safety in operation, especially rock dusting, the loss of life would have been materially reduced.
The preceding summary of Bureau of Mines activities for the past fiscal vear proves that its threefold program of safety, conservation, and research has almost unlimited ramifications.
In the field of metallurgy a comprehensive program for the beneficiation of manganese ores has been planned with the objective of recovering manganese from an entire ore body, including the low-grade material: work on the electrothermal reduction and distillation process for the production of metallic magnesium from magnesite will be continued and expanded, and emphasis will be placed upon the development of lightweight, corrosion-resistant magnesium alloys of adequate stiffness and strength and upon further studies of manganese alloys; electric-furnace smelting of complex ores; and tests of largescale sonic flocculators for handling smelter dust and fume.
Investigations of American resources of nonmetallic minerals and their beneficiation will endeavor to render the Nation more independent of foreign supplies of fluorspar, feldspar, tale, magnesite, clays, and graphite.
In addition to determining the physical and chemical properties of American coals with reference to their most efficient utilization as fuels and the produetion of gas, coke, and byproducts, it is hoped that attention can be given to the mining, preparation, and utilization of anthracite.
Economic studies will be adapted to current demands.
It is desirable to improve studies of the competitive-fuel situation and to expand investigations of byproduct recovery from coking plants and the supply of and demand for byproducts of coal processing.
If opportunity offers, the detailed record of production of metals in Western States by districts and mines will be completed, accident data enlarged to include more detailed statistics by causes, and accident statistics gathered on the petroleum and sand and gravel industries.
Orderly development of mineral resources would also be promoted if data were kept current on sources, production, consumption, and stocks of important minerals.
This procedure will be followed during the year with regard to as many strategic and critical minerals as possible.
Expansion of Bureau of Mines work in Latin America will not only help to foster the mineral industries of these sister republics but doubtless will open new sources of supply for the United States.
In view of the fact that many new workers will be needed in industries producing supplies needed by the defense program, especial attention will be devoted to making working conditions safe and hygienic.
The past year's black record as regards coal-mine explosions prompts the inevitable conclusion that training in accident prevention must be stressed if the mining industries are to retain the improvement they have shown during the first 30 years of the Bureau of Mines.
The numerous and varied activities of the Bureau of Mines during the fiscal year 1940, though supervised from Washington by offices of the Technologic, Economics and Statistics, Health and Safety, and Administrative Branches, were conducted largely in the principal mining districts of the country and at the 14 experiment stations in the following list: Bartlesville, Okla; Berkeley, Calif.
Boulder City, Nev.
College Park, Md.
Laramie, Wyo.
Minneapolis, Minn.
Norris, Tenn.
Pittsburgh, Pa.
Reno, Nev.
Rolla, Mo.
Salt Lake City, Utah; Seattle, Wash.
Tucson, Ariz.
Important features of the year's work have been summarized below by branches and the divisions that comprise them.
The function of the Technologic Branch is to conduct engineering and scientific research in the interest of the mineral industries.
The branch comprises six divisions—Coal, Mining, Metallurgical, Petroleum and Natural Gas, Nonmetals, and Explosives—and the office of the principal mineralogist.
The branch also has charge of the cooperative programs between the Bureau of Mines and corresponding Government organizations in several foreign countries.
Investigations of the Coal Division emphasized conservation of the Nation's best coals by improving the utility of those of lower rank.
One study of this type involved tests of the coking characteristics of coals that have not hitherto been employed in byproduct ovens, including two from Washington State that may be used for making coke if an iron and steel industry should be established in the Pacific Northwest.
In an effort to promote the use of coals whose ash melts at low temperature (which makes them undesirable for some purposes because they form troublesome clinker), a thorough investigation was made of the properties of ash; it has been found that such coals can be burned economically in large powderedcoal furnaces from which ash is removed in molten condition.
Tests continued in Government power plants to develop stokers suitable for burning subbituminous coal and lignite in localities where these fuels are cheaper than higher-rank coals.
Especial attention also was devoted to low-rank coals in the course of research on hydrogenation of coal to produce the liquid fuels that doubtless will be substituted for gasoline and oil derived from petroleum when resources of the latter become depleted.
Fuel-economy service.
The fuel-economy service section made power-plant surveys, fuel-efficiency tests, and acceptance tests of new equipment, thereby advising Federal agencies how to select and burn fuel efficiently.
Work on boiler feed-water conditioning increased more than 30 percent over that in the previous year; in consequence, efficiency was improved, maintenance cost reduced, and safety increased.
Placing low-cost water-conditioning chemicals on the Government general schedule of supplies permitted savings where expensive “"mystery" compounds have been used.
Smoke-abatement research was continued.
Coal analyses and fuel inspection.
To maintain the quality of coal purchased for Government use, shipments are inspected constantly and samples collected for analysis.
During 1940 more than 13,000 samples were received and analyzed in the various coal-analysis laboratories of the Bureau.
Coal-sampling trucks visited more than 300 mines in 14 States for inspection of coal as it was loaded on railroad cars.
Use of fuels.
Recent inereases in the size of steam generators, furnaces, and kilns and consequently increased rates of burning have made the properties of ash—often the predominant factor in limiting the capacity of equipment—important subjects of research.
A new apparatus has been developed for accurate measurement of the absolute viscosity and density of coal-ash slags at various temperatures and in controlled atmospheres.
Study of the relationships between composition, liquid temperature, viscosity, density, and other properties of coal-ash slags indicates that ultimately it may be possible to prediet the viscosity-temperature curve of coal ash from its chemical analyses.
Carbonization of coal.
The carbonizing properties of five coals were investigated, and the coke, gas, tar, and oil produced were studied with regard to the chemical and petrographie composition of the coals.
These tests indicate the maximum probable yield of such byproducts as toluol, benzol, and xylol from various coals.
Moreover, they are important guides when untried coals are substituted in the byproduct-coking process.
Low-volatile coals from the Pocahontas No. 3 bed and Pocahontas No. 4 bed, blended with three different high-volatile coals, were equally effective in inereasing the strength of coke.
Tests of a coal-carbonizing power plant using subbituminous coal were completed.
Subbituminous coal and lignite.
Friability, slacking characteristies, and carbonizing properties of certain subbituminous coals of the Denver region were determined and the results applied in research on their storage and use.
In cooperation with the University of North Dakota, large-scale laboratory tests of the use of high-pressure steam to remove moisture from lignite were made.
The resultant increase in heating value justifies application of the process to the drying of lignite if it is subject to a freight rate of $1.50 a ton or more.
The process can be applied to small sizes of coal more advantageously than to large sizes.
Hydrogenation of coal.
Coals from Alabama, Indiana, Montana, North Dakota, Utah, West Virginia, and Wyoming were tested in the continuous hydrogenation plant to determine how readily they liquefy to produce gasoline and oil under industrial operating conditions.
The survey of the effect of rank and type of coal on its hydrogenation characteristics was continued.
Coals gradually become more resistant to liquefaction by hydrogenation as their carbon content inereases, and there is no sharp boundary between coals that give a high yield of oil and those that give a poor yield.
The low-rank coals, although easily hydrogenated, appear to be more sensitive to operating conditions.
Experimental coal mine.
Tests to check results reported from abroad showed that finely pulverized salt is two to five times as effective as ground limestone in preventing the propagation of coal-dust explosions.
However, salt cheap enough to be used in the necessary quantities absorbs much water from damp mine atmospheres and moreover is likely to cause rapid corrosion of metals.
For these reasons, salt cannot be recommended as a substitute for stone dusts, in spite of its effectiveness.
An extended investigation of dusts prepared from coal tar, watergas tar, and petroleum pitches that now are or may in future be pulverized for use as fuel showed that they are decidedly more inflammable and explosive than is pulverized high-volatile coal dust.
Explosions of pitch dust in industry can, however, be forestalled by rigid adherence to the safety rules developed to cover the handling of pulverized coal.
Conclusions and recommendations.
The resources of the Coal Division barely permit it to keep pace with current demands.
A defense emergency requiring greatly increased use of coal and its products would quiekly increase the demand for investigations of certain phases of the use of coal, especially the manufacture of metallurgical coke and the substitution of poorer coals in less vital industries to release high-grade fuels for key activities.
The present research program of the Bureau, directed toward the most efficient utilization of the cheaper and more abundant varieties of coal, should be augmented in order to extend the life of the relatively limited resources of high-grade steam and coking coals.
Provision also should be made for research on the mining, preparation, and utilization of anthracite.
During 1940 the work on certain problems concerning the mining and milling of metalliferous ores was recessed to permit assignment of mining engineers of the permanent staff of the Mining Division to the investigation of domestic deposits of strategic minerals, as authorized by Public, 117, Seventy-sixth Congress, first session.
Plans had been formulated so carefully that it was possible to initiate exploration projects as soon as funds were appropriated; to complete the first year's projected program for sampling 10 deposits, involving surface trenching, test pitting, and diamond drilling; and to examine 163 additional deposits.
Three deposits disclosed important quantities of strategic minerals, and there is reason for increased hope of self-sufficiency in an emergency as regards at least two of the seven principal minerals on the strategic list—mercury and antimony.
Progress continued in the development and application of methods for measuring pressures on rock pillars in mines; if successful, these will not only contribute materially to conservation of mineral resources by avoiding unnecessary waste but will promote safety.
Other important results were attained from investigations of methods for controlling dust and noxious gases from blasting; of mine ventilation; and of the seismie effects of blasting operations upon structures.
Examination of strategic mineral deposits.
One hundred sixtythree deposits containing strategic minerals situated in 13 different States were examined and reports made concerning them.
About 20 percent of the deposits chosen for examination would-warrant some exploratory work and sampling if funds permitted.
Those selected represented only a small proportion of the many hundreds reported and were determined on the basis of their comparative merit, measured by available data, as possible sources of appreciable quantities of strategic minerals in an emergency.
The location of the 10 projects to which especial attention was given during the fiscal year 1940 and the metals sought is as follows: antimony—Yellow Pine, Idaho; chromium—Columbus, Mont., Casper, Wyo., and John Day, Oreg.
Metal mining and milling methods.
Investigations of methods and costs continued in nine Western States, and at the same time technical assistance was furnished, in the localities being studied, to prospectors and small-scale operators financially unable to employ competent engineers.
Metal-mining research.
Earlier laboratory investigations of sonic methods for determining pressures on rocks was followed during the past year by extensive mine tests, which give promise that such methods ultimately can be applied to practical solution of difficult problems in the recovery of ore and coal.
Subaudible sound waves that precede actual failure of mine pillars have been detected by high amplification.
In the mine-scale laboratory at Mount Weather, Va., comprehensive tests on the use of stemming, blasting plugs, and wood safety primers were continued.
Conclusions were not possible, but comparative results attained with several types of stemming supplied new information on the control of dust and noxious gases from blasting.
Studies of dust prevention in rock drilling and tests of the comparative durability of alloy and straight carbon-drill-steel rods and detachable bits contributed new data that will be of practical use to metal-mine operators.
Nonmetal mining.
Rock-loading, haulage, and drilling tests were conducted at seven quarries.
Tests using a scleroscope to measure the drillability of rocks lend hope that drillability indexes can be developed by laboratory methods.
The particle size and shape of concrete aggregates produced in current practice at 11 quarries were determined, and screening tests of products from different types of crushers were carried on to assist in reducing waste products from quarry operations.
Analysès of data on seismic and mechanically induced vibrations in buildings provided an index of destructibility, and no vibrations from quarry blasting recorded in a great number of tests were as great as this index.
Coal minina.
Important phases of coal-mining practice were considered with a view to promoting improvement in methods that will conserve coal resources and promote safe operation.
The current rapid increase in mechanization of mining operations has justified the Bureau in placing emphasis on problems related to underground transportation of coal and multiple-shift mechanized mining.
Mine ventilation.
A series of tests on fan-pipe ventilation was run under controlled mine conditions at Mount Weather; and new data having practical application to both metal and coal mines were obtained.
Research on air-conditioning in mines was continued by both field investigations and analysis of voluminous literature.
Both ventilation and air-conditioning are important from the conservation view、 point, as they contribute to recovery of ore, that might otherwise be unminable, from great depths.
Electricity and machinery.
Investigation and explosion "permissibility" tests of electrical equipment resulted in approval of 38 machines as safe for use in gassy coal mines when properly installed and maintained in accordance with the standards promulgated in Bureau of Mines schedules.
Cooperation with Navy Department engineers involved mechanical and explosion tests of 20 pieces of electrical equipment.
Comparative tests of the explosive properties of aviation gasolines and "dope" solvents and thinners with petroleum ether were undertaken.
More than 350 persons witnessed laboratory demonstrations of means by which faulty electrical mining equipment and wiring may ignite gas-air mixtures.
Conclusions and recommendations.
The desirability of continuing the activities of the past year was demonstrated.
Based upon the strategic minerals investigations of the past year it is apparent that, in the interest of preparedness, exploration and sampling projects should be greatly expanded.
Increased technical field service to prospectors and small-seale mine operators is highly desirable to prevent wasteful and haphazard exploitation of mineral deposits.
Transfer of the headquarters of the Metallurgical Division from the East to its new building in Salt Lake City, with adequate facilities and central location as regards metallurgical industries, considerably increased its opportunities for service and made possible more effective direction of the technical investigations.
Material success has attended work of the Bureau in developing processes for the recovery of strategic metals from low-grade or off-grade domestic ores.
Laboratory results indicate that highpurity chromium metal can be obtained from off-grade chromite; an operating plant demonstrates that the electrolytic-manganese process can be used to produce pure manganese from low-grade ores; and experiments show that antimony, nickel, copper and platinum metals may be recovered from certain complex domestic ores by methods developed in the Metallurgical Division.
Other tests show that some ferro-grade manganese concentrates can be produced by ore-dressing treatments of several low-grade ores and that most of the residual manganese can be utilized as an iron-rich product or recovered by the electrolytic process.
Metallurgical fundamentals.
In the continuing program of measurement of low-temperature specific heats and determination of the entropy of metallurgically important materials, original results were obtained on eight.
A review of work in this field pertaining to inorganic substances has been prepared.
Calorimetric studies of the heat of hydration of various forms of calcium sulfate show some of the reasons for difficulties in manufacture and furnish a possible manufacturing-control method when adapted to plant conditions.
Studies of the diffusive separation of gases have been completed.
These methods are especially adapted to the recovery of hydrogen from coke-oven, blast-furnace, refinery, and other gases.
Ferrous metalluray.
A fundamental investigation indicates that ferrous sulfide exists mainly as a colloid in molten blast-furnace slag and that the sulfides of caleium and manganese are present both in the colloidal state and in solution in the silicate.
Tests of the effect of various added elements on the thermoelectric power of iron have resulted in the development of a practical method of employing this property to distinguish among different kinds of steel.
The magnetie apparatus utilized in studying slags and simple oxides has been found quite useful in investigating various alloys that experience internal changes.
The method of determining carbon in steel samples by measuring the magnetic saturation is capable of giving consistent results at high temperature, and a new apparatus for determining carbon magnetically appears to be satisfactory for control purposes.
Nonferrous metallurgy.
Several improvements in lead smelting and in sintering resulted from cooperative research.
Modifications in one furnace produced a sevenfold reduetion in barring requirements, and proper control of air supply in another permitted better operation and increased lead recovery in the bullion.
Tests in small laboratory equipment of an electrothermal reduction and distillation process for producing magnesium metal from magnesite have been completed, samples of refined metal produced.
Large furnaces have been designed, equipment and supplies have been purchased, and many special parts for a large laboratory unit to test the process have been constructed.
Special analytical methods were developed, among them new methods for determining molybdenum, that have been introduced in several large commercial laboratories.
The construction or continued operation of a number of precious metal milling plants has resulted from successful solution of problems presented to the Bureau.
A total of 11,718 analyses and tests were completed in conjunction with the strategic-minerals program.
Some success was achieved in the development of procedures for the flotation of oxidized copper ores.
Following preliminary investigations which proved that electrolytic manganese produced by the Bureau method would serve as the basic material for alloys with unique properties, considerable equipment was installed for the casting, forming, heat treatment, and testing of manganese allovs.
Several series of manganese alloys with one or more of the following outstanding characteristics have been prepared and studied: Hardenability by heat treatment, corrosion resistance, high electrical resistance, high coefficient of expansion, high vibration-damping capacity, and suitability for high tensile strength die castings.
Refractory manganese ores from Idaho, Utah, South Dakota, Colorado, and Minnesota are being studied as to the possibility of treatment by matte smelting with sulfide ores of iron and copper.
Electrometallurgy.
Several important contributions in this field include the development of methods for the recovery of nickel, copper, and platinum metals from domestic nickel ores; for the electrolytic recovery of antimony from antimonial gold ores; for the manufacture of caleium boride; for the preparation of pure boric acid from colemanite: for the manufacture of pure calcium borate from raw colemanite ores; and for the production of high-purity electrolytic chromium from domestic chrome ores.
Electric-furnace tests show that domestic chromium ores can be smelted to produce acceptable chromium ferro-alloys.
Improvements in the Bureau's electrolytic-manganese process are constantly being made and applied to small-scale operations.
Dust settling.
In consequence of a comprehensive study of the kinetics of flocculation in the laboratory unit, it has been possible to increase the efficiency of the sound generator from 5 percent to 21 percent; it is expected to exceed 30 percent in the new generator being built for a large flocculating unit designed for performing practical tests in cooperation with two large manufacturers of dust-collecting equipment.
Ore dressing.
Successful plant installations based upon Bureau recommendations include three flotation plants now in operation in the Rosiclare (Ill.) district for the treatment of fluorspar ores and tailings and a concentration plant being constructed in the Birmingham (Ala.) district for the treatment of siliceous hematite ores by tabling differentially ground material.
Problems that have reached a successful conclusion include laboratory demonstration, followed by pilot-plant operations, showing the possibility of recovering one-third or more of the manganese as a ferro-grade product and most of the remainder as spiegel-grade material from black manganese ores of the Cuyuna range, Minn.
Questions of timely interest that are receiving intensive study comprise preparation of concentrates of ferro grade from Utah, Nevada, and Idaho manganese ores.
Conclusions and recommendations.
Adoption by the industry of Bureau of Mines ore-dressing flow sheets and analytical procedures and development of many promising processes for the recovery of strategic metals from domestic ores demonstrate the usefulness of the current work of the Metallurgical Division.
Important projects that await additional facilities for their completion include pilot-plant investigation of the production of important strategic metals especially manganese and chromium; research on substitutes for tin; the development of light-weight, corrosionresistant magnesium alloys with suitable stiffness and adequate strength; the study of electric-furnace smelting of complex ores; and the construction and testing of large-scale sonic flocculators.
The Petroleum and Natural-Gas Division devoted a large proportion of its personnel and funds during the year to the preparation of reports requested by other Federal agencies and consultant service to the Government.
Two reports—one on petroleum production practices and the other on manufacture and use of petroleum products— were compiled for the Subcommittee on Petroleum Investigation of the House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce.
The authors brought up to date similar reports prepared for the same subcommittee in 1934.
The index of the entire 2,170 printed pages of hearings before the subcommittee also was prepared by the division.
The history and trends of technologic developments in the petroleum industry were treated in four manuscripts written by the division for the National Resources Planning Board, and departmental reports were prepared on problems relating to national defense and conservation.
Consulting services to other bureaus are exemplified by a study made for the Biological Survey of the cause and effect of loss of control of an oil well drilled on a waterfowl refuge in Texas and technical information supplied to Army engineers concerning effects on petroleum operations of the construction of a dam and resulting inundation of oil-bearing lands in Oklahoma.
Production of petroleum and natural gas.
Energy relationships in oil and gas fields were studied to facilitate production of the greatest quantity of oil with the least expenditure of naturally occurring energy and minimum waste of oil and gas.
Subsurface and surface samples of oil and gas mixtures were collected from flow systems of wells and analyzed; field tests were made with the Bureau of Mines-American Petroleum Institute pressure core barrel, and the operation of that instrument was improved; laboratory determinations of characteristies of hydrocarbon mixtures were continued; and studies were made of one of the older Oklahoma fields that helped to explain why mány redrilling campaigns in similar areas have been successful.
Data on reservoir conditions in the Lance Creek oil field and in Naval Petroleum Reserve No. 3 were obtained with the aid of instruments and laboratory equipment of the Petroleum Experiment Station at Laramie, Wyo., for measuring temperatures and pressures in wells and for collecting and analyzing subsurface oil samples taken under pressure.
Study of the important problem of well spacing was continued, and a review of Cutler's rule of well spacing was published.
Methods of estimating oil and gas reserves in both sandstone and limestone fields were developed further, and a report was issued on reservoir characteristies of the Eunice (N. Mex.) oil field, which produces from a limestone reservoir.
Research was conducted on the funetion of water in production of oil and on mud fluids used for drilling oil wells; a bulletin dealing with methods of preventing and treating crude-oil emulsions was published; and study of methods of eleaning wells to increase their productivity was continued.
Safety in the petroleum industry.
As a result of work to which the State of Oklahoma contributed financial aid, reports were published on accidents in the petroleum industry during 1937 and on the hazards of mercury vapor in petroleum laboratories.
Natural gas.
Two studies were continued in cooperation with the American Gas Association.
One deals with icelike substances, known as gas hydrates, which form in gas wells and pipe lines at temperatures considerably above the freezing point of water; the other is directed toward improvements in methods of gaging and controlling combination (oil-gas) wells.
This work led to publication of data on the physical and chemical properties of hydrates formed from various pure hydrocarbon gases and their mixtures, a description of an apparatus developed by the Bureau for investigating properties of liquids in the natural underground reservoirs from which oil and gas are produced, data obtained with that apparatus, and results of flow tests on wells.
The Bureau of Mines device for determining eompressibility of gases was improved.
Such work helps the natural-gas industry to prevent obstructions to flow of gas caused by formation of hydrates, to attain greater accuracy in measuring gas in high-pressure operations, to adopt better methods of gaging and controlling wells in "distillate"- or "condensate"-type fields that produce large volumes of gas with relatively small quantities of light hydrocarbon liquids, and to improve conservation in those fields.
Oil-field brines.
In Oklahoma, Kansas, and Illinois Bureau engineers studied the disposal of oil-field brines, which are harmful to fresh-water supplies, vegetation, and aquatic and other animal life.
The Petroleum Division work in Illinois is aiding oil operators in this leading agricultural State where large quantities of brine are produced, and results of field investigations in eastern Kansas not only suggest efficient methods of disposal but are useful to operators in areas where supplies of surface water are inadequate for inereasing recovery of oil by flooding.
All of these field studies received financial support from the States in which the work was done.
Chemistry and refining of petroleum.
The refining industry was reviewed from the incoming crude petroleum to the finished produets, and the types of petroleum found in Illinois, Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, and Kansas studied with special emphasis on relationships between characteristics of crude oils and geological environment.
Several selected crude oils were analyzed and considered in detail.
A system of analysis for sulfur groups based upon investigations of the types of sulfur compounds in distillates from high-sulfur oils was devised and tested, and its limitations were defined.
Oregon Basin (Wyo.) gasoline and kerosene distillates were extracted with liquid sulfur dioxide at various temperatures and solvent-to-oil ratios, and research to determine the types of sulfur compounds in the distillates is progressing.
Asphalts of different consistency, prepared in the laboratory from seven erude oils from Wyoming, three from Arkansas, one from California, and one from Mexico, were subjected to common asphalt tests, and the properties of a 100-penetration asphalt from each crude oil were estimated from these data so that the properties of asphalts from different crude oils may be compared.
Moreover, the asphalts were separated by solvents into such constituents as asphaltenes, resins, oils, and waxes.
Helium production.
The Amarillo helium plant produced nearly 9,500,000 cubic feet of salable helium during the fiscal year 1940, or about 50 percent more than in 1939.
Approximately 84 percent of the output was supplied to the Government, and the other 16 percent was sold for medical, scientific, and commercial use.
More than 450 stations of the Weather Bureau now use helium in meteorological balloons, and estimates indicate that the helium sold for medical use provided at least 34,000 hours of treatment.
Figures compiled by the Bureau show that the Amarillo plant has produced 100,012,000 cubic feet of helium during its operating life of a little more than 11 years.
Even this production is less than 50 percent of the potential output for an equal period if the plant were run at its rated capacity.
In October 1939 the Bureau completed a new gas well in the Cliffside field; it now has the highest producing capacity of the five wells that supply the helium plant.
Conclusions and recommendations.
As the facilities and qualifications of the Petroleum and Natural-Gas Division have become better known, other Government agencies have called upon its staff for technical assistance with increasing frequency.
These requests for special services, especially during the past fiscal year, have hindered members of the division from performing their regular duties; the needs of other Government bureaus for such assistance should receive recognition in the form of increased technical personnel to relieve the burden now placed on the present corps of engineers.
The highest grades of many nonmetallic minerals, such as fluorspar, tale, graphite, magnesite, and clays, usually are imported from abroad.
World conditions already have sharply decreased the availability of some of these minerals, and nearly all are subject to curtailment.
The Nonmetals Division is employing an increased proportion of its facilities in application of the newer ore-dressing methods to domestic materials in order that satisfactory grades may be produced in this country and the United States rendered more independent of foreign supplies.
Methods used are mainly electrostatic and wet filming, such as froth flotation, table agglomeration, and the “sticky surface" process.
Greatest effort has been expended on fluorite concentration because of the critical state of fluorspar supplies.
American materials for sanitary wares.
Continued studies at Norris, Tenn., have indicated that almost any variety of working properties can be developed from domestic clays, including the numerous types of kaolin and of ball clay.
North Carolina alaskite was found to represent a satisfactory and potentially enormous source of whitefiring, mixed potash-and-soda feldspars to replace Cornwall stone from England.
Flotative and agglomerate concentration of feldspars.
Formal publication of the joint work of the Tuscaloosa (Ala.) and College Park, Md., stations with the aid of a cooperating company was released during the fiscal year.
This technique for nonmetallic-mineral separation is novel and of great importance to the domestic feldspar industry, which is in urgent need of an efficient method for recovering feldspar of highest ceramic grade.
A second feldspar company to apply the method on a commercial scale is now installing at Erwin, Tenn., a plant based upon the Bureau's suggestions.
Feldspars from numerous areas have been tested in the laboratory to determine their response to this treatment, and the results have been very encouraging.
Coal.
Work on the preparation of coal was continued at Seattle, Wash., and Tuscaloosa, Ala., to determine the feasibility of reducing the percentage of ash-forming constituents and cutting down wastes in the coal industry.
Recovery of coal from washery sludges and purification of wash water also have been given serious attention.
All this research is working toward coal conservation and the maintenance of quality, which is of special importance in a defense emergency.
Utilization of coal wastes (consisting of bony coal, shale, slates, and clays removed from the coal during washing) has been studied, and experiments have been conducted on possible use of the powdered black material for soil conditioning to cause less reflection of heat rays onto crops that are easily burned, greater heating of the soil to accelerate growth (especially in cool weather), and other effects.
The assistance of agricultural experiment stations, growers, and other State and Federal agencies has been enlisted in this program.
Optical investigations.
Some useful innovations in apparatus and operating technique have resulted during the year from the work in the petrographic, spectrographic, and X-ray laboratories of the College Park (Md.) and Tuscaloosa (Ala.) stations.
Improved methods for obtaining a standard source of light for the spectrograph and higher accuracy in quantitative estimation of alkali metals in nonmetallicmineral products are reported.
Clay investigations.
Because of the numerous uses to which clays are put and because of the many kinds of clay available, selection of a particular clay as best-fitted for a specific use is not easy.
Selection usually is based upon special tests, which are legion; a study is being made to codify these test methods to make them more systematic, as well as more readily applied.
A short syllabus and an unabridged one will be published.
These will be helpful to the operator of any clay deposit in testing his own elay for its applicability in broader markets than he now reaches.
Electrically heated ceramic kilns.
Continuation of cooperative studies with the Tennessee Valley Authority at Norris, Tenn., has shown that excellent firing conditions can be maintained in electric kilns for face and common brick, fine and common china, and complicated sanitary wares, indicating a wider possible use of newly developed hydroelectric power throughout the country and conservation of fuels.
Employment of short, rapidly fired, small-section, multipletunnel kilns will greatly reduce the difference in total .
Both graphite and silicon carbide rods are being used as heating elements.
Prevention of china-plate warpage.
The causes of warpage in china plates have been studied at Norris, Tenn., in cooperation with the Tennessee Valley Authority.
It has been found that unglazed china plates that have warped in the first firing can be straightened by nesting in machined, refractory rings in a second firing.
Embrittlement of boiler steel.
Cooperative investigation of the mechanism and means of preventing the intercrystalline cracking or embrittlement of boiler steel was continued at College Park, Md.
Special emphasis was placed on the installation of embrittlement detectors on 200 stationary and locomotive boilers and on the collection of data from logs of the operating performance.
Greater safety, longer runs, and longer life of boilers are now assured.
Methods were improved for evaluation of the true caustic alkali content of numerous commercial boiler waters, and a more rational correlation of eracking and solution composition was developed.
Critical attention was given to checking the value of sodium sulfate, commonly used to prevent this caustie embrittlement, and to searching for other more effective organic or inorganie compounds.
Certain tannin-containing materials, such as quebracho, waste sulfate liquors, and similar products, still appear to offer the best means of preventing the cracking of boiler steels.
Refractory raw materials.
Work was eontinued on certain phases of the beneficiation and utilization of olivine and kyanite in refractories, molding sands, and special fused products.
Reviews of investigations on olivine were published, and a general report on kyanite is being prepared.
Electrically fused olivine may prove to be an acceptable substitute for imported magnesite for superrefractories.
Raw olivine has been used as a replacement for magnesite in parts of steel furnaces.
Diatomite.
Researeh on the properties and methods for utilizing Pacific Northwest diatomites was continued, and information on methods for treating Maryland diatomites was published.
Reasonable assurance of the ultimate development of commercial production -of high-grade diatomaceous earth from these eastern clay-diatomite deposits is indicated.
Subsieve particle-size analysis.
Numerous fine powders have been subjected to particle-size determination in the subsieve range by means of the roller analyzer.
Limitations and means for improving the method were studied and a eritical comparison was made with other apparatus and methods for particle-size evaluation.
Conclusions and recommendations.
Because of the serious disloeation of world trade by the European war, an increasing proportion of the work of the Nonmetals Division will be diverted to mineral emergeney problems and older investigations brought to convenient end points or recessed.
The major objectives of the Explosives Division are the conservation of life and mineral resources by conducting research and tests pertaining to the development and safe use of explosives, and the explosibility of gases and vapors.
Testing of explosives.
The Explosives Division made 1,619 gallery tests to determine whether or not given samples of explosives would ignite explosive air-gas mixtures or explosive mixtures of coal dust, gas, and air, and also completed 1,051 other explosives-control tests of a physical nature.
In the chemical laboratory, 92 analyses were made.
During the year five explosives were submitted for "permissibility" tests to determine whether or not they could be used with safety in gassy or dusty coal mines under conditions prescribed by the Bureau.
Two of these failed to pass the gallery tests; of the three that met the requirements, only one was placed on the active list.
Mechanism of ignition of firedamp by explosives.
Experimental and theoretical research into the processes by which explosives may ignite firedamp and so initiate serious mine disasters was continued.
The results have emphasized the importance of controlling the energy content of the issuing detonation products.
The flow condition under which the produets mix with and communicate this energy also appears to be outstanding.
The study is continuing to guide the development of safer explosives.
Sheathed explosives.
The Bureau has encouraged industry to to submit sheathed explosives for examination and testing.
A simple procedure for evaluating the increased safety imparted by the sheath when used on a “permissible" explosive has been adopted, and information to aid further developmęnt and economical application obtained.
Poisonous gases from explosives.
Testing-station studies have emphasized the inereased hazards from poisoning that may result when carbonaceous blasting plugs or carbonaceous primers are used in the explosives assembly.
Cushioned blasting.
A review of available information on cushjoned blasting has shown it to be quite conflicting and has demonstrated the need of experimental information for clarification and development.
The experimental study is under way.
Gas explosions.
A procedure for eliminating gas explosions induced by oxvgen-cvclopropane mixtures during anesthesia has been developed.
Helium is used to replace a portion of the oxygen and has proved very successful because of its high thermal conductivity, good flame-quenching properties, and ease of inspiration.
The limits of inflammability of five combustibles and the minimum ignition temperatures of six combustible vapors have been determined.
It has been shown that marked improvement in the ventilation of underground space for the elimination of gas hazards can be obtained when two ducts, one near the bottom and one near the top, are used.
Natural differential thermal effects probably are utilized.
Mine fires.
A method has been developed for estimating the amount of heating or oxidation of a stored anthracite from the standard analysis of the stored coal.
Attempts to follow changing underground fire conditions from carbon monoxide analyses have shown that certain bacteria consume carbon monoxide and hydrogen so rapidly as to render such analyses of doubtful value.
Hazards in the use of Diesel mine locomotives.
An investigation of the composition of exhaust gases from Diesel engines has led to recommendations for safe ventilation practices where these engines may be used and have indicated the significance of such analyses in following combustion phenomena in the engine.
Conclusions and recommendations.
The Explosives Division needs to enlarge its staff to keep abreast of the requests being made by State mine inspectors, mine operators, and manufacturers of explosives for investigation of the safety and suitability of new explosives.
The interest of the public in the search for strategic and critical minerals largely explained the increase of 1,500 in the number of specimens submitted to the principal mineralogist for identification as compared with the 2 preceding years.
The total samples received —3,500—was so large that the laboratory staff had to be enlarged to handle the increased volume of work.
The Economies and Statistics Branch contributed to the Government's defense program by supplying factual information on sources, production, consumption, and stocks of strategic minerals for the Army and Navy Munitions Board and the Advisory Commission to the Council of National Defense.
Its normal activities comprised the collection, review, and publication of data on all principal mineral commodities; research on special economic subjects; and compilation of the annual statistical survey, Minerals Yearbook.
The branch comprised the Coal Economics, Petroleum Economics, Mineral Production and Economics, Metal Economics, Nonmetal Economies, and Foreign Minerals Divisions.
After the outbreak of the European war the Coal Economics Division received numerous requests from coal-trade associations and coal exporters for statistical data and interpretive material on foreign commerce in coal, with special reference to the possibility of expanding the coal-export trade of the United States.
It continued to cooperate with the Bituminous Coal Division of the United States Department of the Interior and helped to prepare a joint study on mechanized mining.
The Coal Economics Division also maintained contact with the Secretary of the Canadian Fuel Board.
Annual reports.
The anthracite and coke sections completed their annual statistical studies of the anthracite, lignite, and coke industries; the results, with corresponding data on fuel briquets, packaged fuel, and peat, largely form the basis for the division's chapters in Minerals Yearbook covering production, distribution, and consumption of these fuels.
In the Anthracite chapter further attention was given to the distribution of that commodity and to a statistical analysis of the competitive-fuel situation in the principal anthraciteconsuming States.
Monthly and weekly reports.
Monthly reports included preliminary data on the production of anthracite and of beehive coke, and soon after the first of any year supplements supply preliminary statistics concerning these fuels for the preceding year.
A weekly report states the estimated current weekly production of anthracite and of beehive coke, and one issue each month summarizes developments in the Pennsylvania anthracite industry during the previous month.
Special articles were prepared by the international coal trade section for the monthly publication, International Coal Trade, including the Competitive Fuel Situation in Ontario and Quebec; Fuel and Power in Canada, 1915–18, 1928, and 1938; Britain's Coal in War Time; Germany's Coal in War Time; Fuel and Power in Uruguay; and Fuel and Power in Chile.
Since July 1939 a table has appeared in each issue of International Coal Trade that shows (monthly and for the year to date in comparison with corresponding periods of the preceding year) the approximate coal, petroleum, natural gas, and hydroelectricity available for consumption in the United States in their own units of measurement and in terms of coal.
Similar data on Canada are shown in a subjoined table.
These two countries probably produce 90 percent of the fuel (except wood) and power available in all the Americas.
Correspondence and inquiries.
The international coal trade section devoted an unusually large proportion of its time after hostilities began abroad to answering correspondence and other inquiries about the export coal trade.
In addition to the reports on foreign aspects of the coal industry, the section also prepared several special articles at the request of various United States and British coal-trade journals.
Conclusions.
The Coal Economics Division purposes to improve its studies on the competitive-fuel situation and to investigate the economics of byproduct recovery from coking plants and of the supply of and demand for the byproducts of coal processing.
The division's research on the recovery of anthracite from refuse piles and rivers, the progress of strip mining, and the inereasing importance of the fuel-briquets and packaged-fuel industries that prepare from fine coal a product having the characteristics of lump coal all measure the results of industrial processes that tend to conserve the Nation's fuel resources and make it more self-sufficient in an emergeney.
The Petroleum Economics Division collects statistics and makes economic studies of the output and consumption of petroleum and natural gas and their products for the information of Federal and State agencies and of the industry.
The scope of this work is such that the oil industry probably is supplied with more comprehensive and current information than is available to any other major enterprise.
The division maintains a field office at Los Angeles for collection of California data and another at Bartlesville, Okla., for contact with State agencies and for assembly of information on natural gas.
Forecasts of demand.
The division has issued monthly forecasts of the demand for motor fuel and for crude petroleum by States of origin since July 1935.
This information is of outstanding interest to State conservation agencies in connection with proration programs to avoid waste and prevent the uneconomic accumulation of oil in storage.
Impřovements in forecasting methods have resulted in attainment of a degree of accuraey that has made the forecasts a reliable guide to the trend of operations in the industry.
International studies.
Data on the trends of world production of oil, international trade, and world consumption have been issued regularly in monthly reports and data on world prices in quarterly reports.
These publications have been of especial use since the disruption of world trade by the European war.
Special investigations.
The annual survey of sales of fuel oil, range oil, and kerosene, by States, represents a worth-while contribution to information on the domestic use and regional distribution of oil products.
The early issue (in June 1940) of the annual list of petroleum refineries, showing their situation and capacity, has been of exceptional timeliness under existing conditions.
A special survey of aviation gasoline was inaugurated in October 1939 to cover production, stocks, and domestic demand on a monthly basis.
Two economie papers prepared by the division were issued during the year.
Economic Paper 20 made available unpublished statistics of detailed operations, by refinery distriets; and Economie Paper 21 discussed the trends and seasonal variations in factors influencing domestie motor-fuel demand on a monthly basis.
The Mineral Production and Economies Division collected mineproduetion statisties for gold, silver, copper, lead, and zine in the United States; supervised preparation of the annual volume—Minerals Yearbook; assembled and interpreted statistics on employment, accidents, and explosives as related to the mining industries; and concluded the Bureau of Mines—Work Projects Administration cooperative study of changes in mineral technology with regard to their effeet on output per man.
Early in the year the chief of the division was transferred to the United States Department of Commerce to conduct the census of mines and quarries, and members of the division have cooperated closely in this work.
Metal-mine statisties.
Preliminary reviews of metal mining in the 13 Western States that produced nonferrous metals in 1939 were released early in January 1940, and recapitulations summarizing the mine production of gold, silver, copper, lead, and zine were distributed soon afterward.
Final detailed statisties for all metal-mining States were completed by the middle of June.
During the year compilation of the historical record of metal mining in the Western States continued to progress.
Minerals Yearbook, 1939, was issued in September 1939.
The total circulation of this volume was about 9,000 copies, and the sales edition was virtually exhausted before the close of the fiscal year.