My DEAR MR. PREsIDENT: You will find in this annual report a graphic story of how the resources owned by 133 million people have been mobilized to deal with the crisis that our Nation faces.
With the defense program making unprecedented calls for raw material, the work of the Department of the Interior for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1941, became infinitely more than conservation of natural resources for conservation's sake alone.
To this great task was added the responsibility for the wise, but rapid development of our resources for preparedness and defense.
The struggle abroad has opened our eyes, as never before, to the extent and the possibilities of America's resources.
We have been enabled to turn to our natural heritage and in the wealth of minerals, water power, grazing lands, and timber find the vital necessities for constructing our physical defenses.
In order that the Nation may fulfill its function as an arsenal of democracy, we have hastened the development of hydroelectric power in the West.
We have never lost sight of more and greater power production as an inevitable objective for a progressive age, but with the quickened tempo of defense needs we have stepped up, by years, the schedules originally set for these great projects.
To this, we can attribute the speed in construction work on 36 projects in 14 States.
The initial production of power at Grand Coulee Dam was months ahead of schedule.
The Bonneville Power Administration power sales alone made possible the manufacture of enough aluminum pig metal to build one out of every four planes.
Other plants produced additional power as the mobilization of democracy made it possible for us to compress into mere months the construction and power-installation schedules of years.
This same stimulus quickened the activities of bureaus throughout the Department.
In another field, the Bureau of Mines, in cooperation with the Geological Survey, hastened its work of locating and evaluating deposits of strategic and critical minerals.
The Bureau's studies indicate that we may, in an emergency, produce our own supply of ferromanganese.
The production of helium gas in the world's only helium plant was increased until it soon will be producing nearly 36 million cubic feet annually.
The Bureau's experiments in producing gasoline from coal advanced notably.
Even in those bureaus whose relationship to national defense is not so readily apparent, greater activity has been in evidence.
Contributions to defense were forthcoming from such agencies as the Fish and Wildlife Service, the National Park Service, the Grazing Service, the Office of Land Utilization, and other agencies.
This report records the role that conservation has played in the national defense.
A study of our achievements will show how important that role is.
The Bureau of Reclamation is not only conserving the water resources of the West for the irrigation of more than 10,000,000 acres of thirsty land, it is making important contributions to national defense and paving the way for post-emergency requirements.
To meet the skyrocketing demand for power for national defense, the Bureau of Reclamation speeded up its power production for airplane factories, aluminum plants, and other defense industries.
Four new power plants on reclamation projects began operations during the vear; installation of additional generating equipment was rushed in order to double existing capacity by 1943; one new project was authorized; and a list of 50 potential projects with power possibilities was submitted to the Congress for consideration.
At the close of the year, 28 power plants were in operation at 17 proiects with a total installed capacity of 953,962 kilowatts—an alltime high exceeding the capacity of all electric plants on the Pacific coast in 1912.
A highlight of power activities was attained on March 22 when the first power from Grand Coulee Dam surged over the Bonneville-Grand Coulee transmission line.
Two 10,000-kilowatt station-service units began operations.
Three of the huge 108,000- kilowatt generating units are scheduled to go into operation by February 1942.
Boulder Dam's installed capacity of 704,800 kilowatts, or a little more than half its ultimate capacity of 1,322,300 kilowatts, will be increased by August 1942 to 962,300 kilowatts with the installation of three additional units.
Power from Boulder Dam is serving the country's largest airplane industries in southern California, and will furnish power for aluminum and magnesium plants in the vicinity.
The West enjoyed one of its best water years in a generation.
41½ million acre-feet, or 13,000 billion gallons of water.
The largest was Lake Mead at Boulder Dam, where storage rose to more than 30,000,000 acre-feet, the greatest amount ever impounded in the reservoir.
All five reservoirs of the Salt River project spilled for the first time.
With the expansion of its irrigation and power activities, the Bureau was serving, at the close of the fiscal year, more than 4,700,000 persons—a population greater than that living in the 11 Mountain and Pacific States when the reclamation law was enacted in 1902.
On 36 projects in operation there were 57,441 irrigated farms on which reside 214,781 persons.
In 279 cities and towns created or maintained by the project farms, there was a population of 688,134.
More than 20,000 additional farms, with a population of approximately 100,000 persons, received supplemental water supplies from project works.
Hundreds of churches and schools in the project areas reflect the social influence of the transformation of desert wastes into productive, selfsustaining communities.
In 1940 the Bureau was prepared to serve water for the irrigation of 4,168,168 acres—the largest area since its operations began.
This area represents an increase of 278,628 acres over that reported for 1939.
The crop returns from the 3,316,030 acres of land in cultivation actually irrigated in 1940 were valued at $117,788,677, an increase of $3,705,883 over the total for the previous year.
Under the construction program in progress, 2,370,000 acres of land will be brought into cultivation.
The largest development in this program is the Columbia Basin project in Washington, which will irrigate 1,200,000 acres.
More than 3,800,000 acres of land now inadequately irrigated will receive more stable supplies through the facilities now under construction, which will bring to about 10,958,000 acres the land to be served by the current program.
Through the water conservation and utilization program, designed to rehabilitate and stabilize the Great Plains and other western agricultural regions, the area of 155,000 acres to be benefited will probably be more than doubled as new projects now under investigation are undertaken.
The Bureau's largest construction program was pushed forward on 36 projects in 14 States during the year.
Of the 17 dams under construction, 8 were completed, which brought to 163 the total number of dams completed by the Bureau since 1902.
Several are outstanding in height and volume.
Grand Coulee Dam is 550 feet high, 4,300 feet long, and contains 10,500,000 cubic yards of concrete, making it the largest concrete structure in the world.
Shasta Dam, 560 feet high, will be second in height to the 726-foot Boulder Dam, the highest in the world.
Grand Coulee Dam, the principal construction feature of the Columbia Basin project, was virtually completed.
Land classification and appraisal of the 1,200,000 acres to be served by the project were nearing completion.
Good progress was made on plans for the development and settlement of the area, which probably will begin in 1944 or 1945, when water is available for the first blocks of land.
Hatcheries were completed at three stations for the conservation of migratory fish in the Columbia River.
The Central Valley project in California, to benefit 2,000,000 acres of rich and highly cultivated land, in addition to providing protection from floods, repulsing salt-water intrusions from San Francisco Bay, and generating hydroelectric power, was approximately one-fourth completed.
Shasta Dam, on the Sacramento River in the north, was more than half finished; the Southern Pacific Railroad relocation was completed with the exception of the high double-deck Pit River bridge; the contract for Friant Dam on the San Joaquin River in the south was more than 75 percent completed; a 9½-mile section of the 40-mile Contra Costa Canal was completed; and work was begun on the Madera Canal.
With eight of the large 82,500-kilowatt generators and one of the smaller 40.000-kilowatt generators in operation at the Boulder Dam power plant, approximately 3,200,000,000 kilowatt-hours of energy were generated, and collections by the Government from the sale of electric energy totaled more than $6,000,000, with a monthly maximum of $767.927 in August 1940.
The Boulder Canyon Adjustment Act of July 19, 1940, which provided for the adjustment of rates and charges for electrical energy generated at Boulder Dam, was effectuated in May 1941 by the execution of agency contracts and new contracts with power allottees.
In Colorado, good progress was made on the Colorado-Big Thompson project, designed to provide a supplemental water supply for 615,000 acres of land.
Green Mountain Dam, on the Blue River, was almost 50 percent completed, and contractors finished two sections of the 13.1-mile Continental Divide Tunnel.
Two additional sections were under construction.
Marshall Ford Dam, on the Colorado River in Texas, was being raised to a height of 270 feet with 67 percent of the work completed under a contract let during the year.
The vear's work brought the construction accomplishments of the Bureau to impressive totals: 85 storage and 78 diversion dams; 50 power plants; 364 pumping plants; 367 tunnels; 16,017 miles of canals and laterals; 5,931 miles of ditches and drains; 206,043 canal structures; 14,072 bridges; 22,504 culverts; 2,175 miles of pipe; 6,427 flumes; 3,735 miles of roads; and 5,403 miles of transmission lines.
Long-needed action was taken by the Congress at the close of the year to expedite the construction of all projects financed from the seriously depleted reclamation fund by providing that additional projects be financed from the general fund of the Treasury.
The demand for the construction of multiple-purpose projects under the reclamation program continues unabated.
The increase in population in the West, coupled with the industrial expansion vital to national defense, is emphasizing the feasibility of combinations of power and irrigation facilities.
By investigations into virtually every river basin in the West, the Bureau of Reclamation will have on hand a shelf-full of feasible projects which can be launched quickly to provide employment and new homes for a permanent population in the rural areas of the West and in the urban communities which they support.
No dearth of feasible projects exists.
Estimates are that there is sufficient water available in the West to irrigate an additional 22,000,- 000 acres, and provide supplemental supplies for 11,700,000 acres.
Potential water power developments, in connection with irrigation developments, would doubtless provide as much as 30,000,000 kilowatts of electric capacity, more than three times the existing installed capacity.
Conservation of the Nation's mineral resources, as practiced for 31 years under the Bureau of Mines, paid off generously during the fiscal year when the national-defense program reflected unmistakably the sound policies of the past.
The Bureau of Mines' helium plant at Amarillo, Tex., the only plant in the world producing lightweight, noninflammable gas, established a new record with an output during the year of more than 16½ million cubic feet, of which 15 million went for Government use.
Since even this rate of production is not adequate to meet future demands for barrage-balloon operation, for meteorological balloons, airships, and other military and naval needs, the building of a new unit and the drilling of new wells to increase plant capacity 50 percent, were undertaken.
Upon completion of these improvements, the Bureau of Mines will be able to produce approximately 36 million cubic feet of helium annually.
Investigations of domestic deposits of strategic minerals, begun by the Bureau last year, made excellent progress.
Discovery of an important high-grade deposit of tungsten ore in Idaho, that is now being brought rapidly to commercial production, was one of the outstanding results of the work.
Another prospect favorable to the production of chromium ore, is being developed with the aid of funds furnished by the Reconstruction Finance Corporation.
In addition, deposits of antimony, manganese, and mercury ores were found which, although of lower grade, could become valuable in an emergency.
These developments are the more outstanding results of the examination by the Bureau of more than 500 possible sources of strategic minerals.
Exploratory work on many deposits that looked favorable was extensive.
The magnitude of the task may be indicated by the fact that it included 76,500 feet of diamond drilling, 43,800 feet of trenching, 2,500 feet of tunneling, 8,125 feet of shaft sinking, and the building of more than 8½ miles of motor-truck trails and 6½ miles of pack trails.
Metallurgical research on minerals of strategic importance also yielded highly promising results.
Studies on production of ferromanganese from the abundant, low.grade, manganiferous ores of this country, revealed definite possibilities that the United States may be able, in an emergency, to free itself from almost complete dependence upon foreign sources.
Laboratory tests of a process for treating domestic ores to produce material of ferro grade have been successful, and tests on a scale large enough to provide engineering data for fullscale industrial application will be conducted upon completion of pilot plants now under construction.
The work is being prosecuted with all the speed compatible with accuracy and efficiency.
The Bureau's special process for the production of magnesium by direct electrothermal reduction of magnesium-bearing ores, such as magnesite, has been further improved; and it is hoped that adjustments being incorporated will yield a method that will be suitable for immediate industrial application and thus help the Nation to overcome the shortage of this vital defense material.
The Bureau's metallurgists.
The threatened shortage of gasoline and oil on the Atlantic coast emphasized the value of the Bureau's economic and statistical surveys of petroleum and petroleum products, and its technical studies on pipe-line transmission.
Special studies were made of eastern supply and demand, and of pipe-line mileage and capacity.
An investigation of the quantity and geographic distribution of èrude oils that can be used to make aviation gasoline, revealed the fact that a number of oil fields, which hitherto have not been regarded as sources of aviation gasoline, are potential producers of this essential material.
Because of a rising demand and rapid shifts in imports and exports, the Bureau's periodical forecasts of demand for motor fuel and a special canvass of production and stocks of aviation gasoline contributed materially to preparedness planning.
Also of value to the defense program was the survey made of the location, type, and capacity of existing refineries.
Although the United States as a whole is not faced with a lack of resources or an immediate shortage of base supplies at production points of petroleum, the Bureau has been conducting studies, on a semicommercial scale, of the production of gasoline and other oil products from coal by the hydrogenation process.
Its pilot plant tested a number of varieties of American coals to determine tle quality and yields of various oil products, and results indicated that the process can be adapted to full-scale commercial production at any time in the future when natural petroleum resources show signs of serious depletion.
Research was conducted also on some of the byproducts of the process that have potential value in the field of plastics.
All of the Bureau's work on the economics and statistics of minerals was intensified and speeded up during the year.
The data became a necessity for all agencies of Government concerned with defense production, procurement, priorities, stock-piling, export control, prices, and civilian supply.
The Bureau, through long-established contact with sources of information, implemented its vast reservoir of data on amounts and trends of production, consumption, prices, stocks, technologic progress, world conditions, and international trade, for more than 100 metal and other mineral commodities, and conducted numerous special surveys and canvasses.
First-aid training, which now assumes such great importance in the preparations for civilian defense, was given by the Bureau during the year to nearly 100,000 persons, raising the total number of persons who have received certificates from the Bureau to more than 1,375,000.
Of the latter number, 15,000 qualified to teach first aid, and the Bureau is keeping as up to date as possible its list of these persons, should they be needed for any civilian or military program of first-aid instruction.
Approximately 75,000 persons have now received instruction in the use of gas masks, and in methods of handling explosions and fires.
As part of the year's educational program in safety, 64 first-aid contests were sponsored, 16 safety associations were organized, and 913 safety meetings were attended by Bureau personnel.
Despite the progress made in promoting safety, the toll of deaths and injuries in coal mining continued at too high a level.
During the year there were 7 major disasters, with a total of 155 deaths, as compared with 3 major disasters and 206 deaths for the fiscal year 1940, and no major disasters for the preceding fiscal year.
Altogether the fatalities from all causes in and about coal mines amounted to approximately 1,200 for the fiscal year 1941, most of which could have been prevented by adequate precautions.
In a desire to reduce this deplorable record of injuries and fatalities, and to improve the health and safety of those engaged in mining, the Congress, by passage of the Federal Mine Inspection Act (approved May 7, 1941) empowered the Bureau to make inspections and investigations in coal mines annually and whenever it is deemed necessary, and to make public its findings.
Funds to initiate activities under the act have been provided by the Congress, and plans were well advanced by the end of the year for the appointment of personnel to conduct the investigations.
The work will include studies of ventilation, haulage, electricity, and explosives; investigations of harmful dusts, gases, high temperature and humidity, and other possible causes of occupational diseases; also investigations of various other factors that may cause ill health or injury to persons engaged in the mining of coal.
Provision is being made for widespread dissemination of the results of the work, which when the real facts are known, should result in the correction of hazardous and improper practices and conditions.
Owing to the pressure of defense work, the Bureau has encountered some difficulty in maintaining its routine research activities.
Nevertheless, valuable results have been obtained during the year, some of which have an indirect bearing on the national preparedness program.
Among the more notable are an improvement in liquid-oxygen explosives that render the explosives virtually immune tó ignition from fire or spark, the location of a domestic source of graphite that can be used in place of a variety formerly imported from Madagascar, methods of improving various American clays to provide suitable substitutes for varieties that were formerly imported, and methods for treating varieties of domestic low-grade bauxite ores.
The increased demand for coke for steel production found the Bureau in a favorable position to provide industry with valuable data on the coking properties of various coals and blends of coal, with especial reference to the availability of western coals for making coke for munitions plants.
Fuel-testing, coal-sampling, and heating studies made by Bureau of Mines engineers for other Government agencies, resulted in important economies.
In the"all-out" national defense effort, the Department reports increased fruition of the Bonneville Power Administration resources.
Due to the impact of the emergency, the Bonneville Power Administration found it necessary, between September 1940, and June 1941, to speed up its activities, the net results of which at the close of the fiscal year were 321,880 kilowatts of power sold under contract; the annual rate of power income increased more than five times; the generating capacity increased nearly 250 percent; and the transmission system increased from 142.3 miles to 1,176.8 miles.
Six new industrial customers were developed, all involving defense production and all new to the area west of the Mississippi.
During the fiscal year the Bonneville Power Administration power sales made possible the production of nearly 60,000,000 pounds of aluminum pig metal, and resulted in the establishment of power-using aluminum plants with a capacity sufficient to build one-fourth of all the planes scheduled for production during the ensuing 12 months.
As an immediate contribution to the defense effort, the principle of public ownership becomes doubly impressive.
During the fiscal year ending June 30, 1941, the Bonneville Power Administration was able to assume a major status not only as a utility, but in determining the exact role of the Pacific Northwest region in the program of national defense.
With the passage and signing of the “Lend-Lease Act", a revised 6-year construction program for the Bonneville Power Administration has been worked out to cover new requirements for hydroelectric power brought about by defense production.
This program has been conceived on the basis of four fundamental factors, to wit: (1) the national emergency and its future influence on the industrial activity of the Pacific Northwest; (2) the actual generating capacity of existing utilities; (3) the determination of additional generating capacity at Bonneville and Grand Coulee, and; (4) a detailed schedule of necessary transmission facilities for the 5-year period beginning in 1943 to conform to estimates of power supplies and demands.
In order to handle more effectively an increasing number of problems incident to national defense, the Department, on April 18, 1941, established a Division of Power.
Although in operation less than 3 months of the fiscal year, the Division has more than justified its existence as a clearing house for the intricate questions arising from power development, not only as they relate to national preparedness, but as they will bear on probable post-war conditions.
The Department is now concerned with the output of more than 1,228,977 kilowatts of installed capacity, in addition to having jurisdiction over the Bonneville project and the power installation of 17 reclamation projects, not to mention developments under the Office of Indian Affairs and the National Park Service.
Projects in process of construction, and projects authorized, will add another 2,221,000 kilowatts.
The grand total of power is approximately 60 percent of the total present installations in the States of Arizona, California, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oregon, South Dakota, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming.
An additional installation of 1,500,000 kilowatts for defense purposes, over and above projects under construction and authorized, will make the power projects under the jurisdiction of the Department equal to the total present non-Federal power installations.in the 13 States named.
One of the most significant and gratifying achievements of the new Division was the development of a program, in cooperation with other departments, looking toward the full utilization of power resources for the production of light metals (aluminum and magnesium) in Government-owned plants.
Not only has the Department been able to step up time schedules of projects authorized for defense purposes, it is now studying locations for additional projects, their construction and the use of their power as they will affect the respective regions after the emergency.
With an eye on the proper peacetime use of low-cost power, the Department looks forward to the full use of labor in the areas affected, and the safeguarding of the Government's investment in power facilities.
In the administration of the Nation's resources of living creatures in the wild.
This consolidation has proved effective in promoting administrative efficiency in wild life conservation and restoration, in the mobilization of Federal facilities for service to the Nation and on behalf of the wildlife resource during the defense emergency.
Though the relationships of wildlife to national defense are not always readily apparent to the general public, the Fish and Wildlife Service has demonstrated that many notable defense contributions can be made that involve this resource—namely, the maintenance of morale by encouraging outdoor recreation, the providing of an important food supply through commercial fisheries, the protection of livestock and crops by predator and rodent control, and cooperation in direct defense activities through a personnel of highly trained and experienced field workers and technicians.
Believing that an abundant wildlife is an endowment that makes a nation worth the most zealous defense, and realizing that such a resource is of longtime importance, the Department has not only been alert to turn every possible wildlife activity to a national-defense purpose but has also been vigilant to see that during the emergency no unnecessary or irreparable damage is done to fish, bird, or mammal populations.
This program has been effectively implemented by the appointment of a liaison officer from the Fish and Wildlife Service to keep informed on the activities of all defense agencies that affect fish and wildlife and report to the Secretary any that might seem to be detrimental.
Receiving considerate cooperation from the other defense agencies, this officer has been highly successful so far, and present indications are, not only will emergency purposes be served, but that permanent benefits will result.
Wildlife damage from lack of concern in essential defense programs is, however, not the major emergency concern of conservationists.
They fear most the forces and interests that are always ready to take advantage of any diversion of public attention from their own selfish attempts to exploit natural resources without regard for the public interest.
To meet this danger the Fish and Wildlife Service has attempted to keep the public informed.
By means of the press, the radio, and public addresses, it has emphasized that conservationists, if alert, can prevent selfish actions, even those that might be disguised as "defense."
This publicity, aided by similar efforts of others, has stimulated an interest that is producing results, and it is believed that a repetition of certain World War mistakes can be avoided.
Aside from activities concerned with national defense, and with the effective organization of a new service, the Department's work for fish and wildlife was largely a continuation of programs already under way and proving effective.
Consolidating two agencies (Bureau of Biological Survey and Bureau of Fisheries) that both began as research units more than half a century ago, and that continued to be scientific bureaus with action programs dependent upon their investigations, the new Fish and Wildlife Service is fundamentally a fact-finding agency.
The major policy governing all of its operations is to consider the needs of wildlife first, and the effectiveness of this policy is wholly dependent upon an understanding of what these needs are.
Knowledge of resources had been remarkably advanced by the Bureau of Fisheries and the Bureau of Biological Survey, but conditions are constantly changing and new circumstances arising, so that it is essential to continue and expand the research activities—not only to maintain an understanding of the current needs, but also to benefit by the new discoveries and the added knowledge inevitable in this field of ecology.
The report of the Director of this Service for the year is replete with instances of research activities.
Many of them deal with fundamental problems in connection with the life history and habits of fishes, birds, and mammals, and their relationships to management policies.
Advances in the field of fish pathology, for example, include the isolation of a previously unknown species of fungus that infects small fingerling trout.
Haddock investigations indicated that the annual yield could be increased by at least 100,000,000 pounds by avoiding the capture of small and sexually immature fishes and allowing them an additional year or two of growth.
Other investigations are concerned with practical measures for dealing with specific wildlife problems.
Rat control, for instance, important in both civil and military life, is in large measure dependent upon red-squill poison for use in baits, but as the international situation has cut this country off from its usual Mediterranean source of supply, service scientists have developed a practical method for the fortification of the low-grade squill that is still available.
Regulations covering the take of migratory game birds and of Alaska fishes and game require field investigations to determine their suitability, and in many other ways the Department must rely upon investigations to insure prudent handling of fish and wildlife problems.
Statistical summaries, as important in wildlife conservation as in other activities, were compiled by the Fish and Wildlife Service, both as a guide for its own programs and as essential information for other agencies and the public.
A survey for 1939, the latest year for which complete figures are available, shows, for example, that the fishermen of the United States and Alaska took 4,443,000,000 pounds of fishery products.
Based upon these statistics, it was estimated that a 46 percent increase in this valuable food supply could be realized over a period of vears and that, under conditions of wartime emergency, the yield could be increased to 4,628,000,000 pounds almost immediately and to 6,200,000,000 pounds in the next few years.
An annual waterfowl inventory, which revealed a continental population estimated at 70,000,000, or only about 5,000,000 more than the previous vear, indicated that the take by hunters during the preceding season had approached the year's production—an indication of obvious importance in considering future regulations.
An inventory by States of big-game animals in the United States showed that, out of a total of about 5,850,000, more than 5,275,000 were deer, and that most of the others were on Federal lands.
The importance of statistical information is emphasized by the lack of authentic data of the fur resources which prevents, for example, accurate estimates of the numbers and origin of animals trapped, thus interfering with the formulation of convincing recommendations.
Availability and lack of basic information have thus both continued to emphasize the importance of investigational work in fish and wildlife management.
Using the results of such investigational work, the Fish and Wildlife Service has successfully continued the so-called action programs for which it is responsible.
The number of national wildlife refuges under the jurisdiction of the Service was increased by 4 (Havasu Lake, and Imperial, Ariz., and Calif.; San Andres, N. Mex.; and Thief Valley, Oreg.) and now totals 267, with an area of 13,740,304 acres.
The work of improving the refuges to make them as attractive as possible to the wildlife for which they were established was continued through the use of CCC, WPA, and NYA labor, and has advanced to a point where the program is showing definite results in increased use of refuges by wildlife.
The $2,500,000 appropriation for Federal aid in wildlife restoration was $1,000,000 more than for 1940, and the number of States eligible for participation in the program increased from 43 to 46.
Enforcement of Federal laws protecting wildlife continued to increase in effectiveness.
Control of predatory animals and injurious rodents through organized cooperative effort continued to be a significant activity of the Service.
The management of the game and fish resources in Alaska, for which the Fish and Wildlife Service has administrative responsibility, continued to make substantial the hope that mistakes of exploitation in the States can be avoided in this Territory.
In general, throughout the United States and Alaska, it can be asserted that wildlife is in a better condition than at the beginning of the year.
Within the general scope of its authorized investigations in scientific and engineering fields, the Geological Survey placed growing emphasis on those phases that contribute most to national defense and, with somewhat increased funds, was able to make correspondingly larger progress.
For example, in geologic and related investigations even greater attention was paid to the search for strategic minerals.
These minerals, so essential in defense, but of which our domestic supplies are inadequate in quantity or in grade, include manganese, antimony, quicksilver, chromite, and others.
During the year more than 150 examinations of deposits were made in a number of States, in Alaska, and in several of the other American Republies, and brief reports were published on a number of these special strategic-minerals projects.
Consultant service was rendered to national-defense organizations and other Government bureaus and to the general public.
More than 28,000 square miles in the United States were covered by topographic surveys during the year, an increase of more than 3,000 square miles above that covered in the preceding year.
This work was conducted under a direct appropriation; under cooperative funds made available by 17 States, Puerto Rico, and the Tennessee Valley Authority; and under a special fund appropriated to the War Department for transfer to the Geological Survey for mapping strategic areas selected by the Secretary of War.
Among other national defense activities, an unusually large amount of control-survey information was furnished to the War Department.
Further successful use was made of stereophotogrammetric equipment for mapping by means of airplane photographs, and in the latter part of the year much additional equipment and technical personnel were being obtained for large expansion in the use of these methods.
The orderly and wise use and development of the Nation's water supplies, at all times important for the people's welfare, become an especially urgent problem in times of national emergeney.
Growth of defense plants and industries, construction of large defense works and training camps.
During the year the Geological Survey responded to hundreds of requests for information and advice on problems of this nature, in assistance to the War Department, to other Federal defense agencies, to State officers, to defense industries, and others.
In so doing, it drew upon its store of information on the water resources of the country gathered painstakingly through more than half a century, and as need arose it made special field and laboratory studies.
Its regular program.
Conservation and national defense were aided by the activities of the Geological Survey on the public lands.
Examination and classification of those lands with respect to their mineral deposits and their water and power resources furnishes information that leads to their wisest use; and supervision of private mineral development on public and Indian lands, under the leasing laws, protects the Nation's properties and insures efficient operation and standards of conservation that serve as examples for the mineral industry.
During the vear the Geological Survey made more than 8,100 reports upon mineral resources, water power, or storage possibilities of public lands, at the same time safeguarding the Government's ownership of great reserves of coal, oil, gas, potash, phosphate, and other minerals.
Technical supervision was given to more than 5,200 properties containing oil and gas, more than 500 containing coal, and more than 100 containing other minerals.
On Indian lands more than 4,100 oil and gas leases were supervised, in addition to more than 200 properties containing coal and other minerals.
Minerals produced during the year from public and Indian lands and naval petroleum reserves under supervision of the Geological Survey, had an estimated value of $71,000,000 and revenue received by the Government as a result of this production amounted to about $7,000,000.
In no place, either in the Americas or in the Colonial Governments, has the problem of administering native minority groups been successfully defined in terms of democracy at work.
Although a small minority in this country, the Indians are significant because they represent in a way a conquered race.
Once the proud possessors of this continent, the Indians fought with such death-like tenacity to save their homes that only today are we coming to realize what freedom and liberty must have meant to them.
Out of their struggles there grew certain democratic traditions which are alive even now.
It is, therefore, important to note how this Government's policy in recent years has nurtured those traditions and accorded to the Indians the formal recognition so long denied them.
There are only 400,000 Indians in this country, equal to the population of Kansas City, Mo., but in all the Americas there are 30 million full-blood Indians.
If not disinherited by wars, commercial exploitation or disease, these 30 million Indians of the Western Hemisphere represent a latent purchasing power which, if developed, might well help to stabilize western economy.
It is important then that administrators and students of Indians in Latin-American countries, many of them faced with problems similar to those our Government has struggled with through several generations, should study and, perhaps, profit from the trial-and-error policies of Indian administration in the United States.
To analyze the past and plan for the future in defense of the Indian of the Western Hemisphere, a new division was set up within the past year in the Office of Indian Affairs.
It is the Division of Inter-American Cooperation, serving as a clearing house for information and a medium for collaboration with other American Governments on Indian problems.
Already the following countries, in addition to the United States, have acted to cooperate in this new Inter-American activity: Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, and Peru.
If the Indian's love of his homeland once proved an obstacle to the white man, today it is making an unique contribution, as it did in the last World War, to the total national defense effort.
Speaking little known native languages, yet schooled in modern mechanical arts, often in the radio and wireless, and thoroughly at home in the forests and in the desert and mountainous terrain of our rural West, the Indian possesses many skills valuable to a modern mechanized army of movement.
Within a few months after the Nation's defense needs became known, hundreds of Indians voluntarily enlisted for 3 years' service in the Army, and hundreds more embarked for army camps with their National Guard units.
By July 1941, almost 1 out of every 10 Indians of military age was in the armed forces.
While Indians themselves have with alacrity joined the armed forces, so has the Indian Service, with similar zeal, revamped its institutions during the past year to meet the emergency.
In many parts of the sparsely settled West, the Indian Service offers the best available equipment, space, and personnel for defense training in the county or State.
Federal Indian schools have opened wide their mechanical shops to State defense training authorities.
The Indian CCC camps are cooperating with private industry to furnish men trained in many trades, notably that all-important skill in defense production, welding.
A number of the licensed radio operators in the Army are Indians who received their training in the CCC telephone and radio schools held every year.
Indians have been found a ready source of labor in certain sparsely settled areas where Army buildings have been under construction during the past year.
At a multimillion-dollar ordnance depot for storing munitions in New Mexico, some 1,500 Navajos are employed tying steel, building forms, finishing cement, driving trucks, and bossing gangs.
Army officers and private contractors alike have been amazed to find Indians so adept in modern construction methods.
This alone seems to justify the many emergency work projects undertaken on Indian reservations during the past 8 years, even though our first concern rightly has been to provide jobs for thousands of Indians threatened with starvation.
A pation organized in its own defense turns to its pbysical resources.
In 1941 the resources of the Indian country, because of the past national effort toward conservation, were ready to meet the demands of the international crisis.
True, the enormous abuses of the past have not yet been completely repaired, but Indian lands are healthier today than in any time in the last 20 years, and the heaviest rains in years in the Southwest this past spring helped to root semidesert lands in many growing things.
The Indians possess farming lands almost equivalent in area to the State of New Jersey.
Their grazing lands would cover the States of Maine and Vermont and a quarter of Massachusetts.
Their timber and woodlands would embrace the State of West Virginia.
Oil, mining, and power interests on Indian lands represent billions of energy units.
Because every unit of soil and water adds so much strength to the Nation's power, the sustained use of these resources continues as in preceding years.
Indian workers are planting grasses and trees in barren areas to prevent wind and flood erosion.
Timber is selectively cut, and new seedlings are set forth.
Wise range management practices to conserve the grazing lands, plus artificial insemination to produce quality livestock, are bringing stock-raising to the front as a major Indian enterprise.
Indians themselves are found through all the ranks of the Indian Service.
The Indian Reorganization Act of 1934 gave qualified Indians preference for jobs.
Since 1934, the number of Indians employed has steadily increased until by October 1940, more than 5,000 Indian employees represented 60 percent of the regular staff.
In addition, more than 11,000 Indians were enrolled in the Indian CCC or held temporary jobs in the Service.
These Indians are members of 130 different tribes.
They hold jobs in every branch of the Service, from the most routine to highly supervisory positions.
Lack of foreign imports, due to the war, has fastened America's attention on its truly native arts and crafts.
Stimulated by exhibits at the San Francisco International Exposition and during the past year at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City, the public is increasingly aware that Indian art is not only beautiful but useful in a thousand different ways.
The creation by hand of jewelry, woolen cloth, pottery, furniture, baskets, pocketbooks, tailored garments, and many other items of dress and housefurnishings, which cannot be duplicated on a mass-production basis, brings the Indians and America to a place of leadership in the world of art.
Indian crafts-men and women find that their most remunerative orders come through tribal craft organizations.
The Indian Arts and Crafts Board, responsible in part for raising the level of craft work, is cooperating with local groups to expand these craft organizations in order to meet the increasing new outlets for goods.
As the world conflagration spreads, the territories and island possessions of the United States—the outposts of defense of the Western Hemisphere—take on an increasing importance in their relation to civilization's problems.
The impact of the defense problems upon the territories is set forth in the annual reports of the four governors.
East of the great Panama Canal, strong naval and aerial fortifications have been and are being built on the islands of Puerto Rico and on the Virgin Islands.
Hawaii, already one of our strongest naval bases, has been greatly strengthened.
Alaska, now close and getting closer daily to the battlefields of the Far East, is the scene of increasing activity as national leaders have recognized the possibilities of attack from that direction.
The Philippine Islands stand between the United States and the expansion of any aggressor to the South.
While the Department is playing a strong part in coordinating the various governmental units as they extend and intensify their defense work, it is vitally concerned with assisting these far lands to attain more of the democratic way of life which has been achieved in the United States.
This work is handled through the Division of Territories and Island Possessions in Washington.
On July 24, 1941, Guy J. Swope, Governor of Puerto Rico, was appointed Director of the Division, succeeding Dr. Rupert Emerson, resigned.
As a direct aid to the military defense of this area, the War and Navy Departments and the Civil Aeronauties Administration have undertaken vast projects.
Prospects for the betterment of the economic welfare of the Territory were never more promising, notwithstanding slightly reduced revenues from fisheries and wildlife.
The coming of thousands of defense workers from the mainland, coupled with the great increase in Army and Navy personnel, highway traffic and adequate housing have become urgent problems with the civilian community of this Territory.
Defense projects throughout the islands, particularly the island of Oahu, are under speedy construction.
Due in part to the national defense program, Puerto Rico is enjoying a period of unprecedented prosperity.
The island's unemployment problem has virtually disappeared, and the finances of the insular government are in sound condition.
During the year, hearings were conducted in connection with the enforcement of the agricultural restriction law passed by joint resolution of Congress in 1900.
As a special adviser to this Department, Dr. Rexford Guy Tugwell was appointed to the work.
Because of his more recent selection by yourself as Governor he will be able to carry this task forward.
A boader economie life has followed in the wake of intensive defense activities.
Not only have the various defense and WPA projects taken all employable males, but hundreds of workers have been imported to St. Thomas from neighboring islands, thus adding to the housing, health, and transportation problems of the community.
Supervision of the exportation from the islands of defense materials, as provided by Congress in the Export Control Act, has brought about an even greater measure of cooperation between Commonwealth officials and the Federal Government.
The war has to a large extent resulted in a reduction of the normal foreign trade of the Philippines with countries other than the United States, and even this is being seriously handicapped by a shortage of shipping facilities.
Strategically important stepping stones for the advancement of American aviation in the Pacific are provided by five small islands under the jurisdiction of the Division.
Canton Island, in the South Pacific, administered in cooperation with the British, today is affording a vital stop-over fueling point for the trans-Pacific clippers, while Jarvis, Howland, Baker, and Enderbury Islands in the same region have been equipped to serve as effective outposts for the study of meteorological conditions and weather observations essential to safe air travel over the ocean.
The National Park Service celebrated the completion of its twentyfifth ("silver jubilee") year as a Bureau in the Department of the Interior by reporting a new all-time record of park use by American citizens.
Over 21 million persons used the parks in the travel year ending October 1, 1941.
After a quarter of a century of service, the Bureau continues to apply those policies and concepts of the proper use of lands and resources which have successfully guided it since the establishment of Yellowstone National Park in 1872.
During the year just passed the areas under the Service's supervision increased from 161 to 164 with the establishment of three national historic sites: Jefferson National Expansion Memorial in St. Louis, Mo.: Vanderbilt Mansion National Historic Site, near Hyde Park, N. Y.
The boundaries of several areas were enlarged and important progress was made on a number of land projects.
The Federal park system increased from 21,550,782 acres on June 30, 1940, to 21,609,- 289.63 acres on June 30.
The 164 areas in the system consist of 26 national parks, 82 national monuments, 4 national historical parks, 11 national military parks.
7 national battlefield sites, 8 national historic sites.
1 national recreational area, 9 national memorials, 12 national cemeteries, 3 national parkways, and the National Capital Parks in the District of Columbia.
In the Nation's defense efforts, the Service has become active as a builder of morale among civilians and men in the armed forces.
A resolution adopted by the Advisory Board on National Parks, Historic Sites, Buildings, and Monuments states that "the Service's interpretive program in national park areas, particularly in the historic parks and monuments and the great scenic areas, is one of the most valuable contributions by any Federal agency in promoting patriotism, in sustaining morale, and understanding of the fundamental principles of American democracy and inspiring love of country."
Physical contributions to defense have been made in the planning and development of "rest camps" for soldiers and sailors.
At the request of the War Department, the Service assigned representatives to work with the Army in each of its nine corps areas to provide recreation spots where from 500 to 2,000 men might go to spend week ends near towns and cities away from the routine of the military and naval stations.
By the end of the year, rest camps had been established along the Gulf and Atlantic coasts and had been planned for all sections of the country.
The Service has assisted the Navy in the study of foundation engineering and soil mechanics.
The Morale Division of the Army has been provided with detailed maps and information on the Nation's recreational areas.
Important contributions have been made to the Engineering Defense Training Program of the Office of Education.
Permission has been granted for the establishment of military and naval observation stations in areas under the Service's supervision and for Army units to maneuver over historic battlegrounds to lend realism.
The Service has insisted that none of these defense activities harms the areas involved.
National Park in North Carolina and Tennessee from a speakers' stand at the memorial to the founders of the park in Newfound Gap on the State line.
Among those at the dedication was Arno B. Cammerer, the former Director of the Service, who has since died.
Mr. Cammerer's presence marked a proper rounding out of his efforts in pushing through the establishment of this great mountain park.
A nonprofit distributing corporation known as National Park Concessions, Inc., was established under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior to operate the concession facilities owned by the Federal Government at Mammoth Cave National Park in Kentucky.
The idea back of this new method of furnishing accommodations for park visitors is that the Government should control and operate national park facilities wherever possible.
Construction progressed along the Blue Ridge and Natchez Trace Parkways.
On the Blue Ridge Parkway, over 300 of the ultimate 485 miles in its length have been completed or are under construction.
From Adney Gap, near Roanoke, Va., to Deep Gap, near Blowing Rock, N. C., there is a continuous 140-mile paved section over which 750,000 persons traveled during the year.
On the Natchez Trace Parkway, 106 miles were reported completed or under construction in Tennessee and Mississippi.
The Service assisted in investigating, surveying, studying, planning, and reporting on the recreational possibilities of a number of reservoir projects.
A land-use plan for the Bureau of Reclamation reservoir back of Coulee Dam on the Columbia River is perhaps the most important of these projects.
An interdepartmental project was the Service's assistance in landscaping Alcatraz Penitentiary in cooperation with the Bureau of Prisons.
Winter sports activities, particularly skiing, have attained such proportions that future national park planning may be affected.
At Mount Rainier National Park in Washington and Yosemite National Park in California, the wintertime enthusiasts came in throngs.
During the last winter season 136,220 visitors went to Mount Rainier.
The Park, Parkway, and Recreational Area Study was continued as State-wide reports for park and recreation programs for Arizona, Delaware, Maryland, and North Carolina were completed, bringing the total to 34 States.
A regional study of the natural resources of the Tennessee and Cumberland River watersheds and the surrounding area affected by them made good progress, and a similar study was planned for New England.
On 190 State, county, and metropolitan parks, 90 national parks and monuments, 22 recreational demonstration areas, and 2 military areas, the Service operated an average of 304 Civilian Conservation Corps camps.
CCC defense projects under the Service's supervision included construction of Army “rest camps" and 5 airfields.
Camps were moved out of 30 areas on which development had reached a stage sufficient to meet essential requirements of the using public.
On 13 areas, camps were established for the first time.
Dr. Thomas Barbour, Director of Harvard University Museum and its Museum of Comparative Zoology, was appointed to fill the vacancy on the Advisory Board on National Parks, Historic Sites, Buildings, and Monuments created by the resignation of Dr. Hermon C. Bumpus, the Board's chairman.
Charles G. Sauers, general superintendent of the Forest Preserve District of Cook County, Ill., was appointed to fill another vacancy, created by the death of Maj. Gist Blair, of Washington, D. C.
Problems of national defense, involving the remaining unappropriated and unreserved portions of the public domain placed increasing responsibilities upon the General Land Office during the past fiscal year, particularly with regard to the need for new supplies of strategic minerals, power, and grazing facilities, and the military and naval requirements for large areas for aerial bombing ranges, antiaircraft ranges, combat training fields, and artillery practice grounds.
During the year, withdrawals of public land for use in connection with the national-defense program aggregated approximately 6,250,000 acres.
These withdrawals included 6,209,932 acres for the Army, 4,509 for the Navy, and 9,983 for the Civil Aeronautics Administration.
Notwithstanding the additional burdens incident to national defense, the General Land Office maintained its position as one of the few agencies of the Federal Government whose operations result in a cash profit to the American taxpaver.
Total cash receipts from all sources during the year amounted to $7,732,341.93.
This was more than three times the amount of the expenditures ($2,116,078) and made the fifth consecutive year in which the receipts were in excess of $7,000,000.
The cadastral engineering activities incident to defense and the national conservation program resulted in surveys and resurveys in the field covering 4,851,336 acres, or approximately 7,580 square miles.
More than 8.000.000 additional acres of land were assured the benefits of vour wise conservation policies through the closing out, during the fiscal vear, of all claims to portions of the public domain under early railroad land grants.
Federal ownership entailed a full year of investigation by research experts.
Altogether, more than 70 land-grant claim releases presented by the carriers were submitted to me for approval in accordance with the provisions of the Transportation Act.
The release of these lands to Federal ownership signalized the close of a 90-year era in which the granting of vast tracts of the public domain as an aid to railroad construction was a fundamental policy of the Nation.
Inaugurated by the Congress in 1850, with the allocation of 2,595,000 acres of the public lands for the construction of the Illinois Central Railroad, the development grew rapidly throughout the West until more than 75 grants, aggregating 158,293,000 acres, had been made.
While out of this policy grew the 21,500 miles of trackage which today form part of the transcontinental transportation network of the United States, the thoughtful student of Government well may ponder the even wider national benefits which might have accrued had the present-day standards of prudent conservation been in operation during the period.
Supervision, under the mineral leasing laws, of substantial deposits of coal, oil and gas, oil shale, potash, sodium, phosphate, and sulphur, constituted another phase of General Land Office activities during the year.
It is estimated that 700 billion tons of coal (including lignite) or about 20 percent of the total coal resources of the United States, are in the public lands, including land to which the Government has parted only with surface title, while almost 5,000,000 acres of the public domain are under oil withdrawal.
Between 7 and 8 percent of the Nation's known oil resources are estimated to be on Federal lands.
Great quantities of Douglas fir and other valuable timber on 2,500,000 acres of revested and reconveyed Oregon and California grant lands in western Oregon, are now under the jurisdiction of the General Land Office for development.
Sound conservation principles insure a permanent supply of timber to communities dependent upon those resources for their economic existence.
With the transition from early policies of public-land disposal, to meet the cost of government, to protection of the remaining areas for the conservation of the Nation's natural resources, the General Land Office has been charged with important land-management responsibilities.
For example, it administers the Mineral Leasing Act.
It grants rights-of-way for public utilities and power and communication lines and oil and gas pipe lines.
It administers the Oregon and California revested and reconveyed grant lands, and what is known as the 5-acre Tract Act.
It also leases the lands of Alaska for grazing and fur farming, and is charged with the responsibility for fire protection for public lands in Alaska.
More than 90 percent of the area of Alaska is public domain under the jurisdiction of the General Land Office.
Basic to the proper management of the public domain and to the judicious utilization of its natural resources is a complete and continuous inventory of lands held by the Federal Government.
To this end a Federal land inventory project, sponsored by the General Land Office, was continued throughout the fiscal year.
When completed, the project will fill a long-felt need by making available, in a single office, information that cannot now be obtained without checking through the records of approximately 35 agencies having Government-owned land under their jurisdiction.
A new edition of the Official Map of the United States, revised to include many new outstanding defense and conservation areas, was brought to completion during the fiscal year.
Preparation of this map has been the responsibility of the General Land Office since its first issue in 1880 was made by specific direction of the Congress.
The Tavlor Grazing Act of 1934 was designed to protect and improve the resources of the public range and to stabilize the livestock industry for the benefit of both local and national economy.
World events of the past year focused the need for greater effort on the part of all concerned to meet the tasks that lie ahead.
To this end the Grazing Service extended its efforts in all directions during the past fiscal year to obtain from the Federal range maximum production of food and fiber while at the same time preserving the basic resources from which an important share of these commodities is obtained.
About 50 percent of the sheep and nearly 20 percent of the cattle produced in the United States, use the Federal range during part, at least, of their growing period.
We know now how seriously the conquered countries and the aggressor nations have had to cut into their basic food-producing resources.
The cattle herds in many countries are virtually wiped out.
The slaughter of foundation livestock in the occupied countries in Europe eventually will cause the world to look more and more to the United States as a source of breeding stock.
Wise use, management, and conservation of the Federal range will enable our western livestock operators to contribute their share to world reconstruction after the war.
While the struggle in Europe is primarily one between dictator and democratic forms of government, there is beneath it all a struggle for the control of resources.
The manner in which we utilize and manage the Federal range is a vital factor in America's future, and is of immediate importance in the supply lines for the factory, the assembly line, the training camp, and human nutrition everywhere.
The public domain ranges must be handled so as to assure forage for livestock.
At tbe same time the mistakes of overstocking made during the first World War must not be repeated.
This means that the 142,000,000 acres set aside for grazing control under the Taylor Grazing Act must be used wisely and efficiently.
It means defense against waste of soil, water, and forage to safeguard investments in education, irrigation, power, livestock, and other enterprises.
It means rebuilding in some areas and adjustment of uses in others.
It means local and national planning in terms of present and future needs.
It means that we must center our efforts around range problems in relation to our established livestock economy, keeping in mind the unusual demands on the range to meet requirements.
To assist in the plan to create more office space in Washington for direct defense activities, the Grazing Service headquarters was transferred to Salt Lake City, Utah, on June 19, effective August 1, 1941.
Salt Lake City is at the geographical hub of grazing-district activities in the West.
From the standpoint of the problems involved, this transfer will effect closer cooperation between the stockmen who use the public range and the Grazing Service in conducting its program on the ground.
It will help the stockmen and the administration do a better, more profitable job and will assure further productivity of the range.
Closer contact with the people and their problems occasioned by this move should solidify the policy of 'home rule on the range.
Following the Civil War, the public domain was the frontier for new homes and the reservoir of boundless resources for a growing nation.
Today the public lands are playing an entirely new role on a new frontier.
Today the need for areas in which to prepare for modern-day defense has focused national attention on the public domain as a proving ground for our air forces.
During the year the Grazing Service cooperated with the War Department in the establishment of bombing ranges, rifle ranges, aerial combat ranges, aerial combat training grounds, maneuver areas, air-navigation sites, and munitions dumps, involving about 5,000,000 acres of public land (about five times the area of Trinidad) in Nevada, Arizona, New Mexico, Utah, and Oregon.
The stockmen affected and other local citizens cooperated to the fullest extent by making adjustments of range use in order that the expanded air-training program could proceed on schedule.
Special-use areas were recommended by the Grazing Service for community, State, and Federal needs in grazing districts under the 5-acre lease law for civilian target ranges, travel check stations, storage sites for Federal agencies, and administrative sites to coordinate unusual activities resulting from the defense effort.
Seven vears ago the great "grazing commons" of the West were put under Federal supervision by the Taylor Grazing Act.
In that time the principal arterial routes of administration have been laid out and many laterals finger out from them.
However, unnumbered trails, as yet uncharted, remain to be blazed.
Progress would have been slow without the cooperation of the stockmen and the local advisory boards.
This type of citizen cooperation has joined the forces of range users and administrative men in a mutual conservation effort that radiates throughout the arid West.
A total of 582 district advisers assisted with the program during the year.
The action program of the Service was enlarged substantially by the establishment of additional grazing districts; by the assumption of added duties conforming to cooperative arrangements with various bureaus of the Department; and by expanded soil- and moistureconservation activities prescribed in the Reorganization Plan No.
IV.
The establishment of four additional grazing districts during the year brought the total number of grazing districts to 57, covering a gross area of 266,006,200 acres in 10 States.
Fifty orders of modification were approved, resulting in the addition of about 3,000,000 acres of land to grazing district areas and the elimination of approximately 250,000 acres for air-navigation sites, reclamation projects, canalization projects, wildlife, recreational, and Indian needs.
Fifteen thousand acres of stock driveway withdrawals were revoked and the land placed under grazing district administration.
The area of public land administered by the Grazing Service during the year totaled 144,873,200 acres.
Approximately 8,535,000 acres of this total are included in public withdrawals for power, reclamation, naval oil stores, and other areas held in reserve for future public needs.
Thus, lands in grazing districts withdrawn for other purposes, are beneficially used and conserved pending the time when they will be put to the uses for which they were specifically set aside.
Long-term grazing permits to replace temporary licenses of previous years were made ready for issuance to approximately 60 percent of the operators.
The number of licensees and permittees was increased by 934 (about 5 percent) over the previous year.
On the other hand, the total number of livestock was 851,727 head less than the number that grazed the ranges during the previous year.
In some measure, this was due to temporary elimination of grazing on depleted areas, but for the most part it was due to the fact that many stockmen took advan.
Plan No.
IV, was initiated on 46 projects, affecting 5,530,000 acres in the 10 States.
The conservation of soil and water basically expresses the underlying objective of any land-management program and the allotment of specific funds in 1941 for this purpose enabled the Grazing Service greatly to expand such activities, resulting in definite benefits for the public lands.
Better weights of animals and fleeces were reported from all parts of the Federal range territory.
Control of the resources, coupled with orderly handling of stock enabled range users to produce more of the essential livestock commodities despite the reduced numbers.
There is a definite trend toward "more pounds" and away from "more numbers" with resultant benefits to the range and the livestock industry.
Because of the tremendous responsibilities entailed in the administration of the vast land areas under its jurisdiction, and the necessity for an all-inclusive coordinated approach to the land-management problems involved, the Office of Land Utilization was established and began to function during the latter part of the 1940 fiscal year as a unit in the Department.
Immediately upon its organization, the Office of Land Utilization entered upon its duties of coordinating the functions and activities relating to land management and conservation work of all bureaus of the Department administering public lands.
The Office of Land Utilization was charged with the formulation and direction of an over-all and completely integrated program of land use, including forest management, and later of soil and moisture conservation as a result of Government Reorganization Plan No.
IV.
The Office has no operations division and none is planned since field programs have been and will continue to be carried out by the several land-management bureaus and agencies of the Department.
It should be pointed out in this connection that the idea of a coordinated approach to public land-management problems was not new in the Department.
Since July 1, 1939, when the Office of Director of Forests was created, all forestry work has been carried out under a coordinated plan developed in cooperation with the agencies engaged in administering forest resources.
The Office of the Director of Forests was logically the foundation around which the more allinclusive Office of Land Utilization was built.
Here the coordinated forestry program of theDepartment is conducted as before, except that it was greatly strengthened and implemented during the year by virtue of its important position in the much broader land-management program initiated for all Interior lands.
At the beginning of the 1941 fiscal year, the Department was given new and enlarged responsibilities.
Section 6 of Reorganization Plan No.
IV, transferred all soil and moisture conservation operations conducted by the Soil Conservation Service of the Department of Agriculture on Interior lands to the Department of the Interior.
In order to attain the aims and objectives of the reorganization as rapidly and efficiently as possible, the authority for the expenditure of funds received for soil and moisture conservation work on public lands was vested in the Office of Land Utilization.
Likewise, all personnel engaged in carrying out the broad conservation field activities were attached directly to the Office of the Secretary and assigned by the Office of Land Utilization to the several action agencies.
The first major task faced by the Office of Land Utilization in connection with the reorganization was the conveyance in Washington and in the field of personnel, supplies, monies, and equipment involved.
Effectuation of these details threw a heavy burden upon the very limited staff of the Office, and it was necessary to spend a large part of the first half of the fiscal year working out administrative problems, including matters of finance, property, and personnel.
The personnel involved in the transfer consisted of 447 individuals, and the funds transferred amounted to $2,302,500.
The conservation policy of the Department, as interpreted into an integrated master program during 1941 by the Office of Land Utilization, may be summarized in four principal points: (1) Sound present use and management of the public lands for the benefit of all the people; (2) practical administration that fits wise use of the land into the day-by-day economic problems of individuals, families, groups, and sections of the country directly dependent upon Federal land for a livelihood; (3) management of the land in such a way as to utilize its inherent productive capacity.
A review of field activities conducted during the past year under the master conservation plans developed by the Office of Land Utilization in cooperation with the land-management bureaus, reveals that outstanding accomplishments were attained in the actual use of conservation practices and measures on wide areas of the public lands.
The Department during 1941 made outstanding contributions in the field of forestry by continuing to push forward the coordination of activities of the several units concerned with forest management.
As in past years, special attention was given to making the management of the forest lands under its jurisdiction models of economy and good business, and increasing the friendly cooperation with the public and private agencies with which the Department deals.
No phase of forestry administration is of greater interest and significance than is the financial report of the Oregon & California Revested Lands Administration.
Now appropriately classified as a million-dollar forestry enterprise, the O & C Revested Lands Administration has the distinction of being the highest income producing feld unit of any public forestry agency in the United States, the next highest being the Klamath Indin Reservation, also in Oregon.
During 1941 the total income from the sale of timber and forest products from O & C lands amounted to $1,102,000, while the amount appropriated for administration was only $170,000.
This fiscal achievement is unparalleled in American forestry, and especially noteworthy is the fact that it was accomplished on the basis of permanent forest production and in conformity with the principle of sustained yield.
Indian forest timber continued to be handled on a commercial basis, and cutting is conducted by the highest-bidding qualified operators under the supervision of foresters of the Indian Service.
During the fiscal year the cost of administration and protection of Indian forests was only $555,640, while income from forest sales amounted to $3,239,294.
There are approximately 23,000,000 acres of forests on the unreserved public domain and in the grazing districts.
At present there is no legislation providing specifically for the management of the forest resources on these lands, nor have adequate funds been made available for their protection and development.
On the other hand, these forests are taken into full consideration in the making of coordinated conservation and protection plans for Interior lands.
Among the most progressive undertakings in American forestry in recent years, which are being pushed forward by the Office of Land Utilization, is the development of cooperative sustained-yield forest units.
In many localities throughout the United States, the ownership and jurisdiction of forest lands are so intermingled that it is highly impractical and uneconomical to attempt an application of the principle of sustained yield to each separate forest property or administrative unit.
Extensivé field studies and experiences indicate clearly that a practical and effective means of improving this complex forest-management situation is the formation and operation of cooperative sustained-yield units.
While no such unit has been fully established as yet in the United States, several units soon will be ready for formal establishment and development.
Lands Administration.
Protective organizations did effective work in preventing and suppressing forest fires during the year.
While excellent fire protection work was accomplished on the vast acreage of forest lands in Alaska, it is necessary to point out that only $27.000 was available for this work in 1941.
During the year 197 fires were dealt with, but 83 fires were reported upon which no action was taken by the Alaskan Fire Control Service because of their inaccessibility and the very limited personnel that was available.
Greatly increased funds for the proper protection of the forest resources of Alaska and for the development of an all-inclusive program of conservation development are needed if the Nation is to guard adequately the tremendous landed resources of the great empire to the North.
In addition to the progress made in coordinating and planning activities incident to getting the broad land-use and management program of the Department into active operation, the advisory services of the Office of Land Utilization were given on a large number of problems to the various agencies and subordinate units charged with a wide range of administrative responsibilities.
In its capacity as coordinator of land-use plans and programs, many appeals on land classifications submitted to the several land-management bureaus were referred to the Office of Land Utilization.
All appeals of classification were considered in the light of the broad conservation policies and plans of the Department.
Regular and special meetings of the Land Committee of the National Resources Planning Board, of which the Assistant to the Secretary is a member, were attended.
Several reports were prepared and other assistance given to this important national committee.
It is significant that in the administration of public lands under its jurisdiction during this year of rapid transition from a peace-time economy to a period of unlimited national emergency, the Department was able to make important contributions to the national defense program while maintaining and increasing the conservation gains of the past 8 vears.
In contrast to the waste and exploitation of publicland forests and the misuse and overuse of range lands during the World War.
The tremendous forest and land resources under the management of the Department are so located that they are making immediate and substantial contributions to the national defense program.
From the great protected forests and the vast range lands is coming a steady stream of timber, food, and other products to contribute and give impetus to the all-out national preparedness endeavors.
Conservation of the resources of the public land goes far beyond the protection of the physical property.
The Department is ever on the alert to defend conservation laws and policies against attempted break-throughs for quick war profits.
A guard is constantly held against efforts designed as patriotic enterprises for the use of natural resources, but which in reality are destructive of all conservation principles and represent attempts to "blitzkreig" conservation fortifications in the interest of personal gain.
In addition to meeting all present conservation requirements, the Office of Land Utilization is already making plans and devising programs for a greatly expanded management and conservation-development program for the public lands at the end of the present emergency period.
Such a program may be the springboard from which one segment of public-works employment can be launched to help take the shock out of the inevitable transition.
The Division of Investigations during the fiscal year 1940–41 gave preferred attention to investigations for the various bureaus and offices of the Department whose activities contributed to the facilitation of national defense and the continuation of the program for conservation of the resources on the public domain.
For example, preceding the establishment of the reserve on the Mojave Desert in California for use as an antiaircraft practice range by the War Department, special agents of this Division made a general examination of the land.
Later, negotiations required to clear title to the area resulted in the checking of thousands of mining claim records and the examination of approximately 900,000 acres of land.
Among the outstanding contributions of this Division to the national defense through conservation has been the part it has played in the program to protect and promote proper use of grazing lands on the public domain.
During the fiscal year reports were submitted on 2,905 applications for grazing leases.
The Division also investigated conditions surrounding the poisoning of livestock on lands in northern Nevada, alleged to have been the result of arsenic fumes emanating from an ore reduction plant erected by a mining company.
The investigation developed that livestock was being poisoned by the fumes, and the company arranged to remedy the condition.
During the year there were received 10,082 cases for investigation and reports were subm tted in 19,043, the largest number of cases closed in any one fiscal year since the formation of the Division.
With petroleum and petroleum products becoming an ever-increasing factor in national defense, operations of the Petroleum Conservation Division assumed greater importance during 1941, as that agency prepared to enter its sixth year of enforcement responsibilities under the Connally Hot Oil Act of February 22, 1935.
Established to assist in the administration of Connally Act provisions calling for the regulation of interstate and foreign commerce of petroleum and its products produced in violation of State laws, success of the Division's work is indicated by the fact that on two occasions the legislative authority contained in the act has been extended by Congress.
I strongly recommend that this legislation under which the Division operates be given permanent status.
The tender system, through which regulation under the act has been made effective, heretofore has been used only in the East Texas oil field, but the area from which monthly reports of operations of producers, refiners, and transporters of petroleum will be required, has been extended into other portions of Texas, into New Mexico, and Louisiana.
At the same time, areas other than those designated in this order will be under constant supervision by examiners of the Division, and no crude petroleum or petroleum products are permitted legal shipment from coastal points of Texas and Louisiana without reporting to the Petroleum Conservation Division the field of origin and the State orders under which the oil moves.
During the fiscal year, approximately 14,500 shipments, and a like number of discharges, were reported to this Division.
I am glad to report that stability has been brought to bituminous coal markets by the establishment of minimum prices and marketing rules and regulations under the Bituminous Coal Act of 1937, which is now administered through the Bituminous Coal Division.
The minimum prices and marketing rules and regulations, which became effective on October 1, 1940, now provide this industry with a bulwark against the price cutting and unfair trade practices which had kept it in a state of upheaval for nearly 20 years and which led to passage oí the Guffey Coal Act.
The sound basis of operation which the stability created by the coal act has provided for this basic industry is of great importance to the country during the present emergency.
Industrial sinews, which were wasting away by long vears of dissipation of capital assets by price wars, now are being rebuilt, and will be stronger to meet the task of supplying the vast energy resources we must have for defense.
The value of the Bituminous Coal Act as a national-defense measure is obvious in another way.
Under this law, the forces of Government and industry have been welded into a harmonious, effective working organization which is getting results in attaining the law's objectives.
A vast store of detailed information concerning the production, preparation, transportation, distribution, and use of the various kinds, qualities, and sizes of bituminous coal has been assembled and is being assembled currently by the Coal Division in the administration of this law.
Such information, with the Division's trained staff of men experienced in coal, and the Bituminous Coal Producers' Boards, through which the industry's forces have been organized for cooperation with the Government, provide effective machinery to aid in handling coal supply and price problems.
During the summer of 1941, the coal industry has been enjoying the strongest market it has experienced for many years.
Bituminous Coal Division economists have estimated that the industry's production will total approximately 500,000,000 tons for the calendar year of 1941.
This would be the largest since 1929, when 535,000,000 tons were produced.
However, in 1941, during which the coal will have been sold under the protection of effective minimum prices and marketing rules and regulations, the industry is assured that its average earnings will not be less than approximately its average cost of doing business.
By contrast, income-tax records show that in 1929, when the industry did not have the protection of the coal act, it suffered a net deficit of more than $11,800,000.
Late in the summer of 1941, some concern was being shown by consumers regarding the market prices they were being charged for bituminous coal.
The Office of Bituminous Coal Consumers' Counsel has filed a petition with the Bituminous Coal Division, requesting that a maximum price ceiling be placed on coal prices to protect the public from what he believed to be"excessive and oppressive" prices.
The Coal Division called a hearing on this petition for September 9, 1941, in order that the matter might be inquired into as expeditiously as possible under the provisions of the coal act.
The Division is in the process of investigating also the effect which the new wage contracts entered into by mine owners and employees during 1941 has had upon the costs of producing coal, as the basis for making any appropriate changes in the minimum price structure.
I feel that the Nation has benefited from the operation of the Bituminous Coal Act so far, and I have reason to hope and expect that these benefits will be of long duration.
When the present expanded market for coal which has been caused by the defense boom is deflated, the coal industry will ave in the coal act protection against sales below cost and unfair trade practices which become more prevalent during periods of more normal demand for coal.
It should be borne in mind that although much coal has been sold above the"cost floor" minimum prices, a great amount has been sold at the minimum prices since they were established on October 1, 1940.
Despite improved coal markets, some producers have violated the Bituminous Coal Act by selling their coal below minimum prices or by engaging in practices prohibited under the law.
Many investigations and prosecutions bv the Division have resulted.
The steady increase in both the number and the difficulty of the legal problems presented for consideration which has been remarked in prior reports continued unabated throughout the fiscal year.
The upward trends in the quantity and gravity of legal tasks were further intensified by reason of the added duties entailed in working out arrangements which would enable the enormous national defense values of the resources husbanded and protected under the conservation program to be drawn upon for the purpose of supplying vital national defense needs quickly and effectively.
The volvme of legal work moving through the immediate office of the Solicitor aggregated 25,924 items during the year.
The preparation of formal and informal opinions upon points of law also necessitated increased attention.
The number of formal opinions written increased from 367 in 1940 to 543 in 1941.
The legal staffs of the various bureaus of the Department also dealt with an increased volume of work incidental to the national defense and conservation problems confronting them.
In addition to its normal duties during the past fiscal year, this Division geared itself to the new and urgent needs created by national defense and rendered greater assistance to the supervisors and administrators having these new tasks to perform.
While the immediate problems of personnel have been given the right-of-way, long-range plans and programs have not been overlooked.
Considerable emphasis was placed on recruitment during the year, with particular reference to the specialized needs of the bureaus and offices engaged in defense work.
The Division has been in close contact with the Civil Service Commission and has assisted in the preparation of announcements for examinations and in obtaining, through selective certification, the type of persons necessary to perform the duties in highly specialized positions.
The Department's promotion-from-within policy has not been sacrificed, as the employees of the Department receive first consideration in the filling of all vacancies.
One noteworthy project of the training program within the Department started during the past year was the supervisors’ forums, in which the heads of the various divisions in the Office of the Secretary formed a master session for the purpose of setting the style and cutting a pattern of programs of training in the technique of supervision.
Another form of employee training which was satisfactorily begun during the year was that of conferences on specialized procedures, designed to bring about thorough and uniform application of laws and regulations.
At the close of June 30, 1941, there were 48,941 employees in the Department of the Interior.
Of this number, 44,374 were in the field, and 3,567 located in Washington.
Dring the year, 543 employees were placed on furlough for military service.
Near the close of the fiscal year, you referred to this jurisdiction by Executive order the problem of maintaining adequate supplies of petroleum on the East coast.
This assignment was so recent as to make detailed reference to it unnecessary.
For the benefit of the record, however, it should be said that the assignment of American tankers to defense tasks created a serious problem of supplying the East coast with the necessary amount of petroleum to meet increased demands.
The Office of Petroleum Coordinator moved quickly to reshuffle the various means of transportation and to take such other precautionary steps as seemed wise to enable us to stretch available supplies to meet growing needs.
In October, when a number of tankers were returned from British service, it was found possible to lift the restrictions on petroleum consumption in the East which were necessarily imposed in August.
The various steps taken by the Petroleum Coordinator's Office were followed by a reduction in the spring 9 million barrel deficiency in petroleum reserves on the East coast to one of less than one-half million barrels at the time the restrictions were lifted.
Further opportunity for this Department to render public service in the national emergency was afforded in your letter of November 5, requesting the Secretary of the Interior to act as solid fuels coordinator for national defense.
Immediate steps were taken to comply with this request with the assistance of the technical staffs of the Bituminous Coal Division, the Bureau of Mines and the Geological Survey to the end that a supply of solid fuels is readily available at consuming points when required for military, industrial, and civilian purposes.
While these two elements of national defense work were, strictly speaking, undertaken for the most part after the close of the fiscal year dealt with in this annual report, they are nonetheless well worthy of mention as indicative of the type of public service and programs of the Department of the Interior under present conditions.
Throughout the year all branches of Department activity have been focused on national preparedness and defense.
Enthusiasm for the cause has run high.
In developing greater defense assets, normal functions have taken on new importance.
Today, more than ever before, every citizen has an interest in the Department of the Interior.
The story of this interest and the increasing responsibilities of the Department is told in the full reports of the Bureaus and Offices which I now have the privilege of transmitting.
Secretary of the Interior.
ODAY the Bureau of Reclamation is not only conserving water resources for the permanent development of the West but is also making important contributions to national defense and paving the way for meeting post-emergency requirements and future peace.
The multiple purpose program advanced during the fiscal year 1941 clearly reflects the many benefits realized from the construction of irrigation projects in 15 Western States.
Great storage dams in addition to their primary purpose of irrigating thirsty lands serve also to generate low-cost power needed critically in the manufacture of airplanes and other defense equipment, in the production of aluminum, and in the processing of strategic and other minerals.
Reclamation reservoirs impound water for irrigation of new lands and supplement the diminishing supplies for established agricultural areas, thus providing homes for destitute migrants sweeping westward and anchoring other farm families on lands threatened with desolation.
Reclamation projects assure food supplies for the western half of the country and opportunities for thousands of other families in nearby cities and towns.
These projects are made up principally of family-sized farms—the backbone of the Nation's stability.
They contribute to the purchasing power of the West, to the stabilization of the livestock industry and to the maintenance of a population growing at twice the national rate.
Through them domestic and industrial water supplies are being assured, floods and soil erosion controlled, navigation improved, wildlife refuges maintained and recreation facilities provided.
The West celebrated one of its finest water years in a generation.
The largest was Lake Mead at Boulder Dam on the Colorado River.
Storage at Lake Mead on June 1 was 28,000,000 acre-feet and rose during June to more than 30,000,000 acre-feet, the largest amount ever impounded in the reservoir.
All five reservoirs on the Salt River project spilled for the first time.
Their storage had reached the maximum capacity of 1,894,800 acre-feet contrasted with 22,000 acre-feet last year.
With the expansion of its irrigation and power activities, the Bureau of Reclamation at the close of the fiscal year, was serving more than 4,700,000 persons—a population greater than that living in the 11 Mountain and Pacific States when the Reclamation law was enacted in 1902.
On 36 Reclamation projects in operation for which detailed settlement and economic data are given on the accompanying table, there are 57,441 irrigated farms, on which there reside 214,781 persons.
In 279 cities and towns created by or which are maintained by the project farms, there is a population of 688,134.
More than 20,000 additional farms with a population of around 100,000 persons receive supplemental water supplies from project works.
Projects under way or authorized will enable the Bureau to extend its influence directly to nearly 10,000,000 persons in 16 States west of or bisected by the one hundredth meridian.
Property values created, maintained, or protected by the multiplepurpose developments now in operation, reach a total of $5,600,000,000.
Completion of the program now being aggressively advanced to meet national defense needs in power, permanent industrial requirements, and the demand for homes in the rural areas will double the tangible wealth traceable to the national irrigation policy.
As revealed by actual surveys of typical areas, the purchasing power flowing from or sustained by Reclamation facilities extends throughout the Nation.
Every State east of the Mississippi River shares in a home market worth a billion dollars annually to American manufacturers and farmers.
Many areas receive a double service as a result of Reclamation developments.
Water stored in Boulder Dam and diverted at Parker Dam into the Colorado River Aqueduct of the Metropolitan Water Distriet, completed this year as a municipal undertaking, is now available to supplement the domestic supplies for Los Angeles and 12 other cities of the metropolitan area of the Pacific Southwest.
These same cities receive a large part of their power supply from Boulder Dam.
The cumulative value of crops produced on land watered by Reclamation projects since 1906 exceeds two and three-quarter billion dollars—an amount twice the estimated cost of the current Reclamation program.
This amount turned into channels of national trade is conservatively estimated to have added nearly 18 billion dollars to the national wealth in 35 years.
More than 50,000 family-size farm homes have been carved from the desert.
As many more will be provided by projects under construction to meet the growth in western population—twice the national average.
Originally conceived as a means of providing new opportunities for settlement in the West, the energies of the Bureau of Reclamation now are turned largely toward preserving established agricultural communities.
More than 25,000 farm homes have been saved by supplemental water developments.
When the present program is completed, 85,000 additional farms will be assured of permanency.
Thousands of farm homes will be saved in the Great Plains and other areas confronted by water shortages and disastrous dry-farming practices.
As each irrigated farm provides support for from two to three families in nearby cities and towns, the number directly benefited by irrigation developments, operating and planned, will be increased to nearly 500,000.
The taxable wealth created and maintained in the 15 Western States in which Reclamation projects are operating, contributes millions of dollars annually to the support of State and local governments.
The ability of several hundred communities to remain selfsupporting results from new settlement opportunities and sustained commercial enterprises.
Food supplies have been increased for an expanding population without invading the markets of other agrieultural sections which produce such staples as wheat and corn.
On the other hand, the West offers domestic outlet for the corn and hog products of other sections as well as for other crops not produced under irrigation.
The shipment of western agricultural products eastward, when farms near the eastern population centers are covered with snow, and the return loads of purchases, are a major support of the transcontinental railroads, the intercoastal steamship lines, and highway motor transports.
Hundreds of churches and schools reflect the social influence of the transformation of desert wastes into productive self-sustaining communities.
The maintenance of thousands of these institutions in areas threatened with disastrous water shortages is an objective of a major phase of Reclamation.
Construction activities on Reclamation projects create employment in areas generally far distant from those centers of industry where national defense has spurred factory and shipyard production.
The type of labor employed at the sites of construction is usually not in demand in industries.
Projects under construction will not only maintain the existing population in its present locations but will afford new opportunities for the settlement of migrant families from other areas.
New land and adequate water supplies for established agricultural areas will assure farm homes for much of the industrial population in the West when defense industrial employment recedes.
The Bureau of Reclamation in 1940 was prepared to serve irrigation water to 4,168,168 acres—the largest area since its operations began.
This area represents an increase of 278,628 acres over that reported for 1939.
The area within regular projects, receiving a full supply of water, was increased about 50,000 acres.
The largest part of the additional area was in the Payette division of the Boise project in Idaho.
Facilities for supplying water to the Buffalo Rapids project in Montana were available for the first time.
The additional acreages, reported as receiving supplemental water supplies from storage projects, were located in the Upper Snake River project in Idaho, the Moon Lake project in Utah, the Pine River project in Colorado, and the Deschutes project in Oregon.
The latter two areas received initial supplemental service this year.
There will be a material increase in the acreage served by Bureau projects during the 1941 season.
The All-American Canal will substitute the water supply for the Imperial Valley in California, served for more than 35 years by a canal extending partly through Mexico.
Eventually more than 1,000,000 acres will receive water from the All-American Canal System.
The crop returns from the 3,316,030 acres of land in cultivation actually irrigated in 1940 were valued at $117,788,677, an inerease of $3,705,883 over the total for 1939.
The average crop value per acre of $35.52 was $1.54 per acre less than the 1939 record.
Under the construction program now in progress, operations of the Bureau will be extended to about 2,370,000 acres of land to be brought into cultivation.
More than 3,800,000 acres of land now inadequately irr'gated will receive more stable supplies through the facilities now under construction.
Through the water conservation and utilization program, the area of 155,000 acres to be benefited will probably be more than doubled as new projects now under investigation are added.
When the current program is completed, water will be available for about 10,958,000 acres, more than half of which will be represented by supplemental service for areas which were inadequately irrigated.
The demand for the construction of multiple-purpose projects under the Reclamation program continues unabated.
The increase in population in the West, coupled with the industrial expansion incident to the national defense, is emphasizing the feasibility of combinations of power and irrigation facilities.
By investigations into practically every river basin in the West, the Bureau of Reclamation will have on hand a shelf of feasible projects which can be launched quickly to provide employment and new homes for a permanent population in the rural areas of the West and in the urban communities which they support.
No dearth of feasible projects exists.
Estimates are that there is sufficient water available in the West to irrigate an additional 22,000,000 acres, and provide supplemental supplies for 11,700,000 acres.
Potential water power developments, in connection with irrigation developments, would doubtless provide as much as 30,000,000 kilowatts of electric capacity, more than three times the presently installed capacity.
From the valleys of Texas rivers to the Pacific coast, from the Mexican to the Canadian borders, the Bureau of Reclamation moved to meet, so far as the area west of the Mississippi River is concerned, the critical deficiencies in electric power which are threatening the national defense program Four new plants on Reclamation projects began operations in the fiscal year; installation of additional generating equipment was rushed in order to double existing capacity by 1943; and one new project was authorized as a part of the Bureau's effort to offset an imminent shortage of power in the Pacific Southwest.
In anticipation of pressure for power, the Bureau prepared for submission to the Congress a program of power installations on 50 potential multiple-purpose projects in the West, which could be constructed between 1943 and 1947.
Including several steam plants to balance systems and additional generators for operating plants, 9,000,000 additional kilowatts could be made available in 6 years.
Investigations were advanced on scores of other projects with power potentialities.
At the close of the fiscal year 28 power p’ants were in operation on 17 projects with a total installed capacity of 953,962 kilowatts—an all-time high exceeding the capacity of all electric plants on the Pacific coast in 1912.
The high light of the power activities of the Bureau was on March 22 when two 10,000-kilowatt station service generators at Grand Coulee Dam on the Columbia Basin project in Washington began operating with the delivery of power to the Grand Coulee-Bonneville transmission system.
The first of three 108.000-kilowatt generators at Grand Coulee Dam was scheduled to go on the line in October; the second in December and the third in March.
The allocation of aluminum and other plants for defense operations in this area will absorb more than the scheduled output.
Three additional generators for Grand Coulee were on order to be available for production in the fall of 1943.
Indications were that still further installations at Grand Coulee in 1944 and 1945 will be necessary to meet the power demand in the Pacific Northwest.
Grand Coulee by the end of 1943 will be second only to Boulder Dam as the largest single producer of hydroelectric energy in the world.
At the Marshall Ford Dam on the Colorado River in Texas, the powerhouse was constructed by the Lower Colorado River Authority and power development, under the supervision of that agency, began January 25.
The first of three 22,500-kilowatt units which went into operation on that date, was followed by a second in February.
On the All-American Canal west of Pilot Knob, power is to be developed by the Imperial Irrigation District of Southern California.
During the year two units of 5,400-kilowatt capacity each were installed at Drop 3 and two 9,600-kilowatt units at Drop No. 4.
Operation of the first of three 8,100-kilowatt units at Elephant Butte Dam on the Rio Grande project began in November 1940.
The second and third generators went on the line in December and January.
To make power available more rapidly in areas where defense industries require great blocks of energy, installations were advanced as far as the congested situations in the plants of equipment manufacturers would permit.
Boulder Dam power plant, with an installed capacity of 704,800 kilowatts, serves the country's largest airplane industries in southern California.
Although Boulder's power supplies more than half the power in southern California, where reside nearly 3,500,000 persons, it has averted a serious deficiency in power in the central California region, which includes the industrial area of San Francisco Bay.
Two new generators which were being installed at Boulder Dam were to be on the line in October and December 1941, and a third on order was to go in operation in August 1942.
Even with these installations, which will be many years ahead of the original schedule, further expansion of the generating facilities at Boulder Dam was being considered.
In addition to the vital airplane industry of the southern California areas, an aluminum plant and a giant magnesium plant being planned at Las Vegas, Nev., were increasing the demand for power in the Lower Colorado River area of the Pacific Southwest.
The magnesium plant alone will require 196,000 kilowatts, a volume equivalent to the capacity of two and a half of the big generators at Boulder Dam.
The power plant at Parker Dam, downstream from Boulder, was nearing completion with the first of three generators scheduled to go on the line in December.
A second machine was to begin operations in January and a third in February, making 90,000 kilowatts available principally to meet a market in central Arizona, where deficiencies have been met by the transfer of power from Boulder Dam.
A fourth generator for Parker Dam was scheduled for service in 1943.
Davis Dam, at the Bullshead site, midway between Boulder and Parker Dams, for which an initial appropriation was made in the Interior Department Appropriation Act of 1942, was scheduled to begin producing power in 1944 with an installed capacity of 180,000 kilowatts.
Plans were made for construction work on the dam to begin in the fiscal year 1942.
On the Central Valley project in California, four 75,000-kilowatt generators had been ordered for the Shasta Dam plant on the Sacramento River which will have a total installed capacity of 375,000 kilowatts by 1944.
Plans were advanced for construction of Keswick Dam, 6 miles downstream from Shasta, which will have 75,000 kilowatts installed by late 1943.
In Idaho, which with Utah, is in the belt of areas where power deficits threaten not only defense activities but normal needs, the Bureau of Reclamation was prepared to begin construction of Anderson Ranch Dam, which will serve both irrigation and power demands.
Government forces were engaged on work at the Minidoka power plant in Idaho, where a seventh unit of 5,000-kilowatt capacity was being installed.
Further eastward, work was being advanced to have power available at Green Mountain Dam on the Colorado-Big Thompson project, located on the western slope of the Continental Divide.
Contracts for two 10,800-kilowatt generating units had been awarded.
The 13.1-mile Continental Divide tunnel will carry water from the Colorado Basin to the eastern slope.
Six power plants in the latter area will provide for double and triple use of the water without affecting the major purpose of the project—supplemental water for irrigation.
Extending facilities of the Kendrick project in Wyoming, a 7,500 kilovolt-ampere substation at Laramie was completed in April.
By the end of July 1942, the total installations on Bureau of Reclamation projects will be increased to 1,615,462 kilowatts, a gain of 80 percent over the total at the end of June 30, 1941.
By December 1943, installations will push past the 2,000,000-kilowatt mark.
The present schedule will bring the total installations to 2,621,062 kilowatts in 1944; and to 2,836,062 kilowatts by the end of 1946.
Even with these planned installations, it is apparent that existing facilities, together with new facilities on order by non-Federal utilities, will be inadequate to supply the demand for power for a sustained defense program.
The prospective requirement for 196,000 kilowatts of Boulder Dam power for a magnesium plant in Nevada is but one example.
In the preparation of the program of potential power installations the Bureau had in mind the challenge of deficiencies in power, existing and imminent in practically all areas west of the Mississippi River.
In Washington and Oregon and in the Pacific Southwest, the low-cost power from projects constructed by the Bureau of Reclamation has proved a magnet for new industries.
On the basis of a 36 billion dollar annual defense expenditure, studies indicated that the West would be confronted by a deficit over and above all planned installations by the Bureau of Reclamation, of 2,000,000 kilowatts by 1945.
This shortage would be increased to 2,455,000 kilowatts in 1946 and by 1947 would approach 3,000,000 kilowatts.
The significance of these deficiencies can perhaps be better understood when compared with the present capacity today of all power plants on the Pacific coast totaling 4,235,000 kilowatts.
Under an all-out defense effort which would call for the utilization of the vast stores of minerals in western deserts and mountains, the additional power required might reach 4,000,000 kilowatts in 1947.
Included in the program of power developments to meet the anticipated deficiencies between 1943 and 1947 were installations at Boulder and Grand Coulee Dams which would bring them up to their ultimate capacities of 1,322,300 and 1,974,000 kilowatts, respectively.
The other projects were located in 16 States west of the Mississippi River, including Arkansas.
The latter State was included since the Arkansas River rises in Colorado and developments on that stream are linked with plans for water conservation and utilization in the West.
The Bureau, in order to assure an adequate supply of energy for the West, is suggesting in several instances, a combination of steam with hydroelectric power to balance producing systems.
Such a combination is desirable from several points of view because of the peculiar characteristics of many western streams, and in the interest of conservation and economic utilization of western resources in land, water, and fuel.
Inclusion of a steam plant in connection with the plans for two power dams on the Central Valley project in California was recommended during the year, primarily for the purpose of stabilizing the output of the more valuable and more salable firm power of the system.
In 40 years the net revenue from the steam plant would pay for its own costs with interest, and more than 25 percent of the entire cost of the Central Valley project, which otherwise would be repayable by water users or other beneficiaries.
The Boulder Canyon Adjustment Act of July 19, 1940, most important legislation during the year, provided for the adjustment of rates and charges for electrical energy generated at Boulder Dam which will result in a saving of approximately $120,000,000 to power consumers in the Southwest.
The act was effectuated in May 1941 when the Secretary of the Interior brought to successful conclusion conferences and negotiations extending over a period of 10 months by executing agency contracts with the city of Los Angeles and the Southern California Edison Co., making them agents of the United States in the operation of Boulder Dam, and new contracts with the power allottees who had contracted for power in 1930, including in addition to the two agents mentioned, the cities of Pasadena, Burbank, Glendale, the States of Arizona and Nevada, the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, and the Nevada-California Electrie Corporation.
The new contracts reduce the rates paid for energy from 1.63 mills per kilowatt-hour for firm and from .5 mills per kilowatt-hour for secondary energy to 1.163 mills per kilowatt-hour for firm and 0.34 mills per kilowatt-hour for secondary energy, provide for rates to be adjusted at 5-year intervals, but do not change the allotments nor the amounts the allottees are privileged or required to take.
The agency contracts provide that the United States may interchange power from Parker Dam and Davis Dam for Boulder power allotted to the Metropolitcan Water District, thereby assuring the Government of practically full correlation of Boulder and downstream projects.
Plans to prevent sabotage and protect irrigation and power facilities were developed during the year and $460,000 was appropriated by the Congress to carry out a protective program.
The program calls for a small force of civilian guards to be organized principally for patrol work at key structures on nearly 50 projects, including Grand Coulee Dam.
The force of rangers stationed at Boulder Dam was increased during the year.
Plans also call for the installation of floodlights, barricades, and other facilities on projects operated by the Bureau of Reclamation, the reimbursement of funds expended by local water users' associations in protecting structures operated by them, and the cooperation of State and local agencies in enforcing rules and regulations.
Generally speaking there were few restrictions on visitors other than that they were barred from the work areas without special permits, but at most of the power plants they were permitted only in restricted areas and under observation of employees.
Five more water conservation and utilization projects were authorized for construction in the Great Plains and other drought areas of the West during the fiscal year, bringing to 11 the number approved under this program.
They were: Eden project, Wyoming; Newton project, Utah; Mancos project, Colorado; Angostura project, South Dakota; and the Saco Divide project, Montana.
Projects previously approved include: Buffalo Rapids, First and Second Divisions, Mont.
Mirage Flats, Nebr.
Buford-Trenton and Bismarck, N. Dak., and Rapid Valley, S. Dak.
Plains area and other western agricultural regions where critical droughts and water shortages during the 1930-40 decade have disrupted the economy of these areas and caused heavy relief expenditures.
The program will avert continued dislodgment of large numbers of farm families from their present locations, reduce Federal relief costs occasioned by drought and migrations, quiet the disturbed economy of States to the westward and elsewhere which have been unable to absorb in productive activities the newcomers rendered destitute and cut loose by circumstances beyond their control, and provide employment.
More than 2.000 families are expected to be rehabilitated and made self-sustaining on these 11 projects and through land adjustments nearby.
Employment is expected to be afforded for an average of 6,000 workers, mostly unskilled, for a period of 36 months.
With more than 120,000 acres to receive a full or supplemental supply of irrigation water from these projects, direct support will be provided for an additional 400,000 acres, largely range land.
Construction of the irrigation facilities is the responsibility of the Bureau of Reclamation.
Land preparation and settlement are the responsibility of the Department of Agriculture.
Negotiations for the disposal of land in excess of economical-size units are also under the Department of Agriculture, which will also assume responsibility for the operation and for repayment contracts on most of the projects so far authorized.
The Work Projects Administration and Civilian Conservation Corps provide most of the labor.
The National Resources Planning Board coordinates the program.
The Congress included in the Interior Department Appropriation Act of 1940 an item of $5,000,000 to assist in the financing of the necessary construction.
Legislative authorization was embodied in the Case-Wheeler Act of August 11, 1939, amended by an act approved October 14, 1940.
A subsequent appropriation of $3,500,000 was made in the Interior Department Appropriation Act of 1941.
This money was appropriated subject to allocation of nonreimbursable funds by the President, represented by contributions principally of labor and materials by the Work Projects Administration and the Civilian Conservation Corps.
The combined reimbursable cost of the 11 projects already authorized amounted to $8,751,000.
The President had approved allotments of $10,885,000 of nonreimbursable funds.
Of the over-all construction costs of the 11 projects totaling $19,636,000, a total of $16,000,000 was allotted to the Bureau of Reclamation and the remainder to the Department of Agriculture.
The Eden project, approved for construction September 18, 1940, will provide supplemental water for the rehabilitation of 20,000 acres in southwestern Wyoming.
October 17, 1940, will benefit 2,225 acres in Cache County in north central Utah.
A supplemental supply of water will be provided for 1,660 acres of irrigated land and a full supply for 565 acres of good arable dry land.
The Mancos project, approved October 24, 1940, will provide a dependable supplementary supply of water for the irrigation of 10,000 acres in Mancos Valley, one of the oldest irrigation sections in western Colorado.
The Angostura project, approved March 6, 1941, will supply water for 16,210 acres of drought-stricken dry-farmed land in Cheyenne River Valley in the western part of South Dakota.
The Saco Divide project, approved April 11, 1941, will irrigate 9,400 acres between Beaver Creek and Milk River near Saco, Mont., by pumping from the Nelson South Canal of the Milk River project.
Work was already under way during the fiscal year on some projects under this program.
Water was made available to irrigation farmers on the Buffalo Rapids project, First Division.
Construction had advanced on the Second Division of that project and on the Buford-Trenton project.
Some construction work had been done on the rapid Valley project and preliminary work in advance of construction was begun on the Mirage Flats, Eden, Newton, and Mancos projects.
There were under investigation or definitely scheduled for study about 50 proposed projects in 13 States which may later be considered for construction under this program.
The following additional projects have been authorized under the Reclamation Project Act of 1939 for construction by the Bureau of Reclamation: Kings River project in California, a water storage project to provide supplemental irrigation water for 800,000 acres of developed land, flood control, and for power development, estimated to cost $22,300,000; the San Luis Valley project on the Rio Grande in Colorado to serve 400,000 acres of developed land around Monte Vista in need of supplemental water for irrigation, estimated to cost $17,- 465,000; the Anderson Ranch project on the South Fork of the Boise River, in Idaho, for water conservation and irrigation, flood control, power and silt control, estimated to cost $13,000,000, for which the President approved expenditure of not to exceed $400,000 during the fiscal year to bring it up to the construction stage; the Paonia project in Colorado to supply supplemental water to lands in the valley of the North Fork of the Gunnison River, estimated to cost $994,000, $300,000 of which was made available for commencement of construction during 1940, but legal and engineering problems delayed the work.
When the Congress was considering the Kings River development and also a similar development on the Kern River in California, the President suggested that a good rule for the Congress to apply in considering these water projects would be that the dominant interest should determine which agency should build and which should operate the projects.
Good administration continues to demand that projects in which irrigation and related conservation uses dominate should be constructed by the Bureau of Reclamation.
Joint investigations to plan for the development of 1,200,000 acres of land to be irrigated by Grand Coulee Dam and the successful settlement of from 350,000 to 400,000 people on the Columbia Basin project in Washington were continued during the fiscal year and final reports submitted on several of the 28 problems which were set up for study in November 1939 when the investigations were launched by the Bureau of Reclamation.
Completion of all the investigations is scheduled in ample time to prepare suitable programs before settlement starts.
Participating in these studies in some capacity and in varving degrees are more than 40 agencies of the Federal, State, and local governments, educational instutitions, private industry, and local civic organizations.
Subjects of study range from how financial aid may best be extended to needy settlers to the location of sites for schools, churches, market centers and the like.
Land classifications, for the purpose of eliminating land not suited to irrigation farming, were completed by the Bureau for the entire project area during the fiscal year and land appraisals, to determine the value of the land without reference to future irrigation, were 90 percent completed.
Determination was made of the first three blocks of land to be irrigated when water is made available, probably in 1944 or 1945.
Settlers were being urged to request complete information about any Columbia Basin land in which they were interested from the Bureau of Reclamation, Coulee Dam, Washington.
Work was in progress on 37 projects in 14 Western States, continuing the major construction program undertaken by the Bureau of Reclamation in 1931, when work on the Boulder Dam and power plant, on the Colorado River in Arizona-Nevada, was started.
Ten storage dams and seven diversion dams were under construetion during the year.
Of these one storage and all seven diversion dams were completed.
Pishkun on the Sun River project in Montana—was also completed.
The dams completed were the Crane Prairie, a 40-foot earth-fill structure on the Deschutes project in Oregon; Dutch Slough Dam on the Delta division of the Central Valley project in California; the Entiat and Icicle Creek Dams Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, all small diverson dams constructed on the Columbia Basin project in Washington, in connection with migratory fish control operations.
The dams completed during the year bring to 163 the total number of dams completed by the Bureau since its origin in 1902.
Twentythree of these dams are now on irrigation projects operated by the Office of Indian Affairs.
In addition the Bureau has made alterations to five dams on the projects constructed by other agencies, and two other structures are used jointly with other agencies.
The Shoshone (1910), Arrowrock (1915), Owyhee (1932), and Boulder (1935), were the highest dams in the world when completed.
The nine dams under construction at the close of the year were: Grand Coulee Dam, a concrete, straight-gravity structure 550 feet high, on the Columbia Basin project in Washington, 96.7 percent complete; Shasta Dam, Central Valley project, California, a 560-foot straight-gravity concrete structure, 53.6 percent complete; Friant Dam, also on the Central Valley project and of the concrete, straightgravity type, 320 feet in height, 72.6 percent complete; Green Mountain Dam on the Colorado-Big Thompson project in Colorado, a 274-foot earth-fill structure, 50 percent complete; Vallecito Dam, a 143-foot earth-fill structure on the Pine River project in Colorado, 87 percent complete; Wickiup Dam, also of the earth-fill type, 100 feet in height, on the Deschutes project in Oregon, 19 percent complete; Marshall Ford Dam on Colorado River project in Texas, a 270-foot concrete, straight-gravity structure with an earth embankment extending from the left abutment, 75 percent complete; Deer Creek Dam, Provo River project, Utah, an earth-fill embankment, 235 feet high, 85 percent complete; and the Box Butte Dam, a 64-foot earth-fill structure on the Mirage Flats project in Nebraska, on which Government forces started construction in May.
Several of these dams are outstanding in height and volume.
Grand Coulee, nearing completion on the Columbia River in Washington is 4,300 feet long and requires the placing of 10,500,000 cubic yards of concrete, making it the largest concrete structure in the world.
Shasta, 560 feet in maximum height above foundation, will be second in height to the 726-foot Boulder Dam, highest in the world.
Water falling over its spillway in the center of the structure, will form a waterfall three times as high as Niagara.
The dam will contain 6,000,000 cubic yards of concrete, being the second largest of its type.
Marshall Ford in Texas will contain 1,877,000 cubic yards of concrete and 1,629,800 cubic yards of earth and rock.
4,450,000 cubic yards of earth and rock is the largest dam of its type yet undertaken by the Bureau.
During the fiscal vear 1941 the Bureau constructed 247 miles of canals; 125 miles of drains; 6 tunnels with a total length of 53,128 feet: 351 miles of roads; 28 miles of railroads; 220 miles of transmission lines: 197 miles of telephone lines; 93 miles of pipe lines; 3,471 canal structures; 979 culverts; 50 flumes; and 160 bridges.
There have been placed in dams and other structures 3,349,587 cubic yards of concrete, 4,069,780 cubic yards of earth, and 889,217 cubic yards of rock.
The total number of barrels of cement used was 4,113,154.
There were excavated during the year a total of 26,991,423 cubic yards .
The Grand Coulee Dam, on the Columbia River near Almira, Wash., is the principal construction feature of the Columbia Basin project in west-central Washington.
The purposes of the project are the irrigation of 1,200,000 acres of land in the Big Bend country, generation of hydroelectric power for irrigation pumping and industrial and urban consumption, river regulation and improvement of navigation.
A reservoir 151 miles in length, extending to the Canadian border, is being formed by the dam, and will have a capacity of 9.800,000 acre-feet of which 5,400,000 acre-feet will be active storage.
The estimated cost of the ultimate project is $435,734,000.
In addition to the dam, reservoir and irrigation system, construction features comprise a power plant to house ultimately eighteen 108,000- kilowatt and three 10,000-kilowatt generating units with a total installed capacity of 1,974,000 kilowatts, largest in the world; a balancing reservoir in the Grand Coulee, with a useful capacity of approximately 340,000 acre-feet and requiring 2 earth-fill dams; and a pumping plant for lifting water into the balancing reservoir, with 12 pumps, each driven by a 65,000-horsepower motor, with a combined capacity of 19,200 cubic feet per second.
Although the progress schedule under the existing $36,645,000 contract calls for completion of the dam, left powerhouse and pumping plant foundation in March 1942, the concrete work is now practically completed with a total of 10,464,374 cubic yards, of which 415,000 cubic yards were placed during the fiscal year.
Work remaining under the present contract comprises minor placements of concrete, and installation of eleven spillway drum gates, each 135 feet by 28 feet.
At the end of the year the contract was 96.7 percent completed.
During the vear the contractors placed 15,509,000 pounds of reinforcing steel; installed 1,897,000 pounds of pipe and fittings; 17,456,997 pounds of drum gates and control mechanism; and 3,252,000 pounds of trashrack guides and sections.
Relocation of sections of the Great Northern Railroad and State and county highways in the reservoir area was carried on during the year.
A contract for construction of earthwork, structures and track, Great Northern Railroad relocation, Kettle Falls to Williams and Kettle Falls to Boyds, started in August 1940, was 99.9 percent completed on June 30, 1941.
Abutments and piers for the Great Northern bridge at Kettle Falls were completed in October 1940.
Work on the superstructure for this bridge was begun in August 1940 and was completed in May.
Superstructures for one highway and two railroad bridges over the Kettle River were also completed.
River channel widening and shore protection near The Dalles were finished in April.
Relocation of a road from Mink Creek to Stranger Creek in Ferry County was started in March.
Construction of facilities for migratory fish protection was in progress.
Broad acres like these in the San Joaquin Valley in California benefit from the conservation program of the Bureau of Reclamation, under which roaring flood waters are captured behind gigantic dams, later to be released through spreading networks of irrigation ditches which form an integral part of such developments as the Central Valley project.
At the Leavenworth station the Wenatchee Canal and hatchery building were completed, also rearing ponds, drainage, sewerage and water systems.
The hatchery buildings at the Entiat and Winthrop stations were completed, and work was started on the construction of residences at the Leavenworth, Entiat and Winthrop stations, and on the rearing ponds and appurtenant works at Winthrop.
During the fiscal year rapid progress was made on construction features of the Central Valley project, the ultimate cost of which is estimated to be $263,990,000.
The Pacific Constructors, Inc., at the Shasta Dam began placing concrete on July 8, 1940, and on May 3, 1941, had placed the one millionth yard, with a maximum daily record of 7,346 cubic yards.
At the end of the year this $42,528,278 contract was 53.6 percent complete and 1,360,800 cubic yards of concrete of the 6.000.000 total had been placed in the structures.The Columbia Construction Co.'s $6,231,612 contract for concrete aggregates, requiring the processing and delivering of 10,500,000 tons of sand and gravel was in force during the year.
The 9-mile belt conveyor system from the Redding plant to the dam site was operated satisfactorily.
Clearing of 1,040 acres in the Shasta reservoir site was completed and a contract was awarded for an additional 2,150 acres.
Work on the Friant Dam kept pace with Shasta and on June 30, 1941.
Griffith Co. and Bent Co. had completed 72.6 percent of their $11.075,541 contract at the close of the year.
The first contract on the 37-mile Madera Canal, to extend from the Friant Reservoir to Ash Slough near Chowchilla was awarded and work started in October 1940 on an 8.4-mile section, involving earthwork, canal lining and structures, which was 29.4 percent complete.
On the 40-mile Contra Costa Canal, extending from the delta to near Martinez, a 9½-mile section was completed, also the canal headworks, Dutch Slough Dam and Nichols wasteway.
Work was started in March on an additional 8.5-mile section.
Relocation of the Southern Pacific Railroad around the Shasta reservoir site was nearly completed.
Two contracts involving 9.22 miles of roadbed construction and comprising earthwork, tunnels and structures were completed, also the Sacramento River Second Crossing, Doney Creek, Salt Creek, and O'Brien Creek bridges.
At the railroad and highway bridge over the Pit River, about 500 feet in height above the water surface, the abutments and piers were 99.9 percent and the superstructure 41 percent complete.
A contract was awarded in March for installation of a centralized traffic control system, and telegraph and telephone facilities.
Four 75,000-kilowatt generators had been ordered for Shasta Dam, which will have an ultimate capacity of 375,000 kilowatts when five main units are in operation.
By means of Shasta Dam in the north and Friant Dam in the south, regulation of both the Sacramento and the San Joaquin Rivers will provide water to supplement the irrigation supply of a large area of highly improved orchard and farm lands in the southern San Joaquin Valley; reestablish navigation to Red Bluff on the Sacramento River; prevent salt water intrusion in the irrigation channels of the delta of the Sacramento-San Joaquin Rivers; provide supplemental water for irrigation, domestic and industrial uses on the Walnut Creek-Martinez area, south of Suisun Bay; and make possible the generation of hydroelectric power at Shasta Dam and Keswick Dam, a regulating dam on the Sacramento just below Shasta Dam.
Erection of machinery and installation of electrical equipment in the Boulder power plant were in progress during the year, including two additional 82,500-kilowatt generating units, A-1 and A-2 in the Arizona wing.
A third unit A-5 was on order.
Approximately, 3,200,000,000 kilowatt-hours of electric energy were generated and the collections by the Government from the sale of electric energy were over $6,000,000, with a monthly maximum of $767,927 in August 1940.
Lake Mead, with a capacity of 32,360,000 acre-feet, of which 3,321,000 is dead storage, in June contained a maximum of 30,220,000 acre-feet.
Construction of an exhibit building was started by Government forces.
On the All-American Canal system a second 47-mile section of the 130-mile Coachella Canal was under construction.
The contract was 85 percent complete at the end of the year.
Placing a clay blanket on the bottom and side slopes of the All-American Canal a distance of about 15 miles was finished in July.
All intercepting drains and drain structures east of the Yuma Canal on the Reservation Division of the Yuma project were completed in May.
A contract for concrete or gunite lining, New Brier Canal, a distance of 2.5 miles, was awarded in April, and work was started in June.
Work was started in May on construction of the Southern Pacific Railroad bridge on the Coachella Canal.
Water was first delivered to the lands of the Imperial Valley through the All-American Canal on October 12, 1940, when water was diverted from the All-American Canal into the East Side Highline Canal of the Imperial Irrigation District.
Good progress was made on Green Mountain Dam and the Continental Divide tunnel, two important features of the Colorado-Big Thompson project, designed to provide a supplemental water supply for 615,000 acres of land now under cultivation, situated east of the Rocky Mountains in Colorado, with water collected and stored on the western slope of the mountains in the headwaters of the Colorado River.
Stored water will be transported through the Continental Divide in a 13.1-mile tunnel to the headwaters of the Big Thompson River, a tributary of the South Platte River, where it will be re-stored for release as needed for irrigation.
Construction of Green Mountain Dam on the Blue River, which will form a reservoir storing 152,000 acre-feet of water, and power plant, to have an installed capacity of 21,600 kilowatts, was 49.8 percent completed at the end of the fiscal year.
An 8,000-foot section at the outlet end of the Continental Divide tunnel was completed in April and the contractor immediately started on an additional 7,000-foot section.
At the inlet end of the tunnel.
6,600 feet were completed and a second contract was awarded for an 8,000-foot extension.
Transmission lines of 115-kilovolt capacity were constructed from Greeley to Fort Morgan, a distance of 54 miles, with a branch line to Wiggins.
6 miles long, and a 10½-mile extension from Fort Morgan to Brush.
Substations were also completed at Fort Morgan, Wiggins, Brush, Greeley, and Poudre Valley.
The contract for construction of the Marshall Ford Dam to & height of 190 feet and involving the placing of 1,413,000 cubic yards of concrete was completed on October 10, 1940.
A contract for completion of the concrete section of the dam to a height of 270 feet was awarded to the same contractors.
Brown & Root and McKenzie Construction Co., and work was started on October 8, 1940.
Of the 464.000 cubic yards of concrete remaining to be placed in the strueture the contractors completed 385,215 cubic vards and the contract was 75 percent completed.
An earth embankment 105 feet in maximum height, 2,500 feet long, and containing about 1,629,800 cubic vards of earth and rock extends from the south end of the river section of the dam.
A contract for constructing this embankment was awarded to Cage Bros. and W. W. Vann & Co.
Work was started on October 23, 1940, and the contract was 67 percent completed, approximately 817,700 cubic yards having been placed.
By enlarging the dam, a reservoir of 3,120,000 acre-feet capacity will be provided, to be used jointly for flood control, power, and river regulation to augment the low-water flow for irrigation purposes along the Colorado River below Austin.
On the Payette division of the Boise project in Idaho, earthwork and structures were completed in August on sections of the A-Line Canal and D-Line Canal, and preparations made for a general opening of public land.
A contract for earthwork and structures at the Graveyard Gulch and Langley Gulch wasteways was completed in April.
Bids were invited on May 31 for construction of the Anderson Ranch Dam and power plant on the South Fork of Boise River near Mountain Home.
The dam will be of the earth-fill type, 330 feet in height above stream bed and will contain 7,500,000 cubic yards of earth, 110,000 cubic yards of sand and gravel, 1,900,000 cubic yards of cobble and rock fill, and 90,000 cubic yards of riprap.
It will be by far the largest structure of its type yet undertaken by the Bureau.
The dam will create a reservoir of 500,000 acre-feet capacity to eliminate flood damages, provide irrigation water, and through its power plant of 20,000-kilowatt capacity make available 104,000,000 kilowatt-hours of energy annually.
On the Provo River project in Utah, which is being constructed to conserve the waters of the Weber, Duchesne, and Provo Rivers for irrigation and domestic uses, the contract for construction of the Deer Creek Dam and railroad and highway relocation, started in July 1938, was 85 percent complete.
Work was started in November 1940 on a 3-mile section of the 6-mile Duchesne Tunnel, which will divert water from the upper tributaries of the Duchesne River (Colorado River watershed) to the Provo River for storage in the Deer Creek Reservoir.
The tunnel contract on the Salt Lake Aqueduct was 88 percent completed, the Olmsted Tunnel having been completed in November 1939 and the Alpine-Draper Tunnel holed through in December 1940.