My DEAR MR. PREsipENT: During the last 12 months, the Department of the Interior has been dedicated to a vigorous war program.
In some phases of the task of harnessing our natural resources for war, we have been highly successful.
In others, we have failed to attain the goals we should have achieved.
But in the final analysis, we have made real progress.
It is worthwhile, it seems to me, at a time of crisis, to review our effort of the last year and to appraise our performance under fire, so that we may evaluate our progress and reset our sights.
We entered the fiscal vear under the stress of a defense program and ended it under the greater pressure of war.
The task of this Department was to convert its custodianship of the Nation's natural resources from a peacetime administration to that of war use.
This was an eye-opening proceeding.
For years, this Nation had been deluded with the idea that it was practically self-sufficient, that its industrial processes were the world's best, and that its supplies were practically inexhaustible.
A painful hangover resulted from that spree.
We woke up to fipd out that we did not have enough steel to do the job; we did not have enough aluminum; we were short of power; we lacked magnesium; our sources of manganese were too far away to do us much good; our supply of timber and lumber did not hold out; our fisheries and other food resources could not be operated on the old basis nor supply enough to meet demand; our coal supply became endangered and the chaos of war tied our petroleum service up into knots.
In short, we discovered, that so far as our natural resources were concerned, we had been doing everything in the easy way.
We had, up to the last vear or two, been skimming the cream—and the cream ran out.
While the enemies we despised had been making the most of their meager resources—and making them do the job-we had constructed our whole economy on our fat.
The former "had-not" nations turned to their secondary ores and low-grade minerals, and by sweat and effort learned how to use them.
We neglected our secondary sources of supply—the low-grade deposits of minerals, for example—and went merrily on our way, using only the best, and therefore the most profitable.
Then we discovered that we did not have enough of the best to meet our needs and that we must perforce proceed to the utilization of what we did have.
It was with this process of conversion that the Department of the Interior was chiefly concerned during the last year.
The accumulated knowledge of our technical bureaus was put to work in as many directions as possible.
New processes for ore treatment and metal extraction were devised and put into effect; new programs for the utilization of secondary deposits of minerals were effectuated, and some industries which had been accustomed to doing things the easy way were persuaded to try the hard way.
It is in this conpection that I cannot, with candor, assert that we have been successful.
Our proposals for the complete utilization of certain domestic minerals, for example, did not meet with whole-hearted welcome.
Ip some instances, temporary expedients seemed to be preferred by some groups to imaginative, full-scale adoption of novel, though proven, methods.
We endeavored to work closely with the War Production Board in order that war industry might have the benefit of the work of our scientists and technical bureaus.
The inertia of the old way, the weight of industrial tradition, the following of the established pattern, frequently induced heavy industries to postpone technical innovations.
In my opinion, this was a postponement of the inevitable.
Whether this postponement has been costly to the Nation in the long run remains to be seen.
For all of that, our efforts as a whole have been fruitful.
With natural resources as our field, we early realized the need for drastic action in utilizing that which was within our reach, and the Department organized a definite war program with stated objectives for each bureau and agency.
This drive was aimed at procuring the sinews for conflict—the metals, oil, power, fuel, helium, food, land, water, and timber available for war production and the equipment of the United Nations.
Our activities increased and hastened production in the mines and in the mills; in the factories and yards where metals are processed and fabricated into planes, tanks, and ships; in the forests, on irrigation projects producing food and in the metallurgical laboratories.
The program for discovery and exploration of new deposits of strategic and critical minerals was pushed vigorously with some encouraging results.
To stimulate the prosecution of war activities within the Department, we established a War Resources Council.
This Council, composed of responsible officers of the Department, has coordinated our war work and has encouraged our bureaus to undertake programs which would contribute the most to the successful prosecution of the war and the production problems which are involved.
A few facts show the extent to which we have provided additional resources orled the way in wielding those at hand against the enemy with greater effect.
Generating capacity on reclamation projects increased by 43 percent.
From Columbia River projects alone, nearly 2,000,000,000 kilowatt-hours of power poured into war plants.
By a process developed in our laboratories, it appears that enough manganese can be extracted from low-grade domestic ores to make 87,000,000 tons of steel annually.
More than a million tons of bauxite, the common source of aluminum, and other valuable ores have been found in our search for strategic metals.
In the course of increasing these essentials of war.
The soundness of the conservation policies put into effect by your Administration when it came into office is now clearly apparent.
Our activities during the last vear in mobilizing for war could never have been as effective if previous policies had been less sound.
Pearl Harbor and the events that followed have taught us that speed in war means ready access for the Nation as a whole to its resources.
For some time this Department has worked to clear the Nation's title to many resources where conflicting claims have arisen.
These actions.
Throughout our activities we have streamlined for war.
Many of our normal activities.
War work has been given the right-of-way and the curtailment of many normal functions has been severe.
Economies have been put into effect, even to the degree that they have become painful.
This belt-tightening has been extended into such details of administration as the reduction of printing and the discontinuance or curtailment of publications.
This report has been reduced in size and content in accordance with that policy, and represents a genuine war edition.
The length of the report has been halved.
Because of this, I will not report to you in as great detail as customary in this letter, but I do wish to call your attention to a few pertinent facts that emphasize such progress in the war program as we have made.
The Bureau of Mines in December 1941 greatly expanded its war program.
Skilled engineers, chemists, metallurgists, statisticians, economists, and others intensified their activities and directed them toward putting idle mineral resources to work and speeding up the mine to metal cycle.
From the Bureau's laboratories and pilot plants emerged several new and better processes for treating strategic, critical, and essential ores; exploratory crews brought reports of new ore deposits which now are being developed; and the economists and statisticians assembled data to aid the Army, the Navy, the WPB, and other war agencies in their planning.
Meanwhile, the Bureau extended its program of promoting safety and efficiency in the mineral industries.
This will conserve manpower and machinery and will help make secure from interruption the output of materials going into tanks, planes, ships, guns, and other equipment for the United Nations.
The Bureau's war plans utilized more than 30 years of experience and progress in the conservation and development of the Nation's mineral resources.
To help offset the threatened curtailment of mineral imports from foreign countries, in cooperation with the Geological Survey, the Bureau in 1939 launched an investigation of domestic deposits of strategic minerals including antimony, chromium, manganese, mercury, nickel, tin, and tungsten.
As the war spread throughout the world and the shipping situation became more acute, the Bureau's quest for domestic mineral deposits grew in importance and extent until it embraced virtually all of the important engineering metals.
During the 1942 fiscal year alone, important reserves of chromite, manganese, mercury, tungsten, iron ore, bauxite, and alumina clay were charted.
Some of the indicated deposits were substantial.
The estimated reserves of chromite were increased by 2,300,000 tons and production began in several areas.
There were several discoveries of usable mereury and five findings of tungsten.
Exploration for manganese ore of milling grade brought increases in reserves of more than 1,100,- 000 tons.
In addition, more than 1,000,000 tons of workable bauxite were marked out and the exploration of five clay deposits pointed to 4,600,000 tons of ore containing 35 percent or more alumina.
In Alaska and in many of the ore-bearing districts of the Nation, the Bureau engineers faced adverse conditions and rough terrain to carry on their exploratory work of drilling, drifting, sinking, and trenching.
By the end of the fiscal year, 740 deposits had been examined and rated.
Paralleling this work, metallurgists and chemists worked in laboratories and pilot plants devising methods of recovering metals from low-grade and complex ores.
From these experiments it became known that substantial quantities of manganese, chromium, magnesium, and aluminum could be obtained from such domestic ores.
Processes were developed for beneficiating ores containing antimony, copper, iron, mercury, nickel, tungsten, zinc, and fluorspar, while methods were worked out for treating ores containing aluminum, cobalt, and magnesium.
Toward the end of the fiscal year, the Bureau reorganized its operating structure to place still greater emphasis on exploratory work, the development of additional metallurgical processes, and the utilization of these methods on a wider scale to bring idle ores into the production line.
Examples of this program are the pilot plants for producing sponge iron and for reducing zinc ores with natural gas, together with an expansion of investigations in beneficiating low-grade bauxite ores, alumina-bearing clays, alunite and chromite, and in the production of electrolytic chromium and manganese.
Important gains also were registered in the field of nonmetallics during the year.
On the basis of Bureau findings, the War Production Board made arrangements for the commercial production of flake graphite from domestic sources to overcome a shortage of the imported variety.
The Bureau determined that some west coast sands could be treated and used in place of Belgian glass sand; it participated in the discovery of new sources of ceramic tale suitable for radio insulators; and conducted studies which revealed that certain volcanic rocks can provide workable substitutes for magnesite brick, a refractory material once imported from Austria and Greece.
Helium, the lightweight, noninflammable gas of which this Nation has a world monopoly, flowed in a greater volume from the Bureau's plant at Amarillo, Tex., in response to ever-increasing demands from the Army, Navy, and various Government and civilian agencies.
To provide ample supplies of this gas for barrage balloons, blimps, and other uses, the production of the Amarillo plant established a new record and the Bureau began enlarging the facilities and constructing new plants.
Petroleum and natural gas engineers shouldered additional responsibilities as a direct result of the war.
Laboratory research and field studies by petroleum engineers and surveys by Bureau statisticians gave war agencies detailed information regarding this Nation's ability to increase its output of aviation gasoline.
The Bureau opened a new field office to stimulate crude oil production from the Appalachian fields.
Other field offices marshaled their chemistry and refining experts to evolve solutions of technical problems in the field of petroleum and natural gas.
Looking to the time when our petroleum reserves may be depleted, the Bureau continued its research on the production of gasoline, fuel oil, and other byproducts from coal.
New coals were tested ard their suitability to liquefaction was determined.
The Bureau made plans to study another process—the Fischer-Tropsch method—for producing motor fuels from coal.
Bureau chemists analyzed more than 15,000 coal samples to aid the Army, the Navy, and other agencies in their purchases of millions of tons of coal.
Expanding its program to assist workers and management in curbing the toll of death and injuries in the coal-mining industry, the Bureau began the systematic inspection of coal mines by Federal inspectors for the first time as authorized under the Coal Mine Inspection Act of 1941.
Up to June 30, 400 mines had been inspected.
While the act was not a wartime measure, the inspection program became doubly important after December 7, 1941, because of the absolute need for conserving manpower and avoiding interruptions in production schedules resulting from accidents and disasters.
The Bureau also was designated to administer the Federal Explosives Act, and as part of a Nation-wide move to protect production, supply, storage, and transportation facilities, the Bureau was made responsible for helping to protect coal mines, metal mines, quarries, mills, smelters, and allied mineral facilities from sabotage and subversive action.
More than 100,000 persons received training in first aid, accident prevention, and mine rescue work, bringing the total instructed in first aid alone to more than 1,500,000.
Time and again the Bureau responded to requests from war agencies for assistance in particular problems.
Demolition studies were conducted in cooperation with the Army; confidential research regarding the health factors in military equipment was undertaken for the Army and Navy; high-speed explosion diaphragms were developed for war industries and studies were made of the explosion and inflammability characteristics of chemicals used by the synthetic rubber and plastic industries; plant security examinations were conducted for the Ordnance Department of the Army; a new method of extinguishing magnesium fires in industrial plants was developed; and several experts of the Bureau acted in consultative capacities in various civilian defense activities.
An important role was plaved by the Bureau of Reclamation during the fiscal year in the war work of the West.
The Bureau functioned as chief supplier of electric power, foodstuffs, apd water—three basic essentials of national existence in war or in peace.
Four decades of sound engineering work in the West made it possible for great multipurpose reclamation projects to supply these three basic needs in larger and more important quantities for hundreds of cities, thousands of war factories, and millions of war workers.
Of 73 reclamation projects in operation, under construction or authorized, 45 were prodvcing power and supplying water for irrigation, municipalities, and war industries.
Twenty were under construction.
Brought to completion were 5 of the 15 storage dams under construction.
Three of them—Grand Coulee, Friant, and Marshall Ford—rank among the five largest concrete dams in the world.
Outstanding was the Bureau's contribution of hydroelectric power the potent energy that turns the machines that turn out the guns.
In both the Pacific Northwest and the Southwest, Reclamation's giant power plants were the bulwark behind industries already working at top speed or mushrooming into existence for the production of war material.
Energy poured out of these reclamation plants and others in 11 States for manufacturing and mining; for copper, steel, aluminum, magnesium; for bombs, planes, and ships.
Generative capacity was increased tremendously during the year, due chiefly to the installation of several huge hydro generators bigger than any others in the world—in the Grand Coulee Dam power plant, Washington.
In the Boulder Dam power plant, Arizona-Nevada, also, another big generator was installed and placed in operation—to make by far the most powerful array of dynamos ever assembled and synchronized into action.
Being hurried to completion as the year closed were more generators at Boulder, Grand Coulee, and Parker (Arizona-California) Dams, due to start operating within 6 months.
Water, a primary essential in war, was provided during the year for municipal areas of 2,500,000 population.
Extensive industrial and military concentrations were located in the areas.
The Rio Grande project in New Mexico, Tex., the Contra Costa Canal on the Central Valley project in California, and the Provo River project in Utah were among these projects.
Aside from the generation of power, and the release of water itself for domestic and industrial uses, the regional production of food, forage, and fiber on the reclamation projects in the West supplied urgent needs.
This production reduced the burden on transcontinental railroads and highways for the movement of men and equipment.
It meant speedy delivery of supplies, and the saving of freight cars, of steel for rails and equipment, of fuel for engines, and of gas, oil, and rubber for trucks.
Stored water irrigated more than 3,000,000 acres of productive land.
Irrigation district officials collaborated with the Bureau in an intense effort to get the most from high-production reclamation farms.
The gross value of the 1941 crops on land served with reclamation water was $159,885,998, a 35 percent increase over the $117,788,677 of 1940.
These values do not include the livestock fattened on reclamation projects, nor dairy products such as milk, butter and cheese, and poultry and eggs-which would increase the totals perhaps more than 25 percent additional.
The storage capacity of the 81 reclamation reservoirs in the West at the end of the fiscal year was 61,610,283 acre-feet, a gain of 13,845,- 680 acre-feet—29 percent over the July 1, 1941, capacity.
Active storage, available for power, irrigation and domestic and industrial uses, was 47½ million acre-feet compared with 41½ million last year, a huge increase graphically illustrating the foresightedness of the Bureau in undertaking construction long in advance of emergency need.
Set in motion also during the year was a program for lessening the shock of post-war dislocation.
Under investigation were 209 river basins and potential irrigation or multiple-purpose projects in 17 Western States, which would produce an inventory of water resources and point the way to their economical and effective use in a region where water is the most precious natural resource and the surest basis for economic expansion.
From studies that have been completed or are well advanced, the Bureau is selecting for a reservoir of public works a minimum of 50 feasible post-war projects.
Demobilized soldiers, sailors, and marines will require employment in useful occupations.
Industrial workers released from war factories will want work close to their original homes.
This shelf of projects and the remaining construction on more than 20 projects where work has been retarded by war conditions, including the Columbia Basin Reclamation project in the State of Washington, will provide some of that work.
On completion the projects will offer settlement opportunities on irrigated farms where families can become self-sustaining.
In the Pacific Northwest, the Bonneville Power Administration delivered almost 2,000,000,000 kilowatt-hours of Columbia River energy to war industries in the area.
Shipyards, naval stations, aluminum, magnesium, ferro-alloys, ferro-silicon, and war chemical plants and allied industries were energized by public power produced by the Bonneville-Grand Coulee system.
Indeed, these vital war establishments came into being only because the Bonneville Power Administration made Columbia River energy available.
Thus one of your administration's great peacetime projects became one of the most productive facilities possessed by this country for war.
It is no idle assertion to say that the great war output from the Northwest—planes.
Not only is this Federal hydroelectric development on the Columbia River paying for itself as a war facility, it is, I am happy to report, beginning to pay back substantial amounts to the United States Treasury.
Power revenues of the system during the 1942 fiscal year were three times the 1941 figures.
On the basis of executed and assured contracts, the Administration's revenues in the 1943 fiscal period will more than double the 1942 income.
This power system, you will recall, was once described as a"white elephant"by those who opposed its building on the ground that it would have no field for the disposition of the power to be generated.
Another record established by the Bonneville Power Administration is worthy of mention.
Although the great war metals and production plants established in the Northwest were completely new, and thus required new construction of transmission facilities, power was waiting at the plant sites in every case by the time that the plants were ready to use it.
In no case was there any delay in Northwest war production because of failure to have Columbia River power at the locations on time.
The import of this accomplishment becomes clear when one considers the heavy amounts of power involved and the difficulties attendant upon heavy construction during a time of war, as well as the lack of necessary power in many important industrial areas in other parts of the country.
During World War I the resources of the Pacific Northwest were not developed as they are now.
At that time, the hydroelectric projects on the Columbia existed only in the dreams of far-sighted men, and the Nation could not count on this area for the enormous war metals and weapon production that is now flowing from the Northwest.
Now the call upon the Bonneville Power Administration for electric energy for war and for distribution by public agencies has proved both the wisdom of the construction of the Columbia River dams and of the basic planning of the Bonneville transmission system.
Established April 18, 1941, to coordinate the Department's powerproduction activities, the Division of Power worked toward that end with emphasis on power for war throughout its first complete fiscal year.
Our principal objectives were the development of additional power for war; the maximum use of available power in war production; the construction of new power facilities which require a minimum of critical material and which can be completed in time for war use; the location of war plants on sites where low costs to war industries and development of a balanced economy in the region of the plant would result, and where operations might continue after the war.
The Division has worked toward pooling the Department's power resources in ways that would result in the greatest efficiency and in the availability of maximum amounts of power in the various areas.
It has insisted that power from Departmental projects be sold for war uses at the lowest possible rates in order to hold the cost of war essentials produced by the power at the lowest feasible level.
Arrangements to supply approximately 200,000 kilowatts to the big magnesium plant near Las Vegas, Nev. were worked out with the Bureau of Reclamation, the allotees of Boulder power and Defense Plant Corporation.
This transaction constitutes one of the largest single sales of power ever made to a consumer.
Hetch-Hetchy power was turned to war use.
In November 1941, a 17-vear-old dispute regarding the disposition of this power in accordance with the terms of the Raker Act culminated in the rejection by the city and county of San Francisco of a charter amendment which precluded the civil use of the power which had been under consideration.
Largely through the efforts of the Division, the Federal Government built an aluminum reduction plant near Modesto; and Hetch-Hetchy power was sold to the plant.
These are but highlights of the Division's activities.
It also worked with the War Production Board for the installation of additional generators on Columbia River projects, assuring their maximum warusefulness.
It has kept war agencies informed about the quantity and location of available departmental power.
It has acted generally as a liaison office between various agencies of the Department and the war agencies, and has operated within the Department as a clearing house for the increasing body of problems incident to departmental power activities.
During the fiscal year the installed capacity of power projects under the jurisdiction of the Department was increased by more.than 500.000 kilowatts, bringing the total to almost 1,800,000 kilowatts.
This represented an increase of 41 percent in power installations.
The work of the Geological Survey for the year was determined targely by a redistribution of essential metals among nations which was made necessary by the war.
When Germany invaded Norway in April 1940 the Anglo-Saxon peoples controlled approximately 75 percent of the world's metal supply.
Germany controlled a small percentage, and Japan a negligible portion.
Within a few months, Germany acquired the iron of Norway, the coal and iron of France and Belgium, the copper and aluminum-bearing bauxite of Southeastern Europe, the metals of the Balkans and, by the force of international circumstances, could draw upon the product of Sweden's rich iron mines.
On the other hand, the amount of metal available to us in other countries was reduced by Axis raids on our shipping, the disruption of war, the lack of transportation, and other concomitant factors.
The Geological Survey thus entered the fiscal year with our sources of metals for war greatly reduced, and those of our potential enemies correspondingly increased.
Then Japan went into the war and swiftly captured the world supply of tin in the Dutch East Indies.
Inevitably a major activity of the Survey involved a diligent search for more minerals for war in the areas still accessible to us.
Such a program.
This search, which is still being vigorously pursued, has a twofold purpose: The first, to make available more of the high-grade ores, customarily utilized in this country, by reevaluating old deposits and finding new ones: the second, to amass geological data which have to be available before we can recover low-grade ores, previously unused, but which must be used if we are to turn out enough munitions and implements of war to insure victory.
It is too early to measure the success of so comprehensive a program, but some encouraging results can be reported.
Basic data essential to the planning of an iron and steel industry in the West have been provided.
Large scale development of manganese deposits in Arkansas has been undertaken.
Tungsten was discovered in an Idaho mine which, by the end of the fiscal year, was the Nation's largest single tungsten producer.
Largely on the strength of previous findings, production of chromite began this year from the abundant deposits in the Stillwater District of Montana.
A new mill there is turning out 150 to 175 tons of chemical grade chromite concentrates daily.
Elsewhere profitable work has been carried on with respect to these and other strategic metals—bauxite, high-grade aluminum clays and alunite (potential sources of aluminum), magnesite, quicksilver, beryllium, tantalum, lithium, and others in the United States and Alaska: manganese, nickel, chromite, tungsten, antimony, quicksilver, chrome, tin, and vanadium in Cuba, Mexico, and other American Republics.
Discovering and revaluating deposits of high-grade minerals has led to an indispensable contribution to victory.
These basic metals and alloys are forged into munitions and implements of war, or into machines for war manufacture.
But the ultimate worth of complete data on deposits of low-grade ores is not so definite.
Many of them have been evaluated qualitatively and quantitatively, but their effectiveness against the enemy depends upon how quickly and how extensively they can be put to use.
There are some encouraging signs.
Plans now well underway for war manufacture from some of the low-grade iron deposits in the West appear certain to materialize.
But general use had not been assured at the end of the fiscal year.
The Geological Survey also placed a war emphasis on its numerous fields of work which are unrelated to the search for minerals.
Data on water resources, regularly gathered and published by the Survey, are doubly valuable in time of war.
Rapid expansion of the national war plant, requiring large water supplies for processing, and to accommodate concentration of troops and of war plant workers, requires knowledge of the quantity and quality of water available at these points of development.
Reports and consulting services have been furnished on surface and ground-water supplies for war purposes at about 1,700 places in the United States and in certain islands of strategic importance, as requested by the War and Navy Departments, the War Production Board, and other war agencies.
These reports have related to the water supplies for Army cantonments, naval stations, munitions plants, largely increased local concentrations of population producing war supplies, and for other war activities.
Surveys weremade for the Navy Department of emergency supplies from wells in case of attack, and summaries of water conditions, on the surface and underground, throughout the United States were prepared each month for the use of the agencies in charge of water-supply and power activities related to the war.
The war program was furthered also by the Geological Survey's conservation work—its surveys and investigations of water and mineral sources of the public domain, and its supervision of certain phases of mineral- and power-production on these lands.
Production of coal, petroleum, natural gas, natural gasoline, butane, potassium salts, and phosphate rock from public lands was substantially greater in 1942 than in 1941.
Additional lands were coming into production, and an unusual amount of prospecting was underway.
Production of lead, zinc, and coal also increased on Indian lands, and there, too, extensive prospecting was in progress.
Numerous mechanical devices constructed during the year have greatly accelerated the production of maps for the Air Corps.
The most important are the Lewis rectoblique plotter, the Sketchmaster, and the Lucidagraph.
A double photoalidade and a stereoblique plotter are now being developed.
By means of such instruments, aerial photographs taken at an angle of approximately 30° below the horizon -may be converted into the kind of maps required for the navigation of air forces over previously unmapped or inadequately mapped areas.
In a letter dated November 5, 1941, and addressed to me, you called attention to the need for"efficient and carefully coordinated development, production, distribution, utilization, transportation, and handling of solid fuels" to assure their availability when and where needed for military and civilian use, and requested me, as Secretary of the Interior, to serve as Solid Fuels Coordinator to help achieve these objectives.
The Office of Solid Fuels Coordinator was established and quickly began functioning, using, for the most part, the staffs, facilities, and data of the Bituminous Coal Division and the Bureau of Mines, thus effecting economy in time and funds, instead of building a large new organization.
Immediate steps were taken to organize the industries dealing with the coal supply on a war basis.
Representatives of the coal mining industries, coal transporters, distributors, dealers, and mine labor met with me on December 18, 1941, and the groundwork for organizing the industries was laid.
Cooperation continues through a council of 18 members, representing the industries concerned, mine labor, and the public.
Estimates made early in 1942 indicated that the Nation would require 550,000,000 to 570,000,000 tons of bituminous coal, approximately 60,000,000 tons of anthracite, and about 70,000,000 tons of coke during the calendar year of 1942-amounts far exceeding normal production.
Later experience indicates that these estimates are in line with actual requirements.
The Coordinator, in cooperation with industry and other Government agencies, is taking various steps in an effort to forestall any emergency as to the coal supply because of wartime changes and deficiencies in manpower, equipment, and transportation.
Although there are many difficulties yet to be surmounted before the Nation can be assured of adequate wartime fuel protection, it appeared as of June 30, 1942, that it would be possible to provide adequate coal of some usable type to keep homes warm and industry operating throughout the winter, provided that dealers and consumers would order their coal sufficiently early to enable mines and carriers to make full and continuous use of their manpower and facilities throughout the warm season.
To bring about public cooperation, a "Buy Coal Now" campaign was launched in the spring of 1942 in cooperation with other Government agencies and with industry.
In general, public cooperation was excellent, although in many cases, consumers failed to make full use of their opportunities to obtain bituminous coal for storage.
Restrictions in the production of anthracite, however, threaten to prevent the storage of the full amount of hard coal that consumers are ordering.
However, as of June 30, 1942, coal in general was being produced and transported at a rate much higher than was demanded by normal seasonal requirements, and a great deal of it was going into dealers' and consumers' storage as wartime fuel insurance.
It is anticipated that the war will necessitate the greatest production of bituminous coal in history.
The stabilization of coal markets under the Bituminous Coal Act of 1937, as administered by the Bituminous Coal Division, is one of the principal factors which is enabling the coal mining industry to mcet its responsibility for supplying tbe Nation with the principal source of the energy needed to forge the implements of war.
For 14 montns prior to Pearl Harbor the industry enjoyed stable markets and fair trade practices by virtue of the minimum prices and marketing rules and regulations promulgated under the act.
This gave it the incentive and the opportunity to improve its capital strength and better to prepare itself for the challenging task of meeting wartime fuel requirements.
It is essential that the stabilization of coal markets by minimum price regulatiors be continued vigorously as a measure of immediate importance to fighting the war.
It will also aid the prevention of post-war chaos in this basie industry, such as followed World War I.
At the present time, the stabilizing effect of minimum price regulation makes it possible for the industry to plan the orderly production and distribution of coal in such a way as to obtain the maximum use and efficiency of the limited manpower and equipment available for producing and transporting coal in time of war.
It prevents the recurrence of pressure buying, particularly by large industrial consumers; curbs cross-hauling and dumping, and constitutes a bulwark against other practices and conditions peculiar to the coal mining industry which would promote waste of the means of producing, transporting, and distributing this vital war fuel.
The demoralization of the coal mining industry which followed World War I, which involved destructive price cutting and uadesirable trade practices on a Nation-wide scale, caused tremendous financial losses.
It precipitated violent disturbances between mine owners and their employees, and seriously weakened the industry's capital structure.
These conditions had an undesirable effect upon the general economy of the Nation in addition to perpetuating the more acute situation in the coal mining regions.
They persisted even in times of general Nation-wide prosperity, and continued until minimum prices and marketing rules and regulations were made effective on October 1, 1940.
The contiaued stabilization of this industry under the Guffey Act will make a large contribution toward speeding general post-war stabilization.
The Bituminous Coal Division is making other great contributions to fighting the war.
It is serving as a central source of coal statistics, and in many instances is providing technical advice, for other Government agencies dealing with wartime fuel problems, including the Coordinator of Solid Fuels, the OPA, the War Department and others.
The establishment by the OPA of anti-inflationary ceilings on coal prices was a task which obviously might have puzzled experts for many months.
It was rendered relatively simple because the Division had classified all soft coals and was able immediately to furnish data on production costs and maximum price application and to give other technical assistance.
The Division is continuing to give substantial aid to OPA in handling compliance matters and in making adjustments to the schedules.
As trustee of much that is great in America, the National Park Service has endeavored to harmonize its activities with the war program while holding intact the things entrusted to it.
The stewardship of the Service extends over areas of outstanding beauty, scientific interest, historical significance, and, more important, the uniquely American concept under which the national parks are preserved inviolate for the present and future benefit of all of our people.
Lumbering, mining, grazing, and other exploitation of national park areas have been urged as a necessity of war.
The Service has tried to measure the degree in which necessity justifies destruction of irreplaceable values and has acted accordingly.
With due regard for its conservation responsibilities the Park Service has nevertheless rendered valuable service within the war program.
One hundred twenty-five permits have been issued to the War and Navy Departments and other war agencies to make use of National Park Service lands, buildings, and facilities.
Salt for use in magnesium production has been made available from National Park property.
Steps were taken to establish fire-lookout and air-raid warning towers immediately after war was declared, and much besides has been done in furtherance of immediate war aims.
Equally vital, if not so spectacular, the Service has helped to sustain national morale in the exercise of its usual functions.
Special reduced rates for men in uniform were continued in effect in federal park areas, and an estimated 650,000 of them visited these inspiring monuments to America's present and past greatness during the year.
Several thousand British sailors found rest and a change of scene while occupying group camping facilities in recreational demonstration areas and vacated CCC camps.
Service technicians helped to plan and to direct the construction of 33 army rest camps in 23 States and the District of Columbia—places in which service men on leave might find rest and relief from training.
Instead of increasing as usual, travel to the National Parks decreased 30 percent this year because of limited motoring to conserve gasoline and rubber.
The decline was greatest at Yellowstone, Glacier, and Crater Lake, and least at Sequoia, Yosemite, and Carlsbad Caverns which are closer to metropolitan centers.
While many activities of the Service were curtailed or deferred, historic areas were kept open and visiting time was lengthened.
The General Land Office responded to the national war needs during the fiscal year by withdrawals of public lands for military and other war uses, by seeking new outlets for various resources on the publie domain, by making public lands and their resources available for use in war industries, by facilitating the search for strategic metals, and by other activities, including many in close cooperation with other agencies.
More than 7,000,000 acres of public lands were withdrawn for military purposes, including areas for aerial bombing ranges, antiaircraft fields, combat training lands, artillery practice grounds, air navigation sites, flying schools, ammunition storage, and ordnance depots.
This year's withdrawals bring the total area of public lands withdrawn for military use to 13,000,000 acres.
In the development of strategic minerals the General Land Office cooperated with the Defense Plant Corporation, Metal Reserves Co., the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, and other agencies.
Opening reserved mineral deposits to exploitation has made available large quantities of tungsten, manganese, and other minerals.
The potash reserves in New Mexico and California, operating under lease, now provide large supplies of potassium at less than one-sixth of the price paid for potassium during the first World War.
Studies are under way to determine possible new uses for resources on the public domain.
New values are being found in minerals, natural vegetation, and other resources which heretofore were considered of little importance or which were not known to exist.
Commercial quantities of strategic minerals may be developed from previously unused deposits, and such materials as fiber, rubber, turpentine, and resin, may be produced from desert shrubs.
Authorized by recent legislation to lease or sell lands in the public domain for use in connection with specified war manufacture, I have issued regulations under which the Commissioner of the General Land Office will negotiate transactions providing land to be used for its yield of timber, sand, gravel, and stone; and as factory sites, housing development sites for war workers, and as expansion areas for plants bordering the public domain.
It is possible that yucca, growing on public lands, may be used as a substitute for fibers that can no longer be obtained from the usual sources.
Information also was gathered on the possibility of helping to relieve the rubber shortage by furnishing lands for the raising of guayule, and by making rabbit brush on public lands available.
Fire prevention and suppression activities have been greatly increased.
Through the work of the Oregon Forest Defense Council, plans and policies were adopted which will greatly increase the effectiveness of fire suppression agencies in coping with forest fire conditions—even the abnormal conditions that exist in wartime.
Work also continued in the suppression of outcrop coal fires which were threatening destruction of a very large amount of the Nation's coal resources in the vicinity of Little Thunder Basin, Wyo.
The proper management of land, important in peacetime, becomes even more vital in war.
This Department has jurisdiction over 625,000,C00 acres of public land in the United States and Alaska.
In order that this great domain might make its maximum contribution to the war, the Office of Land Utilization has directed close coordination during the year of all land management programs in the Department.
An immediate result has been an increase in timber production from Departmental lands and an improvement in western range lands which has fitted them for greater sustained production of beef, leather, wool, and other livestock products.
An increased output from the land of minerals, timber, food, and raw materials was made possible without compromising sound conservation practices.
Developmental programs were curtailed in accordance with the needs of war for money.
At the time of Pearl Harbor, a $2,178,000 soil- and moisture-conservation program was under way.
This activity promptly was restricted to the projects offering the quickest return in increased production of necessary materials.
The balance of the projects were postponed.
Burdens of protection also were assumed by the Office of Land Utilization.
Working closely with the Office of Civilian Defense, the OLU took over the Facility Security Program which involved the establishment of a nonmilitary front against subversive action, forest and range fire hazards, and other forms of sabotage aimed against war production.
In addition to continuing its program of a wise use and development of Federal grazing lands during the fiscal year, the Grazing Service facilitated military use of the range.
Proving grounds were provided for thousands of bombers and tanks, and nearly 3,500,000 acres of Federal grazing districts were converted into training areas, bringing the area withdrawn for military use in 2 years to 8,500,000 acres.
Despite these withdrawals, livestock production was kept at a high level.
Range improvement was confined, with few exceptions, to water development, construction of trails and feeder roads, revegetation, maintenance, and other activities requiring little or no critical materials.
Range reseeding experience furnished a valuable guide to future methods.
A total of 199,670 acres was reseeded in 1942, compared with 66.000 acres in 1941.
Nineteen million acres of range lands were surveyed and a recheck survey was accomplished on 10,000,000 acres during the year.
The Grazing Service became the first bureau of this Department to be decentralized from Washington.
Headquarters were transferred in August 1941 from Washington, D. C., to Salt Lake City, Utah, the hub of the Federal range territory.
The prudent use of our wildlife resources encouraged in the past by the Fish and Wildlife Service paid dividends this year as the Nation sought maximum returns from its investment in conservation.
The Fish and Wildlife Service has done much to produce more abundantly for war from the resources that it administers, but it has enforced the principle of increased production to the extent consistent with conservation.
Nearly all of the war agencies have urged the delivery of more products derived from wildlife—more fish for the armed forces at home and abroad, for our outposts and for our allies; more vitamins from fish, more fish liver oils, more fur and fiber and food for war.
We have given sympathetic assistance, but we have always looked first to new sources to tap, to fuller use of resources at hand, and for means of spreading customary production further.
To increase the home supply of fish, we have advocated production in farm ponds that now flourish in the South.
To augment the commercial catch, we have urged the industry to land species and sizes which previously were caught and discarded as unpopular, though suitable for table use.
We have provided data on seafood production in the various theaters of war so that our expeditionary forces might find a local supply, thus diminishing their demand upon American resources and freeing shipping space for arms and munitions.
These are a few typical means by which we have tried to increase present fish production without impoverishing the future.
A program to use less material needed for war has paralleled our program for producing more food.
With some success we have experimented with canning plates requiring reduced amounts of tin, and with noncanning methods of fish preservation.
We have assisted in the release of fishing vessels for war use, and have facilitated the use of net-manufacturing machines in making camouflage nets.
We have been active in the field of predator control to conserve food and raw materials.
In a single instance organized control reduced sheep losses from 7 percent to less than 2 percent.
This is a considerable contribution when it is considered that the Army estimates a need for 100 pounds of scoured wool for each soldier during his first year of service, and taking into account also that 15,000,000 shearling pelts are needed to line aviators' coats.
In this report you will find accounts of the Fish and Wildlife Service rendering many war services other than those which its title indicates that it might perform.
Among these are services related to the control of disease, often among concentrations of troops; the prevention of stream pollution, which was increasing because of hurriedly expanded mining and manufacturing operations, and to services related to food-storage in England.
All of these activities have been better correlated and their results have extended further because of the relationship between the Fish and Wildlife Service and the Office of Fishery Coordination.
This Office, operating under my jurisdiction, is charged with mobilizing for war all of the industries concerned with harvesting, preserving, and distributing fish and fish products.
The key personnel of the Service's Division of Fishery Industries and that of the Coordinator's office is identical.
The Office of Indian Affairs has dealt with numerous and important problems of war.
After the attack on Pearl Harbor, all of the Aleutian Islanders west of Dutch Harbor were evacuated according to plan, and the removal of these people from their homes raised many problems for this Office.
It helped to relocate them, to provide relief and medical care, and to plan their future self-support.
It was also active from the beginning in the relocation of the West Coast Japanese, and is administering the largest of all evacuee centers.
At the request of the War Relocation Authority, the Office of Indian Affairs assigned personnel and equipment to establish centers for large numbers of Japanese and their American-born families.
Blocks of Indian land also have been requisitioned for military use, and the removal of Indian families, which resulted in some instances, constituted a direct war service for the Office.
Charged with grave responsibilities toward the Indians of the United States and the natives of Alaska, we have seen the war come very close to both—to the very doorsteps of some among the latter group in the Aleutian Islands.
In both the United States and Alaska the response of these minorities to the challenge of war has been excellent.
The Alaskan natives have already defended their homes and given their lives on their own soil in this war for freedom.
In the United States, Indian enlistment in the armed forces increased rapidly after war was declared, and on June 1, 1942, there were 7,500 of them in the service.
Their most distinguished soldier, thus far, has been the late General Tinker, an Osage, lost in the battle of Midway on a daring air mission bravely self-undertaken.
At least 6,500 Indians who received vocational training under the CCC program are now in the service, and others are applying the skills that they learned in shipyards, airplane factories, and munitions plants.
The natives of Alaska are serving there in the United States forces.
The skill of these men and their intimate knowledge of the country are of extraordinary value.
Evidence of the Indians' will to victory has come from even the remotest reservation.
On several occasions groups of Indians have arrived at agency headquarters, each man with his gun, ready to proceed immediately to the scene of the fighting.
The Crow Tribe in Montana offered the Government all of its resources and manpower.
Indians in the United States and Alaskan natives alike have been generous buyers of war bonds.
During the fiscal year much has happened to strengthen our policy toward the Indians.
War conditions are hastening the maturity of tribal self-government; the Indians are continuing the practice, begun several years ago, of investing tribal monies in the land; the courts have tended to sustain the tribes' rights in certain lands against conflicting claims and despite the fact of forcible removal, and to uphold their right to fish in accustomed places without payment of State license fees.
The Inter-American Indian Institute was formally created March 25, 1942, in Mexico City.
This organization is the official agency for the development of collaboration among the American nations on matters affecting the more than 30,000,000 Indians who live in the Western Hemisphere, and it has received support and encouragement from the Service.
Although all of the American people have felt the effect of war, the people of our territories and island possessions have literally been living in the front lines.
Two of the territories, Alaska and Hawaii, have been under enemy attack.
Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands have been under the heavy hand of maritime siege.
The response of the citizens in our territories to the trials and perils of war has been magnificent.
In some instances they have been driven from their homes; they have had to accept sharp restraints; they have had to make profound readjustments in their lives and affairs.
But the nearer the proximity of the enemy, the further in his blows the greater has been their determination to crush him once and for all, regardless of the cost to themselves.
The attack upon Pearl Harbor made Hawaii the center of an active combat zone.
A well-organized civilian defense program took its place alongside of the military operations.
Funds were provided for civil protection, health, sanitation, hospitalization and other civilian defense necessities, and a representative of my office proceeded to Honolulu to aid, temporarily, in the administration of the program.
With the full-fledged cooperation of civil and military authorities a comprehensive program was undertaken to assure adequate protection for the population in the event of further attack.
The report of the Governor supplies the story in full detail.
The willingness of all elements—citizens, plantation operators, factory owners, transportation employees, contractors, builders and utility workers—contributed to the prompt execution of a protection program that should serve as a model for Americans under fire.
Subsequent developments, as the life of the islands was abruptly switched from peace to combat, have had a disrupting effect.
The change from normal, revenue-producing shipping to the movement of war supplies has adversely affected Territorial finances.
Necessary combat zone restrictions on the daily life have caused complications.
There is a shortage of housing, and the labor problem is far from being solved.
No one has any doubts, however, as to the ultimate fortunate outcome of these matters.
Alaska also found itself in the front line.
Close to the top of the world, where airline distances telescope amazingly, the Alaskans were keenly aware of their nearness to the enemy.
They were awake, also, to the assiduity with which the Japanese had studied and charted Alaskan waters, explored the coastline and penetrated the Aleutian Islands.
It was no surprise to them, therefore, when bombs fell on Dutch Harbor.
They had expected them earlier.
In the evacuation of native populations from the various islands, the Office of Indian Affairs played a large role.
Several hundred natives and whites were forced to leave their homes and ancestral hunting areas and were moved to the mainland.
Evacuation camps were established and the first American refugees were made completely comfortable in new locations.
There is reason for great pride in the way in which this job was handled.
Severe problems were created for Alaska by the influx of large numbers of troops and the establishment of long-overdue military bases.
In great numbers construction workers were suddenly dumped upon undeveloped areas, causing many difficulties in social adaptation and adjustment.
Boom times transcending the days of the gold rush were created.
Serious difficulties of supply had to be coped with.
Alaskans were prompt to volunteer for military service.
Indians and Eskimos appeared with rifle in hand.
The knowledge of the Alaskans of their own territory was put to excellent use.
In countless other ways Alaskans lived up to their reputation as alert, enterprising Americans, able to cope with situations which might be dismaying to those of less tough moral fibre.
In Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, in the vital Panama Canal defense zone, the people and their governing officials realized the immensity of the war and the problems of our involvement more quickly than those facts were grasped on the continent.
In the Virgin Islands, our Easternmost outpost, the program for both civilian and military preparedness was especially intense.
When war came, this was well advanced.
James M. Landis, Director of the Office of Civilian Defense, later recognized this when he said, "We must put into practice in the Nation much of what these islands . .. have already done."
Such strength as we have shown in the off-shore areas has gained valuable time for us, especially in the instance of possible eventual enemy occupation.
Much of our strength lay in the loyalty of the inhabitants.
Pre-war controls over shipping, trade in war-essential commodities and other activities strengthened our position.
The problem of supply for Puerto Rico continues to be acute.
It is, without question, the most severe single problem that we face in any of the territories.
Every effort is being made to obtain greater tonnage for the island, and in this all agencies of the Federal and Territorial Governments are cooperating to the fullest.
The complete solution will come only when success in arms will release greater numbers of vessels for assignment to this service.
While the Office of the Petroleum Coordinator for War (now the Petroleum Administration for War) is not a part of the formal organization of the Department of the Interior, I wish nevertheless to mention this activity briefly in this letter.
What the Nation would have done to handle its oil problem under actual war conditions had it not been for the earlier work of the Office of Petroleum Coordinator, I cannot guess.
The story of the successive problems created by the disruption of normal petroleum transportation and supply pattern is too fresh in memory to bear repetition here.
Although the warnings we issued in the summer of 1941 were largely ignored, and the restrictions whieh were imposed met with derision and a flood of misrepresentation, the correctness of our actions came to be generally recognized.
Now, with war demands for specialized petroleum products increasing daily, it is clear that efforts to provide the aid necessary for war were started none too early.
In this connection, I want again to emphasize that the remarkable results that have been brought about would have been impossible without the wholehearted willingness of the oil industry to work in full partnership and understanding with the Federal Government.
Too much credit cannot be given to the members of that industry.
Traditional competitive practices have been laid aside, and many individual companies have willingly accepted severe financial loss to make an integrated handling of the oil problem possible.
There is no such thing as '"business as usual" today in the oil industry.
Normal patterns have been junked for the duration, and the handling of petroleum from the well to the delivery of the finished product is replete with innovation.
As one member of the industry puts it: "The difficult we do at once; the impossible takes a little longer."
Three principal tasks were faced by the OPC.
They were to provide an adequate supply of petroleum and specialized products for our armed forces; for the United Nations, and for our own civilian front.
It has been only by the use of considerable ingenuity that we have succeeded as well as we have.
With the assistance of the industry, we will continue to dispose of the difficult and to perform the impossible.
Although this letter is optimistic in tone, the facts speak for themselves.
The series of disasters inflicted upon the United Nations by their enemies depressed men's spirits everywhere, and a recounting of accomplishments such as this may seem somewhat trivial and academic when judged against the somber backdrop of the world today.
We can appraise our progress honestly and find that we have moved forward.
Under the general tendency to magnify our defeats and belittle our accomplishments because they seem small against big events, we might not regard what we have done as significant.
We have had failures, many of them.
We have had lapses of imagination, and of concept, and failures of execution.
But on the asset side, we have accomplished some truly worth-while things.
So far as this Department is concerned, we intend to proceed with our work; to persist in what we think is the right course, and, with the greatest energy possible, proceed with the sensible development of conservation and'supply programs that, in the end, will win the war.
Secretary of the Interior.
ASED on the sound theory that soldiers and civilians fight best when properly fed, and victory is surer, swifter, Reclamation operations during the 1942 fiscal year were aimed at providing foodstuffs for men behind the guns and machines as well as hydroelectric power for the guns and machines themselves.
For a short conflict or a long pull—a war of attrition—this dual objective symbolizes the straight thinking of a democracy at bay.
The year's results from Reclamation activities in 16 Western States are impressive.
Four decades of sound engineering work enabled the Bureau to assume a vital role in the Nation's war machine.
Outstanding was its contribution of hydro power—potent energy that turns the machines that turn out the guns.
In the Pacific Northwest and Southwest giant Reclamation plants were the bulwark behind industries working at war tempo or mushrooming into production of war material.
Power poured out of these plants and others for mining and manufacturing; for copper, steel, aluminum, magnesium; for bombs, planes, and ships.
Simultaneously, reservoirs on Reclamation projects furnished water to cities and their industry, to military establishments, their training centers, their airfields.
Stored water also irrigated 3,500,000 acres of productive land.
Food, forage, and fiber were produced on the strategically located 45 irrigation projects in operation in the West.
Farmers were urged to plant and to harvest, to raise cows, beef, and poultry.
Irrigation district officials collaborated with the Bureau in an effort to get the most from high-production Reclamation farms.
Expanded production of food, forage, and fiber was recognized as necessary to supply the demands of the United -Nations, to meet domestic, civilian, and military requirements.
Increasing civilian and military population and the urgency of conserving transportation emphasized the necessity of making the western half of the United States self-sufficient in food.
This can be achieved only through an accelerated Reclamation program.
Geared to the over-all demands of the war, the construction of purely irrigation facilities made progress despite retardation by shortages of steel and other critical materials controlled by the War Production Board.
Substitutions of noncritical material and concentration on excavation and other work enabled the Bureau to advance this work further than otherwise would have been possible.
Because of curtailed Work Projects Administration and Civilian Conservation Corps contributed labor, the water conservation and utilization program to stabilize the Great Plains and other semiarid areas was being redirected into a reserve against future contingency.
Projects under construction are being advanced with all the speed possible; many others are being investigated and are being tagged for construction the moment war or postwar needs give the signal to go ahead.
Set in motion also was a still larger program for lessening the shock of postwar dislocation.
Under investigation-were 209 river basins and potential irrigation or multiple-purpose projects in 17 Western States.
The investigations will produce an inventory of water resources and point the way to their economical and effective use in a region where water is the most precious natural resource and the basis for its economic expansion.
From studies that have been completed or are well advanced, the Bureau was selecting for a reservoir of public works, in accordance with the President's direction, a minimum of 50 feasible projects.
This irrigation and multiple-purpose construction can be launched promptly at the conclusion of the war.
Demobilized soldiers, sailors, and marines will require employment in useful occupations.
Industrial workers released from war factories will want work close to their original homes.
This shelf of projects, and the remaining construction on great undertakings like the Columbia Basin Reclamation project in the State of Washington, will provide that work.
As the fiscal year closed multiple-purpose irrigation projects engineered by the Bureau provided the hydroelectric power for war industry, assured a stable supply of water for essential agriculture and for cities and industry, and also represented a main source of manpower in the West—now in the economic front line.
Once unpopulated and unproductive areas, former wasteland, after 40 years of sound Reclamation development were highly productive regions of farms and factories, towns and cities, all contributing their strength to the war.
The 81 reservoirs in operation on Reclamation projects had an active water storage of more than 47 million acre-feet—15,000 billion gallons—available for power generation, irrigation, and domestic and industrial needs.
A 6-million-acre-foot increase in storage over last year illustrates the foresightedness of the Bureau in undertaking construction long in advance of an emergency.
Of 73 projects in operation, under construction, or authorized, 45 were producing power and supplying water for irrigation, municipalities and war industries.
Twenty others were under construction.
Nine were authorized but work was deferred because of the war.
Of the 45 projects in operation several had important features still under construction.
More than 95 percent of the construction costs of these projects is reimbursable under the Reclamation law or other legislation.
The remainder is allocated to flood control, aid to navigation, or to nonreimbursable labor costs.
The hydroelectric development on Reclamation projects as of June 30, 1942, was installed in 28 power plants on 17 projects in 11 States.
A tremendous power increase during the year was due chiefly to the installation of great generators in the Grand Coulee Dam power plant, Washington.
In the Boulder Dam power plant, Arizona-Nevada, also, a big generator was installed and placed in operation, to make by far the most powerful array of dynamos ever assembled and synchronized into action.
An addition at the Minidoka plant in Idaho and another at the Spanish Fork development on the Strawberry Valley project in Utah completed the year's installations.
But being hurried to completion as the year closed were more generators at Boulder, Grand Coulee, and Parker (Arizona-California) Dams due to start operating within 6 months.
Following the recommendation of the Bureau, the Congress appropriated funds for the completion of construction plans for a steam plant on the Central Valley project in California.
The plant will firm Shasta and Keswick power and make the output more valuable.
It will assure a larger net revenue to assist in repaying irrigation costs.
The Congress also provided funds for the construction of a transmission system to carry power from the California project's Shasta and Keswick Dam power plants to market.
Included in the proposal were 8 steam plants.
The remainder were hydro installations.
Aside from the generation of power, and the release of water itself for domestic and industrial uses, the regional production of food, forage, and fiber by Reclamation projects in the West supplied urgent needs.
This production reduced the burden on transcontinental railroads and highways for the movement of men and equipment.
It meant speedy delivery of supplies, and the saving of freight cars, of steel for rails and equipment, of fuel for engines, and of gas, oil, and rubber for trucks.
Water, prime essential in war, was provided during the year for municipal areas of 2,500,000 population.
Extensive industrial and military concentrations were located in the areas.
The Boulder Dam system on the Colorado River in the Southwest provided water for Los Angeles and 12 other cities of the metropolitan area of southern California.
It supplied both water and power to the huge new magnesium plant in Nevada near Boulder Dam.
The Rio Grande project in New Mexico and Texas supplied water to the city of El Paso to make possible more extensive military operations.
The Contra Costa canal on the Central Valley project provided water for industries in Pittsburg, Calif.
Work was rushed on the Provo River project in Utah to provide water for a large steel plant and for Salt Lake City and Provo.
Important military and industrial concentrations in this Utah area, with increased population, are draining the limited water supplies for domestic and agricultural purposes.
Other Reclamation projects also were under construction to provide municipal water supplies.
The Altus project in Oklahoma and the Rapid Valley project in South Dakota will give Altus and Rapid City new reserves.
The increase in Army personnel and population made the added water supply essential.
The gross value of food, forage, and fiber produced in the calendar year 1941 on land served with Reclamation water was $159,885,998, a 35 percent increase over the $117,788,677 of 1940.
These values do not include the livestock fattened on Reclamation projects, nor dairy products such as milk, butter, and cheese, and poultry and eggs which would increase totals perhaps more than 25 percent.
Nor do they include returns from areas irrigated by the All-American canal and 5 other supplemental water projects.
The cultivated area on regular and storage projects rose from 2,138,927 in 1940 to 2,178,288 in 1941, with crop values of $80,098,196 and $110,399,807 respectively (table 2).
The cultivated Warren Act lands supplied with supplemental water increased from 1,177,103 to 1,202,172 acres with respective values of $37,690,481 and $49,486,191.
In acreage, hay and forage for livestock were the most important.
Other products included vegetables and truck, fruits and nuts, small grains, seed, long-staple cotton, and sugar beets.
Reclamation projects in 12 States produced 1,450,321 tons of sugar beets, equivalent to a year's supply of sugar for an army of 5,000,000 soldiers.
The 1941 area of 101,219 acres in sugar beets was increased during the planting season of 1942, but labor difficulties and scarcity of factory facilities may restrict the year's production to a 25 percent increase.
If labor is available and processing plants are established, production in 1943 could double the 1941 output.
The irrigable acreage for which the Bureau was prepared to supply water in 1942 was 4,915,716 acres.
This figure includes more than 500,000 acres under the All-American canal.
The public land opened for homesteading was limited to 2,477 acres of the Payette division of the Boise project in Idaho.
Owing to war conditions and the location of Japanese relocation centers on projects in California and Wyoming, other openings were deferred.
Additional land was brought under irrigation on the Roza division of the Yakima project in Washington and on the Buffalo Rapids project in Montana.
The West depends on irrigated land for more than 70 percent of its food supplies.
Surveys indicate that more than 50 percent of the areas served by non-Federal irrigation systems requires supplemental water to insure production in normal times.
An assured water supply is doubly essential now to safeguard both the growing civilian and military population of the area from disastrous food shortages in the event of drought—for new land to be brought under irrigation as well as for established irrigated areas.
At the request of members of the Congress, the Bureau outlined for congressional appropriations committees a program for accelerated development of projects under construction.
It was shown that by 1945, with high priorities and adequate appropriations, the Bureau could serve 1,964,225 additional acres of land.
Included in this area are 1,096,260 acres now inadequately irrigated by other systems, on which food production is limited by water shortages.
Included also are about 867,965 acres of new land which can be brought in cultivation.
This accelerated program covers about a fourth of the 8,000,000 acres to be added to the present irrigable acreage in the Bureau's current over-all program of projects in operation, under construction or authorized.
When all projects in the over-all program are completed, the Bureau will be prepared to serve 5,115,224 acres with a full (or primary) supply and 7,116,074 acres with supplemental water.
This total of 12,231,298 is nearly three times the 4,915,716 acres (table 1 and footnote) the Bureau was prepared to serve with irrigation water in 1941.
In northern project areas are vast acreages that could be devoted to the production of sugar beets.
In southern project areas nearly 1,000,000 acres of public land could be devoted to the production of guayule to insure a domestic supply of natural rubber.
Guayule as a domestic source of rubber has been recognized by the Congress.
The Bureau, cooperating with the Guayule Emergency Rubber Project of the Forest Service, Department of Agriculture, has made test plots available on the Gila and All-American Canal projects.
Growths on these plots are encouraging, and additional land will be provided for more extensive tests during the winter of 1942–43.
If guayule proves suited to southwest areas, under irrigation, it is estimated that approximately 1,000,000 acres can be planted ultimately on the Gila project in Arizona and under the All-American and Coachella branch canals in California.
Under the Central Valley project studies begun this year the opportunities for growing guayule in the Central Valley of California are being explored.
It is estimated that 300,000 acres may be suited for guayule production.
An experiment in cryptostegia rubber production is being carried on by the United States Rubber Co. on land leased from the Bureau on the Yuma project in Arizona.
This work is still in an investigation stage.
At the close of the fiscal year Reclamation projects provided power and water to 4½ million persons in 15 Western States.
On irrigation projects served by Reclamation systems were 1,088,504 persons, on 86,181 farms and in the 291 tributary cities and towns (table 3).
The other 3½ million persons received power and domestic water.
In 40 years these projects have created taxable property values of a billion dollars and produced nearly 3 billion dollars (table 2) in crop values—nearly 4times Reclamation construction expenditures through June 30, 1942 (table 5).
Guards, floodlights, steel fences, and other protective measures against sabotage were placed about vital Reclamation structures such as large dams and power plants during the year.
Begun with foresight early in the fiscal year, the program of protection on 48 projects in operation or under construction was expanded materially upon news of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
On June 30 nearly 650 armed guards were patrolling their assigned beats.
On several projects troops aided in protection.
The War Department has ruled that responsibility for protecting vital Reclamation structures rests upon the Bureau, however.
Increase of the guard force to 800 was therefore proposed to the Bureau of the Budget for the fiscal year 1943.
Protective steps taken by the Bureau in addition to the guards were floating booms and steel nets in reservoirs to fend off boats and floating objects, prohibition of automobile parking on or near dams, and a close supervision of visitors, who are restricted to certain areas.
When the Army ordered the evacuation of persons of Japanese ancestry from critical areas on the Pacific coast, three Reclamation projects with undeveloped public land were selected by the War Relocation Authority as sites for relocation centers: The Tule Lake division of the Klamath project in California; the Gooding division of the Minidoka project in Idaho; and the Heart Mountain division of the Shoshone project in Wyoming.
Housing for 16,000 evacuees had been about completed on the Klamath project.
Plans were formed to subjugate and bring into production a possible maximum of 21,000 acres.
The Minidoka project was to provide 17,000 acres of land for irrigation and the Shoshone project 27,800 acres.
Products from these lands are expected to provide subsistence for the evacuees.
The Army Engineers construct the housing and community facilities at the centers.
The Bureau of Reclamation supervises the construction, by the evacuees, of the additional irrigation facilities on the projects.
Funds for the construction will be provided by the War Relocation Authority, which will operate the centers.
The evacuees acquire no rights in the land, a portion of which is expected to be opened for homestead settlement under the Reclamation law at the close of the war.
Consideration was being given to the employment of Japanese evacuees on construction work of Reclamation projects in place of Civilian Conservation Corps enrollees and Work Projects Administration workers.
Field work in connection with the 28 joint investigation problems of settler location on the Columbia Basin project in Washington is virtually complete.
Results of the field studies are being collated and integrated for application to the actual settlement phase of the project development.
Funds have been appropriated by Congress for starting construction of the irrigation system.
But construction cannot start until pending legislation authorizing the work is enacted, or repayment contracts are executed by the irrigation districts of the project.
The Bureau will be prepared to launch the settlement phase of this project, to extend ultimately to 1,200,000 acres, as soon as water becomes available for irrigation.
Steps were taken to initiate a program of predevelopment on lands of the Yuma Mesa division of the Gila project, Arizona, in conformity with a directive from the Senate Committee on Appropriations.
A committee was appointed to study the economic and agricultural aspects of the practical problems confronting settlers on the type of arid desert soil which characterizes mesa lands of this section of Arizona.
Through the active cooperation of the college of agriculture, University of Arizona, experience gained by that institution on its experimental plot on the Yuma Mesa has been used in guiding the program.
An area of 5,500 acres is expected to be leveled, put under ditch, and planted to alfalfa.
The program has the double purpose of conditioning the land for settler operation and of preparing an area for commercial plantings of guayule or other rubber-bearing plants, should they be required for war.
The experience gained in predevelopment of Yuma Mesa lands will be unique in its field.
No other similar large area has been irrigated in the West.
In order to assist future settlers in solving complex problems as to varieties of crops best adapted, the application and amount of irrigation water, settlement, and a host of similar subjects, the Bureau of Reclamation is advancing this work as rapidly as its authority will permit.
The rapidly converging problems of the agricultural and industrial economy of the Central Valley project area, associated with the construction of Shasta Dam, Friant Dam and other project works, are under intensive study by the Bureau and more than 50 cooperating agencies, Federal, State, and local.
The prime objective of the'Central Valley studies is to direct its vast potentialities as rapidly as possible into war work.
As these potentialities develop into realities of power for war industry, stabilized water supplies to lands now irrigated, more water for industrial plants, and new agricultural lands, the Bureau is working out the details of project administration.
As a second objective, the Central Valley studies will establish guideposts for the utilization of power, water, and land in a longrange program.
The Bureau of Reclamation brought to completion 5 of the 15 storage dams under construction on irrigation projects.
Three of the completed dams—Grand Coulee, Friant, and Marshall Ford— are the first, fourth, and fifth largest concrete dams in the world.
New electric generating equipment greatly increased the operating capacity of 28 plants on Reclamation projects.
Also erected were 274 miles of high-voltage transmission lines.
The storage capacity of Reclamation reservoirs at the end of the fiscal year was 61,610,283 acre-feet, an increase of 13,845,680 acrefeet—29 percent—over the July 1, 1941, capacity.
Active storage content, available for power, irrigation, domestic and industrial use, was 47½/ million acre-feet compared with 41½ million last year.
Statistically, the year showed the following additional construction: 260 miles of canals, 79 miles of drains, and 2,888 canal structures; 556 culverts, 48 flumes, 183 bridges; 259 miles of roads; 169 miles of telephone lines; 89 miles of pipe line; 13 tunnels of a total length of 38,655 feet; and 2 miles of railroad line.
Placed in dams and other structures were 3,668,333 cubic yards of concrete, 2,247,653 cubic yards of earth, and 736,591 cubic yards of rock.
Excavated in operations: 22,269,750 cubic yards of earth and rock.
Used for concrete in structures: 4,156,572 barrels of cement.
The following dams were completed during the year: Grand Coulee Dam (Columbia Basin project, Washington), 9,926,005 cubic yards in volume, a straight-gravity concrete structure creating a reservoir with an estimated storage capacity of 9,700,000 acre-feet; Friant Dam (crest height was reached but the spillway gates and outlet works were not yet installed), (Central Valley project, California), 2,045,860 cubic yards in volume, a straight-gravity concrete structure creating a reservoir of 520,550 acre-feet capacity; Vallecito Dam (Pine River project, Colorado), an earth and rock-fill structure with a reservoir capacity of 129,675 acre-feet; Marshall Ford (Mansfield) Dam (Colorado River project, Texas), 1,864,000 cubic yards in volume, a straightgravity concrete structure (with earth and rock-fill embankments of 1,715,000 cubic yards) with a reservoir capacity of 3,120,000 acrefeet; and Deer Creek Dam (Provo River project, Utah), an earth and rock-fill structure with a reservoir capacity of 150,000 acre-feet.
Two of the newly completed dams—Grand Coulee and Marshall Ford—have power plants.
When fully installed Grand Coulee's plant will have by far the largest installation in the world.
Marshall Ford was in full operation at the end of the year.
Construction work was being pushed on more new plants at Parker, Green Mountain, Shasta, Keswick, and Anderson Ranch Dams.
The capacity of Boulder Dam, bulwark of war power in the Pacific Southwest, was being increased at a tremendous rate.
As'the fiscal year closed a large generator was being tested for operation and another was being rushed to completion for operation in December 1942.
In addition, a third was ordered with high priority to supply a huge magnesium plant near the dam.
Construction proceeded on 6 projects of the water conservation and utilization program to stabilize agriculture and employment in the Great Plains and other semiarid areas to the westward most seriously affected by periodic droughts.
The irrigated and producing area of a seventh project, under construction but already in operation, was increased.
The 7 projects when completed will irrigate a total of 85,320 acres of land and benefit nearly a million acres of range.
Progress was retarded, however, by the imminent disbandment of the Civilian Conservation Corps, a large reduction in Work Projects Administration forces (both agencies contribute nonreimbursable labor to construction of water conservation and utilization projects) and restrictions on critical materials.
The need for this type of small project as a safeguard against drought and unemployment is unabated despite more rainfall in the Great Plains.
The Bureau carried on investigations of potential developments of this type for inclusion in its shelf of projects to provide employment and maintain established communities at the close of the war.
In the 40 years of its existence as a Federal agepcy the Bureau of Reclamation has placed in operation 45 irrigation projects.
In the construction of these wealth-producing projects the Bureau has built 166 dams; 28 power plants; 5,678 miles of bigh-voltage transmission lines; 372 pumping plants; 16,277 miles'of main canals and laterals; 5,010 miles of ditches and drains; and 208,931 canal structures.
It has built 14,255 bridges, 23,060 culverts and 6,475 flumes, and bored 380 tunnels of a combined length of 105 miles.
It has laid 2,264 miles of pipe and built 3,994miles of road.
The Bureau has excavated 603,115,119 cubic yards of earth and rock and has used 35,195,538 barrels of cement in building irrigation structures containing 30,834,046 cubic yards of concrete—enough to pave a standard two-lane highway around the world at the equator.
The crucible of Reclamation engineering work is the expertly manned laboratory of the Bureau at Denver, Colo.
Designs and materials for structures are submitted to intensive study and actual test by qualified engineers, some of international reputation.
This applied science not only has insured sound, lasting, low-cost structural work but has saved the Government millions of dollars.
Nearly $6,000,000 was saved in the cost of Grand Coulee Dam alone by laboratory analysis of available cements and refinements in structural design as a result of exhaustive laboratory research.
The final bucket of the 9,926,005 cubic yards of mass concrete was placed in Grand Coulee Dam on the Columbia River in Washington.
The pumping plant foundation and the left powerhouse were completed in December and work commenced on the right powerhouse.
Cooling of the mass concrete, in progress 5 years and requiring 2,000 miles of 1-inch pipe for circulating chilled river water, was completed in January.
The first big Grand Coulee generator went on the line October 1, the second on January 29, and the third on April 7.
Two stationservice generators started operating on March 22, 1941, because of the urgent need for power for Northwest defense industry.
Contracts were also awarded during the fiscal year for additional big machines.
In April, preparations began at Coulee for the installation of some generators originally purchased for the Shasta power plant on the Central Valley project.
This shift was an incisive war measure recommended by the War Production Board.
It makes additional power available to war industry practically a whole year sooner.
The generators were to start operating before the end of 1942.
Completed during the year was the work of mapping and classifying 2,000,000 acres below the dam, and the appraisal of 1,200,000 selected fertile acres which ultimately will be irrigated, creating homes and livelihood for a third of a million persons.
The reservoir reached spill height on June 1.
A tremendous cataract—larger in volume than Niagara Falls and twice as high— poured over the spillway down the face of the dam.
The event was hailed as a wartime baptism of Grand Coulee's important role in supplying power to the Pacific Northwest.
Migratory fish conservation work was continued successfully to save salmon and fighting steelhead trout of the Columbia which were blocked by Grand Coulee's massive wall of concrete.
Two hatcheries were in operation—at Leavenworth and at Entiat—under the direction of the Fish and Wildlife Service.
Completing the relocation of the Southern Pacific Railroad around the Shasta Reservoir, placing the final cubic yard of concrete in Friant Dam, and commencing work on Keswick Dam and power plant were outstanding events on the Central Valley project, California.
Shasta Dam, a concrete gravity structure, 602 feet high (second in height only to Boulder) with a crest length of 3,500 feet, was 66 percent completed.
More than half the estimated 6,230,000 cubic yards had been placed.
Concrete work on Shasta power plant was nearing completion.
Relocation of 36 miles of the main line of the Southern Pacific Railroad from the Shasta Reservoir site to a shorter new line outside the reservoir was completed in March.
The new line is 30 miles long and includes 12 tunnels with a total length of 3½ miles and 8 major bridges, including the highest double-decked bridge in the world, over the Pit River.
Migratory fish conservation, necessary for the protection of the salmon industry, was begun.
Fish will be caught in traps at Keswick Dam and Balls Ferry, and transported by tank trucks to the Coleman station on Battle Creek, which is under construction.
Work was started on Keswick Dam and power plant, 9 miles downstream from Shasta.
The structure will be operated to reregulate the variable releases from the Shasta power plant and generate power.
Friant Dam on the San Joaquin River reached crest height in June with the placing of 2,045,860 cubic yards of concrete.
The spillway gates and outlet valves were not installed, however, owing to lack of priorities.
The straight-gravity structure is 320 feet high with a crest length of 3,430 feet.
Work was continued during the year on the first section of the 37- mile Madera Canal, one of two main canals leading from Millerton Lake, the 520,550 acre-foot reservoir formed by Friant Dam.
Through a section of Contra Costa canal in the Sacramento-San Joaquin delta area domestic and industrial water was being supplied to the city of Pittsburg.
Boulder Dam on the Boulder Canyon project of Arizona-Nevada-California supplied increased war power for Pacific Southwest industry.
On October 9 another generator went on the line.
The October 9 installation made the Boulder plant the largest in the world.
At the rate of more than 40 feet a day workmen drilled through the granite backbone of the Rocky Mountains, holing out the 13-mile Continental Divide Tunnel on the Colorado-Big Thompson project, Colorado.
The tunnel will shunt Colorado River headwaters from the western to the eastern slope of the mountain.
It was more than 8 miles complete on June 30: nearly 5 miles were excavated during the preceding 12 months.
En route to sugar beet fields and other crops the irrigation water, after passing through the tunnel, will energize 6 power plants.
On the west slope work on Green Mountain storage dam and power plant proceeded with rapidity.
The power plant is due to begin operating in February 1943.
In December 1941 the diversion and outlet tunnel was started for Granby Dam and by June 30 was 62 percent complete.
Deer Creek Dam on the Provo River about 14 miles northeast of Provo, Utah, was completed in October 1941.
This storage dam is the second largest earth and rock-fill dam to be built by the Bureau.
It is 235 feet high, 1,256 feet long, 2,809,800 cubic yards in volume, with a storage reservoir capacity of 150,000 acre-feet.
Also completed was a 9-mile section of the 40-mile Salt Lake Aqueduct on which work is being pushed with all possible speed.
The aqueduct will provide domestic and industrial water for Salt Lake City.
A contract was awarded to enlarge the Weber-Provo Canal.
Operation of the All-American Canal—the country's largest irrigation canal, 242 feet in maximum width at water surface, 80 miles long extending from the Colorado River to the west end of the Imperial Valley, deep enough to float an ocean-going vessel-was extended throughout the Imperial Valley during the fiscal year.
On the 131-mile Coachella branch which stems from the All-American Canal, 81 miles are excavated; also structures along 47 miles are complete.
Excellent progress, with work 23 percent complete on June 30, was made during the fiscal year on Anderson Ranch dam and power plant, contract for which was awarded Avgust 1941.
Located about 20 miles northeast of Mountain Home, Idaho, on the South Fork of Boise River, the structure will be the highest earth and rock-fill dam in the world—444 feet from the lowest point in the foundation cut-off to crest.
A multiple-purpose development, the structure is also the largest dam of its type undertaken by the Bureau to date—9,600,000 cubic yards as designed.
The 500,000 acre-foot reservoir to be formed by the dam will provide a needed supplemental water supply for more than 300,000 acres of farm lands in the Boise Valley and control floods.
The power plant will offset deficiencies in southern Idaho and northern Utab.
Marshall Ford (Mansfield) Dam on the Colorado River, about 18 miles northwest of Austin, Tex., was completed in May.
It is a concrete structure of the straight-gravity type, 270 feet high, with an earth and rock-fill wing embankment at the left abutment 105 feet high and 4,910 feet long.
With an over-all length of 7,333 feet, the dam contains 3,579,000 cubic yards of concrete, earth, and rock.
The reservoir of 3,120,000 acre-foot capacity will provide flood control in addition to water for power generation.
The powerhouse and installation of electrical machinery at Parker Dam.
Arizona-California, neared completion.
Construction of the Phoenix terminal substation was also in progress.
On November 3 a contract was awarded for building a 123½-mile transmission line from Phoenix to Tucson, and a 50-mile line to connect the Gila substation at Blaisdell, Ariz., with drop No. 4 on the All-American canal in California.
Approximately 50 miles of the 99-mile Yakima Ridge canal on the Roza division of the Yakima project in Washington were completed on June 30.
Water for the irrigation of 6,630 acres was made available for the 1942 season.
On the Tucumcari project in New Mexico, earthwork and structures on a 25-mile section of the 75-mile Conchas main canal were completed, also three tunnels with a combined length of 3.8 miles.
On the Gila project in southwestern Arizona pumping plant No. 1 was completed in November.
Installation of three pumps was started in December.
Earthwork, structures and concrete lining for canals and laterals on unit No. 1 of the Yuma Mesa division were about half complete.
Canal and lateral construction was in progress on the Heart Mountain division of the Shoshone project, and the Riverton and Kendrick projects, all in Wyoming; the Owyhee project in Oregon-Idaho; and the Deschutes project in Oregon.
Work was continued on the Wickiup Dam and canal system on the Deschutes project, using Government and CCC forces.
The Cody-Thermopolis transmission line on the Shoshone project was completed in November.
The Modoc unit of the Tule Lake division of the Klamath project, Oregon-California, was under construction.
A contract was awarded in June for construction of Davis Dam and power plant on the Colorado River about 67 miles downstream from Boulder.
The dam will be an earth and rock-fill structure 200 feet high with a volume of 4,230,000 cubic yards, forming a reservoir of 1,940,000 acre-foot capacity.
Palisades Dam project on the Snake River in Idaho was authorized for supplemental storage and power generation under the 1939 Reclamation Project Act.
Changed plans necessitated reauthorization of the Rapid Valley project on Castle Creek in South Dakota.
Both projects include earth dams.
Engineering investigations have two major objectives in connection with the war program: First, to determine the best method of providing additional electric power to avert a shortage in vital production areas of the West.
Second, to prepare a reservoir of feasible irrigation and multiple-purpose projects on which construction can be quickly launched to provide employment and settlement opportunities at the close of the war.
Studies have been made of numerous hydroelectric power sites and steam plant installations.
The major purpose of the steam developments would be to firm the power from and balance the output of existing or proposed hydroelectric plants.
Albuquerque (steam) near Albuquerque, N. Mex.
Heart Mountain near Cody, Wyo.
Bismarek (steam) near Bismarck, N.Dak.
Klickitat near White Swan, Wash.
Kortes power near Casper, Wyo.
Brazos River near Waco, Tex.
Lower Big Horn near Hardin, Mont.
Bridge Canyon near Kingman, Ariz.
Mystie power near Reno, Nev.
Cabinet Gorge near Sandpoint, Idaho.
Newark (steam) near Newark, Calif.
Canyon Ferry near Helena, Mont.
Palisades Dam near Alpine, Idaho.
Debenger Gap near Medford, Oreg.
Pelton power near Redmond, Oreg.
Denison power near Denison, Tex.
Detroit power near Detroit, Oreg.
El Paso (steam) near El Paso, Tex.
Dewey Reservoir near Moab, Utah.
Pilot Knob near Yuma, Ariz.
Provo (steam) near Provo, Utah.
Sacramento (steam) near Sacramento, Calif.
Scriver Creek near Garden Valley, Idaho.
South Dakota (steam) near Mobridge, s.
Dak.
For a reserve of irrigation and multiple-purpose projects, more than 200 potential areas were under investigation.
The Bureau has been reviewing flood control reports of the War Department in numerous stream basins in California.
Eight reviews have been completed and 20 others are in progress.
This work has been carried out under the terms of the agreement of August 14, 1939, by which the Bureau of Reclamation, the War Department and the Department of Agriculture interchange information on multiplepurpose projects.
The National Resources Planning Board is the liaison agency.
Production of food, forage and fiber was the multiple goal of the operation and maintenance activities on the Bureau's irrigation projects.
Foresight pointed to the time when these agricultural commodities and especially foodstuffs might have as much effect on the outcome of the war as weapons.
Denver urged all projects to respond to the growing need for essential foodstuffs and livestock by bringing all irrigable land into production.
On some projects idle tracts were leased and brought into cultivation.
Larger areas of withdrawn classified land were leased for expanded stock raising.
The acreage planted in the spring of 1942 was an increase over 1941.
The educational program to assist farmers in making the most economical use of available water supplies, preventing soil erosion, eradicating noxious weeds and developing pasture acreages, made good progress.
Motion pictures, illustrated lectures, and instructive circulars were used.
Cooperative programs with agencies of the Department of Agriculture were continued.
The Farm Security Administration has been active in helping settlers on newly developed areas on several Reclamation projects.
Funds were transferred during the fiscal year 1942 for the employment of specialists of the Extension Service to assist farmers on certain Reclamation projects.
The Bureau took measures to aid in the Federal program for directing excess purchasing power of the water users into non-inflationary channels.
It urged retirement of outstanding debts, advance payment of Government obligations and the creation of a reserve fund to take care of post-war emergencies.
Projects were given information on the Government's policy with suggestions as to methods of cooperation.
Soil and moisture conservation operations were continued on lands under the Bureau's jurisdiction.
Work included hydrographic measurements and studies for determination of seepage losses in canals and laterals; studies of materials and demonstrations of their application as sealing agents to reduce seepage; prevention of water erosion and depletion of soil fertility; and construction of controlling structures and planting of vegetation on noncultivated land at locations suffering from extreme wind erosion.
Amendatory contracts under the Reclamation Project Act of 1939 to adjust annual repayments to paying ability were executed with 6 water users' organizations.
Contract drafts have been completed for 5 irrigation districts, and preliminary drafts for 9.
Preparatory studies were begun on contracts for 11 districts.
Under the act of 1939, reclassification of irrigable acreages has been completed on 6 projects, and was in progress on 2 others.
Relief by the extension of time for the payment of construction charges pursuant to Section 17b of the act of 1939, where water users are unable to pay such charges without great hardship, was greatly reduced.
Time extensions were granted to 10 districts by the Secretary of the Interior for charges accrued for the calendar year 1941.
The extensions amounted to $322,929 or less than 11 percent of charges due from all projects, a reduction of about 50 percent of the amount granted for 1940.
More prosperous conditions and improved water supplies increased the ability of the water users to pay their obligations.
Civilian Conservation Corps camp operations on Federal Reclamation projects were suspended late in the year in anticipation of the termination of CCC activities.
Originally organized under the Emergency Conservation Work program, the CCC established its first camp on a Reclamation project at Guernsey Reservoir in Wyoming in 1934.
On July 1, 1941 there were 43 camps.
During the past 7 years over 15,000 old wooden water control structures in canal systems were ripped out and replaced by permanent concrete structures; canals were straightened, strengthened, and rebuilt to grade and cross-section, and more than 100 miles were concrete-lined; 3,000 miles of operating roads were constructed along canal banks; dams of all types were examined, and rebuilt and repaired wherever necessary: 40,000 acres in reservoir areas were cleared of timber and debris; destructive rodents by tens of thousands were exterminated; and an aggressive campaign of weed control on Government lands was developed.
A major part of the construction on the Deschutes project, Oregon, was assigned to CCC forces.
They also undertook reservoir clearing jobs on Utah projects, at Shasta Dam in California, and Vallecito Dam in Colorado.
Facilities built by the CCC now provide recreation at Elephant Butte and Alamogordo Reservoirs in New Mexico, Guernsey, and Alcova in Wyoming, Minatare in Nebraska, Lahontan in Nevada, and Lake Walcott in Idaho.
CCC camps were assigned in 1942 to seven water conservation and utilization projects in the Dakotas, Nebraska, Montana, Wyoming, and Colorado, to build dams, canals and related structures.
The work of enrollees at camps on Reclamation projects trained thousands of truck drivers and tractor operators.
Elementary training in concrete and masonry construction, erection of frame structures and the use and repair of hand tools were standard on job courses.
Although CCC work on Reclamation projects was far from complete when suspended, the excellent condition of the reservoirs and canal systems brought about by CCC forces is high-quality insurance against interruptions in the growing of crops on irrigated land.
The organization of the Bureau of Reclamation in Washington and in the field was being molded to the war pattern.
Power plant construction, protection of structures against sabotage and preparation for irrigation expansion to meet war needs required an increase in personnel which more than offset military furloughs and transfers to other war agencies.
The number rose from 7,636 to 8,016.
The number of field offices remained at 57 but arrangements were being made to close several small ones.
Effective October 1941, the headquarters of the Operation and Maintenance division was transferred from Washington, D. C., to Denver, Colo.
The accounting division, except for the chief accountant and a staff of five, also was transferred to Denver—to be designated as the central accounting office.
The accounting division transfer was not officially effective until July 1, however, and was not reflected in the personnel employed as of June 30, 1942, in Washington, D. C.
152, including the Commissioner and Assistant Commissioner and employees detailed to other offices and agencies but carried on the Washington office salary roll.
Of the 7,864 Bureau employees in the field, 1,086 were in the field headquarters at Denver under supervision of the Chief Engineer and the General Supervisor of Operation and Maintenance and 6,778 were engaged in construction or operation and maintenance activities on the projects.
Fifty supervisory engineers report directly to the Chief Engineer in Denver; 22 project superintendents or other supervising officials report directly to the General Supervisor of Operation and Maintenance.
Both the Chief Engineer and General Supervisor report to the Commissioner, who is appointed by the President and serves under direction of the Secretary.
During the year 517 Bureau employees were given military furloughs.
The Bureau also released several hundred engineers for civilian transfers to the War Department, Navy Department, and other war agencies.
Accretions to the Reclamation fund created by the Reclamation Act of 1902 (table 4) brought the total cash available from this source in 40 vears to $213,173,921.75.
Collections—construction and operation and maintenance repayments, water rentals, power, etc.
Disbursements totaled $339,913,575.29, leaving a balance in the fund on June 30 of $14,526,809.25.
Construction repayment collections during the year totaled $2,327,886.42; operation and maintenance collections amounted to $1,253,099.50; and water rental, power, and other receipts of $2,983,- 596.66 were repaid to the Reclamation fund during the fiscal year 1942.
Construction expenditures for all projects during the year of $84,349,841.29 increased to $816,768,590.05 on June 30, 1942, the Federal investment, through the Bureau of Reclamation, in irrigation, power and multiple-purpose facilities in the West (table 5).
The emphasis in the fiscal year 1942 was on facilities which will bring in power for war industries.
Expenditures, however, were directed toward completion of facilities which will benefit irrigation directly through additional storage or which, through power revenues, will assist in the repayment of the cost of irrigation systems.
John S. Moore, Field Supervisor in Charge of Soil and Moisture Conservation, was appointed General Supervisor of Operation and Maintenance effective September 16, 1941, succeeding George O. Sanford, retired.
From Denver headquarters Mr. Moore supervises the activities of 15 projects which are operated in their entirety by the Bureau and 7 other projects which are Bureau-operated with respect to their dams, reservoirs and other reserve works.
His administration also extends to 25 projects and operations conducted by water users' organizations under contracts with the United States.
The Operation and Maintenance division deals with approximately 120 separate water users' organizations which are under contract with the United States.
Water Metitan s bb be.
URING the fifth year of its existence, the Bonneville Power Administration greatly increased its delivery of electric energy to war industries, public-owned distribution agencies, Government agencies and private utility enterprises.
The eneigy of the two great dams on the Columbia river—Grand Coulee and Bonneville—was utilized almost continuously on a 24-hour a day basis, and served as one of the aggressive war weapons of the United States.
At the outbreak of the war in December 1941 the Administration was already far along in its war production program and through advanced planning prepared to take on even greater war loads.
With the passage of the defense appropriation bill (H. R. 1055) in June 1940 and the lend-lease bill (H. R. 1776) in March 1941, the Administration early recognized that a tremendous inciease in the generating capacity of the Nation was necessary to cariy out a war production program.
Early in 1941 the Administration recommended acceleration of installations of generating units at both Bonneville and Grand Coulee Dams and the speeding up of construction of necessary facilities to transmit the additional power to load centers.
As a result additional generating units were authorized at Bonneville Dam and at Grand Coulee Dam.
In addition Shasta units were transferred from California for installation at Grand Coulee.
There was also appropriated to the Administration the sum of $48,858,500 for the fiscal year 1942 for the construction of transmission and substation facilities.
The declaration of war and decisions to locate many war loads east of the Cascades made necessary certain major changes in the Administration's 1942-43 program.
It nevertheless found the Administration in a position to meet the war strategy with changes only as to location of additional lines and substation facilities, thus justifying the basic planning of the system.
The impact of the war program in the area served by the Administration was reflected by war contiacts totaling $1,259,449,000, covering the manufacture of aircraft, ships, ordnance, military and naval supplies and the construction of barracks, docks and munition depots, which had been awarded in Oregon and Washington, between June 15.
1940, and December 31, 1941.
This figure does not include the purchase of raw materials such as aluminum, copper, zinc, lead and timber produced in the area.
The Columbia River projects, which had been assailed as,"white elephants in the wilderness" during their building, had become an integral part of the war might of the United States.
As the year ended the Administration operated a transmission system containing 1,748 miles of transmission lines and 37 substations.
The Administration acted to integrate all of the Northwest's power resources to provide greater security of service for the growing war load.
In addition to its interconnections with the public systems of Seattle.
Tacoma, Centralia and Grays Harbor, Wash., and Eugene and McMinnville.
Oreg.
An interconnection with the Portland General Electric Co. was continued through the year.
Public-owned agencies, established for the purpose of distributing Columbia River power without profit and entitled to preference in purchasing Columbia River power under the Bonneville Act, voluntarily postponed their plans for construction of new power facilities until after the war.
Those public-owned agencies which were already in business and receiving Columbia River power continued to make steady reductions in rates in the face of rising costs attendant on the war.
During the year public owneiship progiess was steady.
Eleven public agencies in Washington and Oregon were successful in purchasing either all or part of privately owned utility systems.
Two other Oregon Peoples' Utility Districts approved revenue bond issues for the purchase of existing utility properties for $885,000.
During the year, 17 public agencies executed new contracts and 9 public agencies revised existing contracts with the Bonneville Administration for the purchase of power.
The Administration's power deliveries to public agencies increased in the 1942 fiscal year.
Both from the standpoint of actual power deliveries and from the standpoint of "demand value" of contracts executed, the Administration's power sales showed heavy gains during the fiscal year 1942.
Of power actually delivered, war industries, comprising piincipally aluminum and shipbuilding, purchased 81.4 percent; private utility companies, 14.7 percent; public agencies, 3.8 percent; and Federal agencies, 0.1 percent.
Twenty-six new power contracts were executed during the year, bringing the cumulative total of signed contracts to 70.
By June 30, 1942, industrial power contracts and commitments dominated the Administration's marketing program and construction plans.
Industrial loads, all of them for war production, accounted directly for 92 percent of curent contracts and commitments for 899,920 kilowatts.
The economics of the Pacific Northwest and of the electro-process industries of the country had long indicated that industrial power sales would play a major role in the development of the Northwest region.
During 1942, the Bonneville Power Administration agreed to serve 5 of these 20 types of industry.
In addition to industries of the "electro" type, the war brought a new market for power in the development of a huge shipyard industry.
The Administration agreed to serve three shipyards in the Portland, Oreg.
Vancouver, Wash., district.
The three new yards required a total supply of power which would not have been available in the lower Columbia district had it not been for the Bonneville project.
New electric welding processes which require large blocks of electricity have reduced shipbuilding time from 250 days to as low as 10 days.
In order to provide a solid foundation for the new electro industries of the region and to insure their continuous operation, technicians of the Administration assisted materially in the establishment of other industries, the products of which are critically needed in the manufacture of the materials and chemicals produced because of the availability of Columbia River electric power.
A proposal for a coke plant sponsored by a local industrial group was prepared, presented and carried through to approval by war agencies with the assistance of the Administration.
Similarly, ferro-allovs manufacturers and calcium carbide producers were assisted in obtaining suitable grades of raw materials in Oregon and Washington.
Bonneville technicians also cooperated in the establishment and expansion of a plant in Utah, for the production of alumina from alunite ores and clays.
This was a significant step since inexhaustible deposits of aluminum bearing clays are available on the Bonneville transmission system in the Castle Rock region of Washington.
All'these activities were undertaken with the firm conviction that suitable low-cost raw materials could be made available from the area's natural resources for the metallurgical and electrochemical plants in the region to insure their continuity of operation.
These activities were carried on in conformance with the policy expressed by the Secretary of the Interior that the west is not only building for the war, but for its future and that of the Nation.
Every electro industry established during the past 4 years in the Pacific Northwest is part of a pattern of industrial development providing for the complete processing of Northwest resources from raw materials to consumer goods.
At the close of the year a total of 53 contracts between the Bonneville Administration and public utility districts, municipalities, cooperatives and Federal agencies had been executed.
Seventeen contracts with public agencies were executed during the 1942 fiscal year.
By the end of the year the cumulative total of Bonneville's public agency contracts included 17 with utility districts, 12 with municipalities, 19 with cooperatives, financed in all but one case by the Rural Electrification Administration, and 5 with Federal agencies.
Twenty-six of these fifty-three public agencies were distributing Columbia River power and nine cooperatives and two public utility districts were assured of Columbia River power almost immediately through interconnection agreements between the Bonneville Administration and privately owned utilities.
The public agency market for Columbia River power is largely dependent upon the ability of public-owned electric utilities to enter active business and become purchasers of power at wholesale.
For this reason the Administrator continued to accede to the wishes of the local utility districts, to serve as their official negotiator for the purchase of privately held utility systems.
One municipality, six cooperatives, and four public utility districts in Washington and Oregon reported success during the fiscal year in purchasing either all or part of privately owned utility systems.
The Skamania, Grant, Lewis, and Klickitat County Public Utility Districts, the city of Grand Coulee municipal system, the Orcas Light & Power Co. (REA), and the Stevens County Electric Cooperative each purchased all or part of privately owned utility systems in Washington.
In Oregon the Central Electric, Coos Electric, Lane County Electric, and North Douglas Electric Cooperatives all completed purchases of all or part of utility systems.
The Clatskanie Peoples' Utility District and the West Coast Power Co. reached agreement to purchase the company's Clatskanie division for $150,000 and the Central Lincoln District agreed to purchase the company's coast division for $735,000.
Revenue bonds were approved by voters in the two districts.
The Tillamook (Oreg.) Peoples' Utility District also reached an agreement to purchase practically all of the Mountain States Power Co. properties in Tillamook County for $625,000.
On June 30, 1942, 26 public agencies had been distributing Columbia River power for periods up to 36 months.
The success shown in their operations records was significant in its illustration of the possibilities which the public power market holds for the distribution of Columbia River power.
Administration operates makes public agencies and cooperatives the Administration's preferred market, the record of these first small public-owned utilities assumed double significance.
In 1939, 1940, and 1941, and the first half of 1942 the public electrie systems in Oregon and Washington made rate reductions amounting to more than $1,417,000.
As a result of these reductions power consumption increased, thus permitting gross revenues to remain stable.
Substantial reductions in rates have been made by the public systems of Canby, Cascade Locks, Columbia County REA, Cowlitz County PUD, Drain, Forest Grove, Ellensburg, Eugene, Grays Harbor PUD, Kittitas County PUD, Lewis County PUD, McMinnville, Monmouth, Nehalem Valley REA, Pacific County PUD, Seattle, Skamania PUD, Tacoma, Wahkiakum PUD, Centralia, Douglas Electric Cooperative, Salem Electric Cooperative, Columbia County REA, and the City of Grand Coulee.
The Clark County Public Utility district signed contracts during the fiscal year to supply Columbia River power to a Federal Public Housing Authority project at Vancouver, Wash., and to one war industry.
The housing project, which may be enlarged, included 1,000 permanent houses, 4,000 temporary houses, dormitories for 4,400 men, and 2,000 units of family apartments.
These contracts gave the district a greater load than that supplied by the two private utility companies serving Vancouver.
One of the private utilities offered to supply the load for the 1,000 permanent houses for about $84,600 a year.
The district is supplying this load for approximately $36,190.
Housing Authority officials say it is the lowest power rate it has received in the United States.
During the year Monmouth, Oreg.
The reduction brought McMinnville rates into line with the Bonneville standard resale rate and resulted in a further substantial saving to customers.
Typical of rural cooperative performance was the record of the Wasco Electric Cooperative in the mid-Columbia River valley.
During the first 12 months of its operation with Columbia River power, the Wasco cooperative brought electricity to 365 Wasco County farmers who had never before had access to electricity.
Nearly 340,000 kilowatt-hours were sold by the cooperative.
Revenues totaled nearly $10,000.
Cascade Locks (Oreg.) City Light, by June 1941, had reduced rates 31 percent, yet as a result of increased use of electricity by customers maintained its revenue from power sales.
Customers of this municipal system with their June 1942 bills received another reduction of 15 percent in commercial rates.
During the early months of the 1943 fiscal year the Administration expected to execute power sales contracts for the delivery of Bonneville and Grand Coulee energy to new war industrial plants, in addition to additional blocks of power to existing industrial customers.
The Administrator had made definite commitments during 1942 to supply these plants and additions.
It was expected that the full demand would be required by these plants before the middle of the 1943 fiscal year.
Contracts for these new plants were in advanced negotiation at the close of the fiscal year 1942.
Several of the plants were actually under construction.
Prospective power sales to war and other industries in the Northwest for the fiscal years beyond 1944 were, of course, progressively more difficult to estimate.
For this reason, in planning future generating and transmission capacities, the Administration endeavored to plan a power system of sufficient flexibility to supply not only normal load growth, but any fluctuations in load which might grow out of a war need extending over a number of years.
The Bonneville Administration's estimates of power sales from its own system for the vears 1943 through 1945 included four other classes of customers.
These were non-Federal electric utilities, public power agencies, military establishments, and war housing projects which, among them, were estimated to require a combined peak delivery of 576,200 kilowatts by 1945.
In conformance with Executive Order No.8455, the Bonneville Administration during the 1942 fiscal year revised its 6-year construction program in the light of new factors which developed during the year.
These new construction estimates of the Administration were conditioned by two fundamentals: First, the fact of the war need, and second, the fact that almost no other utility within the region has definite plans for expansion of its generating capacity.
These two factors meant that both normal growth in power consumption within the region and growth in power demand incident to a war of uncertain duration would have to be met in their entirety by the region's Federal power projects.
In planning future generation and transmission capacity, therefore, the Bonneville Administration planned to fill not only the needs of its own customers but the expanding needs of the region as well.
In the formulation of these plans three things became at once apparent: (1) that immediate material shortages would compel slight reductions in the over-all power consumption of the region in 1943 and 1944 below the Administration's estimates of June 1941, which were made contingent upon a recommended earlier installation of generators; (2) that beginning witb 1945 the region's power needs would increase, in an anuually expanding ratio, above the Administration's estimates of June 1941; and (3) even with the slight reduction of use in 1942 and 1943, additional generating capacity would be required in the Pacific Northwest over and above both existing and authorized capacity.
At the end of 1944, including units definitely approved for construction at the end of the 1942 fiscal year, the installed capacity of Bonneville and Grand Coulee Dams will be an insufficient total in view of the region's predictable needs.
Because of the potential power shortage in the region, the Bonneville Administrator jointly with the Bonneville Advisory Board, on February 10, 1942, urged that studies be completed on the 10 hydroelectric power projects in the Northwest which are known to be feasible of early construction.
In addition the Administrator recommended immediate construction of another dam on the Columbia River accessible to the existing Bonneville-Grand Coulee transmission system and to the larger load centers of the region.
It was further recommended that new generator installations should be scheduled immediately because of the time required to complete such installations.
Only in this way could an adequate supply of power be assured for what might be the critical years of 1946 to 1949.
The congressional appropriation of almost $23,000,000 received by the Bonneville Administration at the start of the 1942 fiscal year instituted a construction program almost twice that of the previous fiscal year.
This enlarged program was again increased by an additional appropriation of $30,000,000 in December 1941.
Since the war program required the use of critical materials for the production of war goods, the Administration's program was limited after December 7 to only those extensions of its system which contribute directly to the prosecution of the war.
As a result the Administration held in reserve a considerable portion of its construction funds at the end of the fiscal year pending determination of their detailed use.
The Administration placed 586 miles of transmission line and 530.050 kva of substation capacity in service during the fiscal year.
This represents an average of 2.3 miles of transmission line and 2,100 kva of substation capacity completed for each working day.
At the close of the fiscal year the Administration operated a transmission system containing 1,748 miles of transmission lines and 37 substations.
Design work was in progress on 13 substations and 19 major substation additions and on 8 transmission lines totaling 437.3 miles in length.
Construction was in progress on substations and additions and on transmission lines having a total length of 629.7 circuit miles.
As an operating utility the Bonneville Administration faced new operating problems affecting both the agency's management procedures and its electrical operations.
Until the last quarter of the fiscal year the organization was expanding to meet the immediate needs of building new transmission facilities to serve war industries.
During that period production increased markedly until it reached a processing peak of obligating over $7,000,000 per month.
New production records were attained and all commitmients to war industries fulfilled on schedule.
When the national shortage of copper, steel, aluminum and other metals became critical, however, these production levels began to decline until, during the latter quarter of the year, previously approved construction plans had to be postponed with a resultant tapering off in personnel and production.
Some copper, aluminum, steel and other critical materials originally ordered under proper priorities of the War Production Board could not be used under the curtailed program of construction later initiated by the same agency.
A complete inventory of these materials was made and submitted to the War Production Board, and arrangements made to make it available to other war agencies as needed.
Studies were continued during the year for the purpose of further simplifying the Administration's accounting methods.
Financial or general ledger accounts were kept in accordance with requirements of the General Accounting Office and cost accounts were kept in conformance with the Federal Power Commission's system.
Both the law and the power economics of the Pacific Northwest make it mandatory upon the Federal Government to provide sufficient generating and transmission facilities to supply the region's everincreasing power demands, whether for war or for peace.
In terms of immediate need, competent studies & forecast a serious shortage of power for war production by 1944 unless new power sources are immediately developed throughout the Nation.
In terms of post-war requirements, the Bonneville Administration's own studies 8 indicate a need of nearly 5 million kilowatts for normal use in the Northwest in 1949.
The Administration does not anticipate any power surplus when the war ends.
Generators now installed or being installed are worked to capacity.
Even the end of the war and the possible slow-down of a number of industrial plants would permit only a normal and necessary reserve of power and withdrawal of generating units for necessary reconditioning and replacement of worn parts.
More generating capacity must be developed.
Generator schedules for Bonneville and Grand Coulee in 1943 should be maintained and given the highest possible priority assistance.
Grand Coulee units, which have been redesigned for installation in the second powerhouse at Grand Coulee because of the transfer of Shasta Dam generators to the present powerhouse, should be completed in 1944.
This will require higher priorities for both the generators and the powerhouse than the A-2 priority now assigned them.
In the last 6 months of the fiscal vear 1942.
Finally, in order that the Pacific Northwest may contribute its share of new kilowatt capacity to be required for 1945, an immediate program should be adopted for development of an additional supply through the authorization of additional generators at Grand Coulee Dam and by construction of new hydro projects, such as those feasible of construction on the Columbia River.
1. Columbia River power should be sold to such industries and on such terms as help the long run and best development of regional resources.
2. The establishment of basic electro-process industries should be followed by fabricating and supply industries so as to support the operations of the basic industries and to provide products for regional consumption at lower costs than obtained at present.
3. New feasible industries should be financed and managed as far as possible by business men of the region.
4. Research on new processes to use electric power and raw materials in the region must be stimulated by governmental agencies and the results of such research should be freely available for use by independent enterprise.
5. The opposition of established industry to new competition from Northwest industry and the attempts of any industrial groups to control large amounts of Columbia River power must be prevented.
6. Within the region, new industries should be encouraged to decentralize in accordance with the advantages of locational factors and of the 'postage stamp" rate of the regional network.
7. Columbia River power should be sold on such terms as contribute to the conservation of other resources of the region and as prevent the destruction of scenic and recreational assets.
SUPERVISION exercised by the Division of Power over problems involved in the development of electrical energy by agencies under the jurisdiction of the Department of the Interior acquired even greater significance when the attack on Pearl Harbor transformed a condition of national emergency into a state of total war.
Already established by the Secretary of the Interior in April 1941 to promote efficient coordination of the Department's power production activities, the Division was able to gear its organization to aid in the prosecution of the war program without loss of time.
During the fiscal year the activities of the Division of Power were dedicated to the fulfillment of the purposes for which it was created, intensified by the war and the urgency that it has brought for the development of additional power for war uses and the achievement of the maximum utilization of existing plants for that purpose.
During the year the installed capacity of power projects under the jurisdiction of the Department was increased by more than 500,000 kilowatts.
Perhaps the most significant step in the power program during the year was the beginning of operations at Grand Coulee Dam on the Columbia River in Washington.
The Division has been constantly engaged in working for the construction of power projects which will require a minimum quantity of critical materials and can be completed with sufficient speed to warrant construction for the war program.
In the fall of 1941 a comprehensive program was worked out in conjunction with the Bureau of Reclamation and the Bureau of Mines to develop 1,480,000 kilowatts of additional electric generating capacity throughout the Western States and to use it for the extraction and beneficiation of strategic minerals.
This program included the more rapid completion and expansion of projects now under way and proposed immediate authorization and construction of projects still in the planning stage.
It also called for the integration of the Federal power resources by transmission networks.
The Division has aided in the preparation of specific proposals for the development and greater industrialization of the Western States insofar as the use of power facilities is involved.
The Department's work on programs relating to the furnishing of power for war involves continuing contact and cooperation with other Government agencies, particularly the War Production Board, the Reconstruction Finance Corporation and its subsidiaries, and the Federal Power Commission.
The Division serves as liaison between various agencies of the Department and the war agencies which are centralized in Washington.
This work of the Division has made it possible to continue the Department's policy of decentralizing the administration of its power activities.
Arrargements for the supply of power to the magnesium plant near Las Vegas, Nev., were worked out in conjunction with the Bureau of Reclamation, the allottees of Boulder power, and Defense Plant Corporation.
This transaction constitutes one of the largest single sales of power to a consumer ever consummated.
Negotiations extended over a period of 6 months and at the end of the year the principal agreement and three subordinate agreements were ready for execution.
Extensive negotiations with the War Production Board were, and still are, carried on to assure the maximum war use of the Columbia River power developments through the installation of additional generators at Bonneville and Grand Coulee Dams.
Authorization was secured for the irstallation of generators at Bonneville which will raise the capacity of the plant.
Authorization of more generators for Grand Coulee was also obtained, but when it became apparent that other war demands would delay the completion of these, the Division participated in an arrangement whereby generating units designed for the Central Valley project in California, and ready ahead of time through the foresight of the Bureau of Reclamation, were transferred to the Grand Coulee powerhouse to bring power to the new metallurgical and shipbuilding industries in the Northwest sooner than could otherwise have been done.
In seeking the full utilization of the Department's power resources the Division has sought to have war plants located on a sound basis, looking to lowering costs to war industries and the development of a balanced economy in the regions involved.
It has also endeavored, to the fullest extent commensurate with war production needs, to secure the location of plants which might continue to operate after the war and thereby contribute to the post-war readjustment and to safeguarding the Government's investment in the facilities.
Every effort has been made to effectuate the consolidation or pooling of thepower resources of the Department in such a manner as to secure the greatest efficiency and to make available maximum quantities of power in various areas.
The appropriate war agencies have been kept fully and promptly advised of the quantity and location of power available from the Department's projects and have otherwise had the benefit of complete information as to the capabilities of these projects.
Initial steps in the creation of a power pool in the State of Arizona had been taken at the end of the year.
Similarly, a plan for consolidation of the power resources of the Department in Wyoming was under study.
At the same time, the Division has insisted that power from the projects in the Department be sold to the war agencies and contractors at the lowest possible rates in order that the cost of war materials and supplies produced with the power might be held to the lowest feasible level.
Members of the Division's staff advised the Secretary of the Interior upon the power problems of the Island of Puerto Rico which became acute largely due to the stringency of the oil supply on the island.
In order to conserve oil and to make the utmost use of the power facilities, it became necessary that all of the facilities be completely integrated.
At the request of the Territorial Government and the Federal Works Agency, the Division assisted in formulating a program for the integration of the properties of the two utility companies which served a portion of the island with those owned by the Territorial Government for the wartime welfare of the island.
The city and county of San Francisco submitted to the voters in November 1941 the plan for acquisition of a distribution system which the Secretary of the Interior had found would comply with the terms of the Raker Act.
After the rejection of the charter amendment to put the plan into effect, a bill was introduced in Congress to relieve San Francisco of the statutory requirement to distribute solely for the publie benefit the power developed through the storage of water in Yosemite National Park.
Hearings were held by the Public Lands Committee of the House of Representatives at which the Department opposed any change in the conditions under which the use of national park lands had been granted by Congress.
At the conclusion of the hearings, the bill was not reported out of committee.
Thereafter, largely through the efforts of the Division and in accordance with the suggestion made by the Secretary of the Interior at the hearing upon the bill to amend the Raker Act, arrangements were worked out for an aluminum reduction plant to be constructed by the Defense Plant Corporation to utilize Hetch Hetchy power in accord with the Raker Act.
The Department, through the staff of the Division, and the Department of Justice then joined with the city in petitioning the Federal District Court for a further stay of the injunction against the city, to prevent loss of revenue to it pending completion of the plant.
The court granted an additional stay of 1 vear, within which time all Hetch Hetchy power will be disposed of through a direct sale to the Government-owned aluminum plant.
Even with two of its generating units temporarily transferred to Grand Coulee, the Central Valley Dams will supply one of the largest single blocks of power that will become available for war production.
Every effort has been made to expedite the completion of the Shasta and Keswick Dams and to secure the priorities for materials necessary to the generation of electric energy which the War Production Board has agreed is vitally needed in California.
An appropriation was obtained to begin the construction of transmission lines to bring the power to load centers and for engineering work on a steam standby station which is a necessary adjunct to the project if the full benefits of the power development are to be secured for the people of the area and if power is to contribute an appropriate share to the repayment of the cost of the entire project.
Comprehensive studies were under way, including studies relating to the marketing of the power and the rates at which it will be sold.
Emphasis is being placed particularly on the most effective use of the power for war purposes.
As the clearing house for the increasing body of complicated problems incident to the power activities of the Department, the Division of Power had handled matters relating to the Park Service, the Office of Indian Affairs, the Bureau of Reclamation and the Bonneville Power Administration.
All problems relating to the power projects of agencies of the Department, which are of sufficient importance to require the attention of the Secretary, have been cleared through the Division.
Further steps were taken to obtain a smooth-running procedural relationship between the Office of the Secretary and the agencies of the Department dealing with power, and to establish machinery which will permit coordination of the many matters which are of concern to more than one of the agencies of the Department.
The review of applications for the use of public lands by utility companies and other power agencies was continued.
A large number of contracts for the sale of power from reclamation projects was also studied and reviewed.
Suggestions were made from time to time looking toward the establishment of uniform policies and practices in power sales.
Further steps were taken for the effectuation of the policy of including in contracts with distributors of power at retail, provisions relating to the rates at which the power is to be resold, the aim being to prevent excessive profits from resale of Government power in the development of which public funds and public resources have been utilized.
A study of the wholesale rates for power generated on a number of projects in the Department was begun, in collaboration with the Bureau of Reclamation, to determine whether adjustments could be made in accordance with the Reclamation Project Act of 1939.
Preparations were made for the Division to appear for the several interested agencies of the Department of the Interior at a hearing before the Federal Power Commission on the application of the State of Arizona for a license to dam the Colorado River at Bridge Canyon.