M utterly from the regular departments of the Federal Government.
In our biggest job, that of mobilizing the Nation's natural resources for war, we have been tested for agility in improvising new tacties on the field as new challenges arose and old ones changed, for economic performance, and for resistance to that wartime itch for overcentralized authority.
In our secondary job, the prosecution of a minimized but inescapable conservation program, we have been tested for the plain gumption that is needed to know what to stop doing for the Nation's good as well as what to do, and for our ability to prepare for peace in time of war.
You will notice that our job is, by brief and limiting description, the same as it was last year.
That is because we assumed the job of marshaling the Nation's natural resources on the very day that Pearl Harbor was bombed.
But despite identical labels, this year's work has differed from last vear's.
It is one thing to conceive and launch a great new program, and a quite different thing to push the program through when the obstacles loom in front.
This has been the year of the big push, and execution has been a real test, as I have said.
From the very beginning, we have labored under a modern version of the ancient and vexatious command to make bricks without straw: we have had to do more, vastly more, with less and less to do it with.
The huge new war-production plants of the West depended upon us for more hydroelectric power to make more implements of war—more ships, more tanks, more planes.
The normal ways of increasing power, the installation of more generators, the construction of more dams and more transmission lines, were barred.
The construction materials that we needed were needed elsewhere.
There was a manpower shortage to contend against, and other obstacles were numerous and formidable.
We had to push for larger food crops, but to economize on scarce materials, many projects that might have extended irrigation were closed.
We had to promote the production of more fish and fishery products despite a shortage of fishermen and fishing equipment.
The world looked to the Federal ranges for more meat, but in order to concentrate on even more pressing war needs we had halted many activities that keep the ranges conditioned to fatten cattle.
Being denied the normal means of increasing the production of one resource after another, we turned to other means.
We narrowed our demands for materials with which to build for increased power to that which was essential to the national safety, then pleaded the case for that minimum convincingly enough to get it.
Or, we moved a generator from the plant for which it was intended to another plant at which it could produce power quicker or to better advantage.
Where larger catches of fish that are customary food were not possible, we persuaded the industry to land edible species which were taken with the usual catch, but formerly discarded because they were not in demand.
Then we persuaded consumers to accept these species as food.
The important thing is that, in the end, we did vastly increase production.
We doubled our output of hydroelectric power.
We increased our capacity to produce power by nearly half a million kilowatts.
The salmon pack in western Alaska will exceed last year's pack by about a million cases.
Despite our shattered range-improvement program, 85 million more pounds of meat were taken from the Federal range this year than last.
We can report progress also in our search after the ores from which industry extracts the metals that armies and navies fight with.
In response to the smelters' appeal for more zinc and copper for war, we revealed domestic reserves which contain 33 million pounds of copper, and 8 million tons of zine and zinc-lead ores.
We not only did these things and many others: we did them economically.
We cut this year's budget 10 million dollars below the amount which you approved, and voluntarily began operations on a budget that was 25 percent below the appropriation for the previous fiscal year.
During this fiscal year we prepared next year's budget, scaling it down to 66 percent below the appropriation for 1943.
We achieved many of our economies by abandoning activities which could be dispensed with temporarily, and by minimizing others which could be curtailed, if not eliminated.
I have heard that Federal departments never stop any activity until forced to do so, but we have suspended many operations aside from those that ceased for lack of men and materials.
The Grazing Service alone held in abeyance a score of range-improvement projects.
I have already reported the gains which particular bureaus made despite their curtailments.
Other bureaus and offices economized similarly, but contributed impressively to victory just the same.
To take up the question of our ability to prepare for the future, is to continue the discussion of these deferred projects.
We have consolidated them into a vast post-war work program, and we have kept the working plans for these projects up to date, ready to unfold and follow when the firing ceases.
We could launch much of our program within 30 days after victory.
On one type of project alone—power and irrigation construction—we could keep 480,000 demobilized service men and war workers gainfully employed for 3 years—225,000 of them at construction sites and 255,000 in the plants and factories that would provide materials for the developments.
When complete, this construction would open farm settlement opportunities to 165,000 families.
We have wrestled with the problem of keeping the huge new industrial plants of the Northwest busy when peace comes.
They have grown up on the low-cost power which we provide, and flourish now on war production, but what shall they manufacture and to whom shall they sell it when the last war contract is finished?
The Bonneville Power Administration, which distributes this power, searched diligently for the answer during the year with some encouraging results, and the search continues.
We have kept in mind the huge contribution which the United States will have to make to replenish the world's war-depleted larder.
Consequently we gave an important place in our post-war program to irrigation projects.
We are prepared to extend irrigation to 6,000,- 000 additional acres, and to supplement the water supply which now irrigates 9,000,000 acres, but which irrigates them inadequately.
Six of our bureaus have worked together, and continue to work, on a food production program that embraces extended irrigation, range conditioning for the production of more meat, various means of increasing the production of fertilizer, the further tapping of fish and wildlife resources, and much besides.
We also continued to prepare for the day, only decades—not centuries—in the distance, when our liquid fuel reserves will be depleted to dangerously low levels.
To cushion the shock of that inevitable occurrence, we furthered our experiments in extracting liquid fuels from coal and oil shales which are abundant.
Instead of centralizing authority, we tended generally toward decentralizing it.
In particular, we decentralized one of our most powerful and far-reaching functions; that of directing local use of Reclamation projects in accordance with Federal conservation policies.
We established six regional offices and appointed local directors to give order to the use of power and irrigation projects which are now in operation, and to recommend new projects in accordance with the varving needs and prevailing practices of their respective regions.
They are not free, of course, to override fundamental conservation policies; but they are granted "extensive latitude for independent action," in behalf of their communities within the ample premise of sound conservation policies.
I have not expressly mentioned the assistance which some of the bureaus and offices of the Department have given me in my capacity as Petroleum Administrator for War, Solid Fuels Administrator for War, and Fisheries Coordinator.
But that assistance has been considerable, and in some instances a Departmental bureau or office has been the mainstay of an extraordinary agency.
You will find a fuller account of the regular and special functions of the various bureaus in the remainder of this letter, but even that account will not be as detailed as usual because we have cut our report to half-length for economy's sake as we did last year.
Still, I think that vou will find enough detail to support my assertion that we have been through a severe test, and enough about the results to determine whether we have acquitted ourselves well or have failed.
The United States, manufacturing for war at a record-breaking pace, called for an unprecedented production of minerals.
In response the Bureau of Mines again took a leading part in finding new ore reserves and in devising methods for their rapid utilization in the multibillion-dollar production program of American industry.
Blast and open-hearth furnaces required more ore, more flux, and more coke.
The Bureau of Mines, with 32 years of progressive research in all fields of the mineral industries, found usable iron-ore deposits in 20 States to provide potential supplements to the iron reserves currently utilized; and intensified its experiments in the production of sponge iron as a possible substitute for steel scrap.
It promoted the production of high-quality coke of a uniform grade; it carried on extensive exploratory work to help the output of fluorspar for flux; and assisted in the greater recovery of ore from operating underground iron mines.
Smelters called for more ore for zinc and copper to provide weapons and equipment for war materials and lend-lease.
The Bureau's exploratory projects revealed additional domestic ore reserves containing 33,000,000 pounds of copper, and disclosed 8,000,000 tons of zine and zinc-lead ores, substantial amounts of which are being brought into production.
The demands for mercury inereased steadily and the Bureau sent its crews into seven mineral-bearing areas to increase the known reserves of cinnabar.
At the end of the year they had made known more than 600,000 tons of ore.
The production of 6,000 or 7,000 war planes monthly resulted in a heavier drain on domestic bauxite for aluminum.
In less than a year the Bureau's engineers had increased the known reserves of bauxite by more than 10,000,000 tons and, in addition, had charted some 100,- 000,000 tons of alumina-bearing clays for possible future use.
Such achievements by the Bureau were added to the long list of wartime accomplishments which date back 21/ years before Pearl Harbor when the Bureau, at the direction of the Congress, embarked on the long-needed inventory of the Nation's mineral wealth.
Because many of our domestic ores are lean in war metals or are difficult to beneficiate, the Bureau conducted studies to determine which low-grade ores could be processed advantageously, which could not be, and which method should be applied to those that could be processed.
Thousands of samples were analyzed.
By this rapid, authoritative system of reporting to industry the comparative amenability of various ores to processing, the Bureau helped to eliminate costly, chance-taking explorations of doubtful deposits.
Advancements were made in the methods of producing chromium, manganese, vanadium, cobalt, copper, nickel, molybdenum, tungsten, and other war metals from complex or low-grade ores.
When significant findings occurred, the war agencies and appropriate industries were advised regarding the Bureau's progress.
Simultaneously, the Bureau gained steadily in cooperative research projects, undertaken with industry, to solve specific problems.
Significant attainments resulted from exploratory, laboratory, and pilot plant work in nonmetallics.
Millions of radio insulators, made from domestic tales tested by the Bureau, were processed in a Bureau laboratory to aid the manufacture of essential communications equipment for the armed forces.
Exploratory crews proved that there were deposits of more than 1,000,000 tons of flake graphite, and the War Production Board approved the building or reconstruction of mills to process this domestic graphite.
In analyzing more than 23,000 samples of coal for Federal agencies, particularly the Army and Navy, whose purchases of solid fuels total several millions of tons annually, the Bureau saved considerable sums of money for the Government.
Coal-storage and coal-procurement problems were brought to the Bureau by industry and solutions were provided by experts who have had long experience in those fields.
One such problem involved the storage of 50,000,000 tons of coal on Great Lakes docks.
To help solve the fuel-oil shortage problem, the Bureau cooperated with an oil company in operating a boiler plant on colloidal fuel, a mixture of pulverized bituminous coal and bunker C fuel oil.
The Bureau embarked on laboratory-scale investigations of the indirect process for making synthetic gasoline, oil, and other petroleum products from coal and continued its research in the direct hydrogenation process.
Although the experiments in coal hydrogenation were launched by the Bureau in 1935, they came into greater prominence during the year because of recurring gasoline shortages for civilians, and because of the growing concern over the depletion of domestic petroleum reserves.
Symbolic of the Bureau's ability to dovetail its activities most effectively with the whole war program was its production of helium for Navy antisubmarine blimps, for meteorological ballons, and for a dozen other essential uses.
From its plant at Amarillo, Tex., and from a newer plant that was completed during the year,the Bureau pushed production of the lightweight, inert gas to about 25 times that of 1941.
To supply anticipated needs, the Bureau rushed the construction of three other helium plants in the Southwest, and drilled additional wells in the Texas helium field.
Every demand for this noninflammable gas by the armed services was met.
Demands for special lubricants and 100-octane gasoline for war planes, the need for more chemicals for explosives, and the heavier use of gaseous fuels by industry threw greater emphasis on the Bureau's special research in petroleum and natural gas.
Several new research programs were begun, and the Bureau's findings helped to increase the production of high-test gasoline, benzene, toluene, and other petroleum byproducts.
A mobile field laboratory was dispatched to petroleum fields to speed the flow of technical information to operators.
An extensive field-testing program was undertaken for a natural-gas reservoir in the South-Central area, and valuable assistance was given the Petroleum Administration for War by the Bureau through its studies of deep, high-pressure fields of the Gulf Coast.
The health, safety, and plant-security activities of the Bureau increased manyfold as Americans in war production worked closer together, for longer hours, and at higher speeds.
As the need to conserve manpower, equipment, and other plant facilities of the mineral industries became more pressing; safety experts in the Bureau gave first-aid training to more than 45,000 workers; and coal-mine inspectors visited more than 1,100 mines in the United States and Alaska to investigate health and safety practices and to counsel workers and officials on safer methods of performing their jobs so that the wartime production of coal would not lag.
Improvements in many mines resulted from this work and, despite a general increase in industrial accidents, numerous mines cut their accident toll while increasing their output.
In administering the wartime Federal Explosives Act, a barrier to sabotage, the Bureau investigated 9,000 stores of explosives, approved the granting of more than 350,000 licenses under the act, and investigated accidents in which nonmilitary explosives or their ingredients were involved.
Plant-security studies of the Bureau— another wartime assignmentwere conducted at nearly 2,000 mines and related facilities.
Many inspections were made jointly with Army officials.
The special confidential laboratory experiments and studies undertaken by the Bureau for the Army, the Navy, the Maritime Commission, and others closely associated with the prosecution of the war, increased in number and scope.
Typical experiments inquired into the characteristics of explosives, metallic and nonmetallic dusts, gases, vapors, and liquids, the safety qualities of protective equipment, and the prevention of accidents involving the handling of inflammable materials.
Assisting such war ageneies as the War Production Board, the joint War Production Board, Office of Price Administration Quota Committee, the War Manpower Commission, and the Solid Fuels Administration for War, the Bureau completed many special studies which provided these offices with up-to-date interpretative facts regarding the production, consumption, uses, stocks, and other information involving mineral commodities.
The Bureau provided specific information about war minerals to hundreds of inquirers each month.
The Geological Survey also did much of its work in response to industry's insatiable demand for mineral commodities.
War-production demanded not only more of the materials that are ordinarily recognized as of strategic importance; it also demanded more of many minerals, the supply of which had hitherto been considered adequate, because deposits were abundant, or because demand had been slight.
The Geological Survey was especially qualified to evaluate the sources of needed minerals in the United States and in other American Republies.
Its Geologic Branch was on a war footing, acting as a fact-finding organization and as an adviser on policies of mineral production and problems of reserves.
During the year more than 700 mines and mineral areas were examined, and reports of the findings were made to various Federal agencies, in response to their direct requests in many instances.
In addition to studying mineral deposits, the Survey assigned about 30 geologists to help meet the increasing demands of the War and Navy departments for geologic information about strategic foreign areas.
This information was for use in military engineering abroad.
One of the outstanding activities of the Geological Survey was (and still is) the compilation by its Alaskan Branch of aeronautical charts which were needed by the Army air forces.
In the course of that work trimetrogon planimetric mapping covering 2,146,000 square miles of strategic areas, widely distributed throughout the world, was completed.
The high quality of the product and the speed and the low cost at which it was made available established records.
This remarkable performance was made possible through the utilization of the Survey's engineers who are skilled in rapid reconnaissance field surveys and who have trained a special force of assistance to use the unique methods and special apparatus that have been designed largely by the staff of the Alaskan Branch.
In this work they have had the close cooperation of members of the Survey's map reproduction plant in the use of all its facilities.
The Topographie Branch emphasized the making of maps within the strategic areas outlined by the War Department.
Of 241 quadrangles for which maps were published during the year, 160 were within the strategic areas; of 228 quadrangles for which mapping was completed, 166 were in such areas, and of 456 quadrangles for which work was in various stages of progress at the close of the year, 416 were in strategic areas.
These figures indicate the importance of the Geological Survey's part in the military program.
The aerophotogrammetric unit at Clarendon, Va., with increased production facilities and working two shifts, continued to accomplish a large amount of photogrammetric mapping.
This unit also maintained a central laboratory for designing, testing, repairing, and adjusting all types of special optical and mechanical equipment which was needed for stereophotogrammetrie work.
Up to the present time, 47.1 percent of the total area of the United States has been covered by adequate topographic maps which the Survey has produced.
The strategic importance of water in all human activities is accented when those activities are directed to the waging of war.
Military establishments and war production plants are scattered from coast to coast, and many problems of water supply confronted them.
The geologists, engineers, and chemists of the Geological Survey helped to solve them, and contributed effectively in a surprising number of other ways to the success of the war.
The information on water accumulated in the routine reports of the Water Resources Branch affords a dependable basis for the wise planning of water projects related to the war.
This information was adapted to local problems and was supplemented by many special investigations.
During the year more than 4,000 special reports on water were made to military agencies; to industrialists and engineers engaged on war contracts; to municipalities that sought to enlarge their water-supply systems in order to serve new concentrations of population; to producers of power who were obliged to build or enlarge power plants to increase the supply of electric energy for use in manufacturing establishments; and to irrigation engineers who were assisted by this data in expanding irrigation systems for the production of more food.
The water experts of the Survey have served also with the armed forces, either as officers or civilians, in obtaining water for the armies in the field, where a wide variety of new situations extending even up to the fighting lines must be met quickly and surely.
Increased demand for minerals, fertilizers, chemicals, water power, and petroleum accelerated prospecting on the public domain and on certain Indian lands which are under the supervision of the Geological Survey.
The conservation and development work fostered by the Survey includes surveys and investigations of water and mineral sources and supervision of certain phases of mineral and power production on these lands.
The production of coal, sodium, potassium salts, phosphate rock, and crude oil from public lands during 1943 was substantially greater than in 1942.
On Indian lands an increased production of coal, vanadium and petroleum, and the working of substantially lower-grade lead and zinc ores were reported.
Continuing efforts, though hampered by manpower shortages, are affording enhanced consultive activities, accelerated field investigations and studies, particularly in regard to secondary recovery methods and an increased contribution of minerals from federally supervised land in support of the war program.
Wherever American troops have fought this year they were better equipped and better fed as a result of the contribution of the Bureau of Reclamation.
Guns, tanks, and planes were produced in large quantities in plants that operated on power which was generated on Reclamation projects.
Much of this matériel was carried to fronts on which it was sorely needed in ships that were built with power from the same source.
Troops and civilians at home and abroad were provided with food that was grown on land which Reclamation projects irrigated.
Industrial and military concentrations tapped Federal reservoirs for homes and plants and barracks.
The Bureau's continued expansion of power production for war was impressive.
The output of 30 plants on 19 projects—9½ billion kilowatt-hours—was double the 1942 total.
The production was equivalent to that of all plants in the 11 far Western States 20 years ago.
Nearly half a million additional kilowatts were developed during the year.
The capacity is now 1,850,000 kilowatts—twice the Bureau's pre-Pearl Harbor installation.
Most of 900,000 kilowatts that were made available in a 2-year period were installed 2 to 10 years ahead of schedule, at Boulder, Grand Coulee, and Parker Dams.
These giant structures were erected in time of peace as part of the Department's far-sighted poliey in planning for construction to keep ahead of the inevitable industrial expansion of the West.
In terms of war equipment, the new generators potentially are capable of providing annually the power required to build 30 large battleships, or to construct more than 11,000"Flying Fortresses".
The production of essential foods on the 4,000,000 acres of land that were irrigated by Reclamation facilities in 15 Western States, also contributed toward victory.
From these highly-productive areas, once desert wastes, came enough beans to provide an annual supply for nearly 22 million persons, enough potatoes for 13 millions, (through alfalfa fed to beef and dairy herds) enough beef for 41/ millions, and milk for 33% millions.
Even greater harvests of food crops may be expected this fall as the result of the response of irrigation farmers to the plea of the War Food Administration to shift from the less essential to the more important war crops.
Spring plantings of potatoes this vear were 441/ percent greater than last year, and the bean acreage is 36 percent higher.
The 1943 cultivated acreage on Reclamation projects is expected to be the largest ever reported.
The huge irrigated yields are materially reducing cross-country shipments of certain foods, chiefly processed meat and dairy products, on which the West has always been dependent.
This releases transportation facilities for other war activities and saves large quantities of fuel and equipment required to operate trains and trucks.
The gross value of crops produced on the land that was served by Reclamation works during the calendar year 1942 was $272,048,516, an increase of more than 45 percent over the 1941 value and a 100-percent gain over 1940.
Conditions beyond the control of the Bureau prevented it from carrying out in full the power program outlined in 1941.
This called for increasing the installed capacity to more than 3,300,000 kilowatts by 1945-46.
Studies showed that the industrial demand of the West would absorb the output of the additional generators.
The War Production Board, however, took the position that critical materials were more urgently needed in other war activities, and stop-construction orders were issued against the 865,600 kilowatts.
The Bureau was permitted to proceed with installations which will increase the capacity of its projects to 2,436,000 kilowatts by October 1944—placing more generating equipment under its control than that of any other agency Federal or private.
In order to grow more food for war, I directed the Bureau, in 1942, to prepare an irrigation construction program which would enable the West to increase agricultural production.
But the requirement for the critical materials for other purposes was regarded as more acute, and nearly all irrigation construction was halted later in the calendar year 1942.
In the war food program which was submitted to the Department of Agriculture in March 1943, the Bureau indicated that by 1947 it could extend irrigation services to more than 9,000,000 additional acres, provided that critical materials, manpower, and funds were provided promptly.
The program was modified later to embrace projects which would produce a more immediate effect through services to 2,000,000 additional acres by 1943.
By June 30, clearances had been given by the War Production Board on projects aggregating less than 300,000 acres.
Committees of the Congress joined in recommending irrigation construction as a means of advancing war food production, and additional substantial appropriations of funds were made.
In addition to power and irrigation services, supplemental municipal and industrial water was provided for cities, military concentrations and industries in areas served by Reclamation projects.
In all, nearly 5,000,000 persons live in western regions which look to the Bureau for these services.
At the end of the fiscal year, 71 projects were in operation, under construction, or authorized.
Fifty-two of these were for generating power or supplying water for irrigation and other beneficial uses.
On or near practically every Reclamation project are air bases, other military establishments, and war industries, including aluminum and magnesium plants, airplane factories, shipyards, chemical and other manufactories.
The storage capacity of 81 reservoirs reached a new high, or more than 64 million acre-feet of water during the year.
The active storage content on June 30 was 43½ million acre-feet.
While war contributions were of paramount importance during the year, attention also was focused on the problems due to arise in the post-war era.
In anticipation that the Nation will be called upon to provide employment and settlement opportunities for the returning service men and war workers, the Bureau continued to assemble an impressive list of projects for construction during the post-war period.
Ineluded in this program will be projects on which work has been halted or retarded during the war and about 50 others for which blueprints will be ready when the victory is won.
It is estimated that 3 billion man-hours of work could be provided if this publie works program can be carried out in full.
It would extend irrigation to 15,000,- 000 acres of land, and would provide 3,300,000 new kilowatts of power for war industries converted to the production of peacetime necessities.
I have already referred to the decentralization plan for this Bureau as an indication of our willingness to disperse authority.
I also expect that this reorganization, which provides for four major branches with offices at Denver in addition to the six regional offices, to increase our efficiency.
The greater number of interrelated and complex problems arising from the construction and operation of the many Reclamation projects for irrigation, power, and related purposes, makes a closer coordination of Bureau activities essential, particularly during the war.
For the long-term program, I believe that the decentralization will bring the people of the West into closer contact with the many functions which affeet so vitally the future of a third of the Nation's land area.
The difficult task of assuring an adequate supply of coal for war industries and for essential civilian uses was carried out successfully during the past fiscal year and steps were taken to provide, so far as possible, assurances of a continued supply in the future.
Pursuant to your Executive order of April 19, 1943, directing me, as Secretary of the Interior, to serve as Solid Fuels Administrator for War, I established this office, which absorbed the personnel, records, and programs of the Office of Solid Fuels Coordinator for War which I had established under your instructions in 1941.
The present office, under its broad authority, has been carrying out your Executive order of May 1, 1943, directing the Secretary of the Interior to take possession and control in behalf of the Government, of coal mines in which work stoppages had halted or were threatening production.
The Administration continued to serve as the Government's agent in operating the mines during the next 2 months, through periods of new work stoppages, until I transferred the operation of the mines to the Coal Mines Administration.
The Solid Fuels Adminisration and its predecessor, the Office of Solid Fuels Coordinator, has worked in close cooperation with the coal industry.
Through its Solid Fuels Advisory War Council it has initiated and coordinated policies to the end that the Nation's coal supply might be adequate.
Coal production in 1942 totaled an estimated 580,000,000 tons of bituminous and about 60,000,000 tons of anthracite, thus exceeding estimate of the vear's requirements.
The surplus bituminous coal went into stock piles, as a result of a coal stocking campaign which was carried on by the Office in the summer months of 1942.
These stock piles reached record heights during November and, although they had dropped as the result of rising consumption, prevented many production losses by industry during the coal mine strikes in May and June.
To meet the estimated requirements of 665,000,000 tons for 1943, I prevailed upon mine operators and labor to agree to lift their former 35-hour workweek limitation.
The 42-hour workweek which was adopted made possible the maintenance of production despite continued losses of mine manpower to the armed services and to other industries.
The necessity for coal to meet the requirements of consumers who had converted from fuel oil to coal, to provide transportation for coal to areas where requirements had been greatly changed by the war, to supply anthracite for Eastern States, to make sure that vital mines were not handicapped by lack of equipment and repair parts created complex problems.
Many of the problems continue.
Manpower shortages will make it difficult to compensate for production stoppages which occurred during the strikes.
Conservation in the use of coal may help to restore the balance.
If shortages should develop, the Administration will put into effect programs to assure an equitable distribution of the available coal.
Although there had been furnished impressive evidence that the Bituminous Coal Act was an essential part of the Nation's war machinery and that its mechanisms were efficient and workable for the peacetime stabilization of the chronically distressed bituminous coal industry, the Congress permitted it to expire automatically August 23,1943.
The opposition to the act which developed at a hearing before the Ways and Means Committee from June 21 to July 5, 1943, on several bills for its extension was based on contentions that the act established a system of regulation which is inimical to free competition and constituted an undesirable precedent for the establishment of post-war business regimentation.
It was urged that it had been rendered unnecessary by the establishment of the Office of Solid Fuels Administration for War and by improved conditions in the industry, and that the strikes in the coal mines because of the inability of management and labor in the bituminous coal industry to reach a wage agreement demonstrated that the act had not stabilized the industry.
While the opponents of an extension of the act admitted that the industry had achieved stability with respect to costs and realization during the period that the act was in operation, they insisted that this rehabilitation was attributable solely to wartime expansion in demand for coal.
While contending that the act had nothing to do with the rehabilitation of the industry, opponents also argued that it had resulted in exorbitantly higher prices to the consumer of bituminous coal.
Abundant testimony was placed before the committee to show that the Coal Act did not provide an alien or novel system of regulation, but only precluded unfair methods of competition, and did not fix the price at which coal had to be sold, but only fixed the price below which coal could not legally be sold.
It was demonstrated that the bituminous coal industry is composed of between 12,000 and 17,000 scattered business units and, like agriculture, has been consistently depressed because of the typical inability of the diffused industry to regulate a situation in which a relatively few strong buyers can play against each other numerous necessitous sellers.
No testimony was offered before the committee to substantiate a belief that the Bituminous Coal Act would form a pattern for post-wear business regulations any more than the Act to Regulate Commerce in 1887 has furnished an all-time business regulatory pattern.
The record showed that the functions of the Secretary of the Interior as Solid Fuels Administrator for War were different from those of the Department under the Bituminous Coal Act, and that the existence of a sellers' market did not dispense with the necessity of maintaining the stabilization factors provided by the act.
It was indicated clearly that the inability of labor and management in the coal industry to negotiate a wage agreement consonant with the law could not be attributed in any way to the Coal Act because nothing in the act compelled either labor or management to reach an agreement.
However, the removal of the assurance to the industry of the recovery of the cost of production furnished by the minimum price structure under the act might well make the execution of a wage agreement by the operators and mine workers more difficult.
For approximately 15 years prior to the enactment of the Bituminous Coal Act, the industry's yearly losses ran to millions of dollars.
The Bituminous Coal Division offered the committee a precise statistical measurement to show that this loss continued through 1940 until October 1, the date on which minimum prices under the act became effective.
There was no indication that the situation was improving.
However, during the final 3 months of 1940, with minimum prices effective, the industry as a whole operated at a slight profit, and has continued to operate with a profit since.
This rehabilitation cannot be attributed to exorbitant prices which have been prejudicial to the consumers, since the minimum prices in existence during the hearing on the extension of the act were only 29 cents a ton higher than the average depressed going prices of 1939.
It has been shown that the bituminous coal industry, because of the economic conditions that I have mentioned, has suffered distress for many years during periods which were unrelated to general periods of prosperity or depression.
Between 1923 and 1929, generally prosperous years in other industries, 3,274 mines with an annual production of 1,000 tons or more each went out of business.
While the impetus of the industrial activity due to the war may temporarily relieve these conditions, there is no foundation for believing that it will remedy them permanently.
Unquestionably, instability in the coal industry remains, with the expiration of the act, an unsolved economic problem.
The stabilization of the industry through the operation of the minimum price structure accounts for its ability to meet unprecedented wartime coal requirements.
The Bituminous Coal Division, the administrative agency of the act, accomplished many specific wartime tasks for many agencies.
This work either will have to be abandoned or accomplished by agencies established at additional expense.
The Bonneville Power Administration was able to more than double its power deliveries to war industry during the year, despite shortages of material and construction curtailments.
Only through the availability of power produced at Bonneville and Grand Coulee Dams was it possible for plants in the Northwest to produce ferroalloys for the armoring of thousands of tanks, and aluminum for airplanes.
These two great dams were also the source of motive power and electric heat for the high speed production of merchant and naval vessels, and for the manufacture of many other essentials of war.
These things were made possible only because your administration steadfastly pursued its policy of developing the Northwest power resources well in advance of need.
This policy enabled the Bonneville Power Administration to meet continuous new calls for industrial production with a power supply and transmission facilities from the great dams on the Columbia River.
Bonneville and Grand Coulee Dams were first put under construction 10 years ago.
At that time, and during the years following 1933, many persons expressed skepticism as to the need for the Columbia River development.
But if this development had been required to wait until Pearl Harbor, the Nation's war production program would have been held back for years and there would now be.few war industries of consequence in the Pacific Northwest.
In addition to tremendous power deliveries directly into war industry over the Federal transmission system, the Administration supplied nearly 1,000,000,000 kilowatt-hours to the systems of 10 other major Northwest utilities, thus enabling them to meet their war commitments.
The formation of this wartime power pool, one of the largest in the country, was in conformance with the instructions of your administration, as set forth in the War Production Board's Order L-94.
One utility system, interconnected with Bonneville, depended upon the Administration for virtually one-third of its entire power requirements.
When it is considered that this utility system serves ône of the most congested and productive war industrial centers on the Pacifie Coast, the significance of the Bonneville Power Administration's contribution to the Northwest power pool becomes at once apparent.
In wartime, weapons, not dollars, are of first importance.
Yet it is worthy of note that, during the fiscal year 1943, the Bonneville Power Administration collected more than $11,000,000 in revenue, from the sale of power.
This monev, more than double the revenue of the preceding fiscal vear, brought the total collections by the Administration for the first 5 years of its existence to more than $18,000,000.
The work of the Division of Power has related primarily to the supervision of the power operating activities of the Department in a manner intended to assure that the greatest possible amount of power was made available in the war program, efficiently and economically.
The work of the Division has increased greatly, due to the large increase in the power output of the plants of the Department and to our shift of emphasis from construction to operating and marketing.
The Division consulted and worked with other agencies of the Government, such as the War Production Board, the Federal Power Commission, and the Defense Plan Corporation, in connection with a number of national and local power problems.
An order of the Secretary was issued outlining somewhat more in detail the basic duties of the Division and formalizing certain of the procedural relationships between the Division and the power operating agencies.
The Division staff reviewed a large number of power contracts, most of the effort being required on important and complicated arrangements to provide power for war.
Members of the staff also participated with the operating agencies in the negotiation of a number of the more difficult war contracts for the sale of power from the plants of the Department.
In cooperation with the operating agencies and other bureaus of the Department, a number of studies of special matters relating to rates, markets, cost allocations, legal problems and other questions were made or initiated.
Wartime dislocations overhung the lives of the 213 million inhabitants of the Territories and island possessions of the United States to a greater extent than in any area of comparable size in all of the mainland.
These Territorial areas—Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands—are geographically isolated from the mainland from which they import most of their supplies.
Each is a busy, strategic base for a part of our global war activities, and, as such, has encountered intensified health, housing, education, and food supply problems.
To solve these complex problems more effectively, the Division was reorganized during the past year and has worked closely with other agencies of the Government.
The strenuous efforts of the Insular and Federal Governments averted the food supply disaster which appeared inevitable in Puerto Rico in the summer of 1942.
For a considerable period basic foods, such as rice and codfish, had been virtually unobtainable.
Wholesalers and retailers were threatened with bankruptey as the result of the depletion of stocks.
By September of that year food supplies in the island reached bedrock.
In October the Civilian Food and Supply Unit was established in this Division.
An agreement was reached between the Department of the Interior and the Department of Agriculture under which the Food Distribution Administration, acting for this Department, began procuring foodstuffs on the mainland for distribution by sale to wholesalers in Puerto Rico in accordance with estimates of requirement set up by this Department.
The War Shipping Administration allocates varying amounts of tonnage to the Puerto Rican route monthly, and the Interior Department assigns space on these vessels for the food and general supplies needed in the Island.
Since the time the Government took over, food shipments have increased regularly and a stock pile has been built up which would supply the basic needs of the island should there ever be a recurrence of heavy submarine warfare in that area or should there again be a shortage of shipping for any other reason.
For the 9-months' period from October 1, 1942, when the Government took over, through June 1943, the average monthly shipments of foodstuffs, grains, feeds and fertilizers compared favorably with those for the three normal years, 1939 through 1941, when, according to Department of Commerce figures, 24,777 tons of foodstuffs were shipped monthly.
Although there have been shortages from time to time, just as in this country, the basic products have been supplied since the Government assumed responsibility, and the people of the island have been provided with essentials.
Satisfactory shipments have also been made of the general supplies which industry has needed.
The Department of the Interior also allocates the shipping space for these supplies.
At the end of the fiscal year arrangements had been made, in accordance with original plans, to turn back the procurement of certain nonessential food items to the regular pre-war channels.
All procurement and shipping arrangements for Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands have been considered jointly, because the areas are close together and because their supply situations are similar.
Inasmuch as it was realized that any increase in production of islandgrown foodstuffs would help relieve the shipping situation and contribute toward insular self-sufficiency, the Department of the Interior, the Department of Agriculture, and the Insular Government assumed responsibility for local planting programs.
The Food Distribution Administration distributed the seed to farmers in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands at half price and guaranteed a price for home-grown foodstuffs.
Under this program the production of rice in Puerto Rico for 1942–43 increased 69.8 percent over 1939–40; legumes increased 26.4 percent; corn 56 percent; and starchy vegetables 22.2 percent.
In the development of the campaign to drive the Japanese from North America, the Aleutian Islands, previously almost uninhabited, have become centers of activity.
As the tide of military action has swept westward, the military bases on the Alaska mainland, originally constructed for defensive purposes, have been used increasingly as depots for the transshipment of men and matériel to the islands.
Alaska has seen such activity as never before encountered in her entire history.
Here, too, large shipments of civilian food and other supplies were made in the fall of 1942.
These have been properly warehoused at a number of strategic points in the Territory and replenished from time to time with fresh supplies.
Labor turn-over in Alaska has been heavy with the various Army, Navy, and civilian activities competing for the available supply.
Despite the labor shortage and the fact that the winter was one of the most severe in the history of the Territory, the Alaska Railroad maintained its schedules almost without interruption and kept the flow of supplies and military equipment moving steadily.
In August this Department and the Department of Justice opened negotiations with the War Department for the restoration of civil jurisdiction in the Territory of Hawaii.
An agreement was reached and on February 8, 1943, various specific functions were officially returned to civilian control.
Civilian defense in Hawaii continues to maintain a high degree of efficiency.
Due to the foresight of your national conservation policies, the General Land Office was able to furnish from the public lands under its jurisdiction a noteworthy share of the natural resources which were needed to fight the war and to meet the needs of the United Nations.
More than 5,000,000 acres of the public domain were made available for troop training, aerial bombing and gunnery practice, and other military purposes during 1943, bringing the grand total of public land areas devoted to such war use to approximately 15,775,000 acres— an acreage equal to that of several States.
In addition, more than 70,800,000 acres were withdrawn so as to assure the development and production of strategic war minerals, while smaller tracts were furnished for defense plant sites and to provide housing sites for war workers.
An increase by about one-third in the amount of gasoline and butane produced from the public domain was recorded during the year, and other mineral products were secured for military use under the system of publie domain leases which were maintained by the General Land Office.
Despite the heavy volume of its war work, this branch of the Department maintained its position as one of the few executive agencies in the Government which operates at a profit to the Federal Treasury.
Returning $4.25 for every $1 spent, its cash receipts were $9,758,066.48 as compared to $2,304,416.39 in expenditures.
Incidentally, 1943 was the second consecutive year in which total cash receipts exceeded $9,000,000.
A great advancement was made in the program of your Administration for sustained-yield forest management on 2,500,000 acres of Oregon and California revested railroad grant lands, which will assure a permanent economic stability for communities and industries in that lumber-producing region in western Oregon.
At the same time, efficient operations within the limitations of prudent conservation practices made possible' the furnishing of approximately 417,000,000 board-feet of lumber for war use—lumber which ranged from heavy structural timber to airplane woods.
These timber sales from the area produced nearly $1,000,000 for the 18 Oregon counties in which the lands are situated.
Contributing its share to the supply of food, fiber and leather for fighting men and civilians, the public domain during 1943 afforded an opportunity for the grazing of livestock on 11,978,000 acres of land outside of Federal grazing districts in the continental United States and in Alaska.
During the year, 14 separate agencies of the Federal Government, including the Army and Navy, called upon the General Land Office for accurate field surveys of land areas under their jurisdiction.
The development of production of potash and sodium in California, magnesium in Nevada, coal in Utah and Wyoming, and timber in Oregon, was facilitated by these cadastral engineering activities.
The investigation of more than 4,000 mining claims to clear sites, selected by the Army and Navy for military purposes, was made by the Branch of Field Examination during 1943, the first full year of its operation as an agency of the General Land Office following its reorganization from its prior status as a departmental division.
In addition to its administrative responsibilities under the more than 5,000 public land laws, the General Land Office met many requests from Federal agencies and from the Congress for expert cooperation in the consideration of problems concerning the national land pattern.
The Office of Land Utilization, established pursuant to departmental Order No. 1466, dated April 15, 1940, to coordinate the landmanagement functions of the Department, continued its operations under the policy which prevailed during 1942, namely, a concentration upon activities which were either directly or indirectly related to the prosecution of the war.
Immediate results have been increases in timber production, improvement in western range lands and the maintenance of a high degree of protection against subversive action, forest and range fire hazards, and sabotage seeking to disrupt or destroy strategic production facilities on lands under the jurisdiction of the Department.
Under date of March 12, 1943, the Office of Land Utilization was charged with the additional responsibilty of representing the Department in all matters pertaining to the operation of work camps for conscientious objectors which operated on lands under its jurisdiction.
At the end of the fiscal year there were 10 camps assigned to the National Park Service, the Fish and Wildlife Service, the General Land Office, and the Bureau of Reclamation.
The work of these camps was revised during the year with a view to placing more emphasis on forest and range protection, thus materially strengthening the protection organizations of the Department.
The conservation principles which are fostered under the Taylor Grazing Act of 1934 paid a dividend in 1943 amounting to 85 million more pounds of meat than was produced on the Federal range during the previous year.
In reaching this new high figure, totaling nearly 900 million pounds of beef and mutton, the "free range" of earlier days becaine an important cog in the Nation's war machine.
In addition, several million acres of public land were used by the armed forces for training in aviation, bombing, chemical warfare, and as proving/grounds.
In giving priority to war activities, the Grazing Service constructed 782 miles of access roads leading to 30 different types of strategic war minerals.
As a result, thousands of additional tons of war materials were delivered to production lines on time.
One road in Colorado made possible a tenfold increase in the delivery of vanadium ore to reduction plants.
One thousand, six hundred and fifty-five war emergeney licenses were granted for 271,245 livestock, enabling producers to put more meat on the market.
A total of 10,777,793 livestock, owned by 22,019 stockmen in 10 States, used the range under regular licenses and permits.
The labor and other war conditions influenced a trend toward more cattle and less sheep.
This change influenced the increased tonnage of livestock products that reached trade channels during the year.
The National Park Service, reduced to a wartime staff, devoted itself to its primary function of protecting and maintaining the national parks and monuments, and at the same time made definite contributions to the war program.
Threats to invade the National Park System for logging, mining, and grazing purposes grew imminent during the year.
Several concessions were made to further the prosecution of the war, but the basie policy that all reasonable alternatives must be exhausted, and that the demand must be based upon critical necessity rather than upon convenience, was applied in all cases in order to prevent any unnecessary sacrifice of distinctive park values.
On this basis, 403 permits were issued to military and war production agencies for the use of areas and facilities in the National Park System.
It is estimated that it would have cost more than $30,000,000 to have purchased these lands, structures, and services had the National Park Service not been able to make them available.
It is impossible, moreover, to evaluate the benefits derived by more than 1,655,720 members of the armed forces who visited the parks during the fiscal year.
There is ample justification for keeping the national parks and monuments open to those members of the armed forces who are being given opportunities to visit the inspiring American scenes which symbolize the greatness cf the nation which they are fighting to preserve.
Although it was necessary to discourage civilian use of transportation resources involved in long-distance travel, approximately 6,572,- 500 civilians were able to visit the national parks.
The National Park System involves less than three-fourths of one percent of the total land area of the United States.
Yet it is preserving for this and future generations some of the finest aspects of America.
Under conditions of total war, this concept of conservation has faced the most critical challenge of its history.
We have had to reaffirm basic park principles, and to ward off those who, under the cloak of patriotism, would reopen old issues as to the exploitation of the lands which Congress and the American people have decreed should be held inviolate for the national good.
Some sacrifices in the common cause have been necessary, and more may be inevitable.
But I believe that we can emerge from the war without departing from the basic idea that the national parks and monuments must be protected as symbols of our national greatness.
For an organization whose activities ordinarily are geared to the ways of peace, the Fish and Wildlife Service is very much in the war.
The largest of all the National wildlife refuges under its administration, the Aleutian Island chain, was the scene of hostilities.
The Pribilof Islands, to the northward, summer home of the famous and valuable fur seal herd, which for years has been so successfully managed by the Service, were evacuated at the request of the military authorities, and the native populations and administrative personnel are maintaining themselves in leased quarters on the mainland.
Requested photographs, and information on the meteorology and typography of Alaskan and Siberian areas were furnished to war agencies.
Military operations and other factors incident to the war in the region prevented full scale fishing.
Consequently there was a considerable decrease in the halibut, herring, and salmon catches, despite every effort to achieve the maximum utilization that would be consistent with the conservation of the fisheries resource.
More than one and three-quarter million acres on 35 Federal wildlife refuges in the United States have been assigned to the military forces for training areas.
Eleven of the larger vessels in the Service's fleet were transferred for war purposes.
Service personnel assisted the War and Navy Departments in patrol operations for the security of Alaska, in the detection of subversive activities, in the appraisal and acquisition of lands, and in the search for warmth-conserving and windproof furs and fabrics.
We helped to salvage the hides of deer and elk that were killed by hunters, and to control rats which destroy clothing and food supplies.
We have worked to suppress plague-carrying field rodents, a menace to the health of troops, and to eliminate burrowing species that create hazards on air felds.
Food and fur production was intensified on wildlife refuges and on Indian lands.
Fish propagation was directed toward the multiplication of the more valuable food species and toward increased cooperation in the farm fish-pond program.
Campaigns to establish fisheries and to increase the catch were carried on in the Caribbean area and in the South Pacific.
The utilization of previously little exploited fishes and other aquatic food animals was developed.
Additional sources of vitamin oils and of seaweed gums that could be substituted for agar were investigated.
We helped to increase the production of domestie rabbit meat for human food by amassing information on rabbit raising that reached every State.
To conserve tin, the use of nonmetallic containers for fisheries products and increased employment of dehydration and salting were recommended.
To overcome a fiber shortage, substitutes for manila were brought to the attention of the fisheries industry.
Predator and rodent control was vigorously prosecuted to safeguard essential food and fiber resources by protecting sheep, goats, calves, and poultry from the onslaughts of predatory animals and by protecting.
Law enforcement activities for the protection of both terrestrial and aquatic wildlife were continued with good results.
Research, though carried on at a reduced rate, was never more important to the proper functioning of the administrative and regulatory operations of the Service.
The Office of the Coordinator of Fisheries was established by Executive order on July 21, 1942, to meet a critical situation which had been created by the impact of war upon the fishing industry.
Although fishery products—high-protein foods, industrial and therapeutic oils, and animal feeding meals—were needed more urgently than ever before, the industry had been so hampered by the requisitioning of vessels, the loss of men, shortages of gear, and by security regulations in coastal waters so that the catch of fish and shellfish in 1942 declined about a billion pounds as compared with 1941.
To the Coordinator of Fisheries was assigned the task of giving the industry direct and immediate assistance in its problems of manpower, equipment, and operation.
Our goal was to increase the yield of urgently needed fishery products and to eliminate waste and inefficiency in the utilization of these essentials.
After a year of effort, marked by notable cooperation from the industry, we are able to record definite progress.
For example, the pack of salmon in western Alaska this season is running ahead of last year's by about a million cases.
A considerable number of boats, no longer urgently needed by the military services, have been returned for use in fishing, and still more are coming back.
Comprehensive programs of operation, designed to make the best possible use of available materials and manpower, have been adopted for two of the major fisheries—salmon and pilchard.
New products have been developed for civilian consumption or Government purchase by means of utilizing species formerly neglected.
The condition of the fishing industry is definitely improved as compared with last year.
We are confident that the coming months will bring a further advance.
Eighteen thousand Indians are in the armed forces.
They serve with distinction on every front where our Army and Navy are engaged.
These Indian warriors come from families comprising fewer than a half million men, women, and children of aboriginal descent in all of the United States and Alaska.
Considering their small numbers, I think that equally significant are the Indians' contributions at home.
The Indians are mainly direct war producers, either as the owners of large herds of cattle, as owners of land which grows food crops, as owners of forests and vital mineral deposits, or as a ready source of labor in our less populous West.
Few Indians work solely for civilians.
In 1942, the Indians produced and sold food enough to sustain for 1 year 200,000 of the best-fed soldiers in the world, or an army of 6 million men for 1 week.
Notable was their production of beef cattle and sheep, totaling almost $13,000,000 in 1942 as compared with top livestock sales of $4,000,000 during the last war.
I am unable to measure the Indians' production as wage workers off of the reservations, but I am glad to report that employers who have employed Indians for the first time during this war have combed the reservations seeking additional Indian labor.
It would not have been possible to maintain production on Indian lands in the fall of 1942 and in the spring of 1943, if Indian women and children had not willingly replaced men.
Indian women are cooking in lumber camps and assisting in cattle round-ups.
They dip sheep on the Navajo Reservation, drive trucks, repair heavy machinery, and at the Menominee Indian Mills, Wisconsin, women are working in the sawmills and in the forests for the first time in Menominee history.
We are indebted to an 89-year-old Navaja woman, Mrs. Rose Daniels, for a new variety of lima bean which is on the market for the first time this year.
In her odd little seed house on a Utah Reservation, Mrs. Daniels had carefully saved from her garden years ago three lima beans.
Horticulturists have developed from her beans a new seed especially suited to a short growing season of a high dry country such as eastern Utah, Wyoming, and South Dakota.
Although ministering to the needs of only a small segment of our population, the Indian Service occupies a unique position among Federal agencies in that it is concerned with all the problems of a community.
Its progress in helping a native people to rehabilitate themselves is becoming known abroad.
King Ibn Saud, who is anxious to improve the economic lot of his people, invited the Chief Engineer of the Indian Service and a representative of the Department of Agriculture who had worked on soil problems on the Navajo Reservation to comprise a U. S. Agricultural Mission to Saudi Arabia.
This mission was completed this year and its recommendations were published by the State Department in English and in Arabic for the use of the King and his advisers.
South American countries have large Indian populations, and 11 distinguished Latin-American educators and soil technicians representing 8 countries spent from 3 weeks to 4 months studying administration on U. S. Indian Reservations this year.
That is our record in brief.
It reveals that our performance has been imperfect as all things human are.
But I am proud enough of it to let it stand without a word of special pleading.
I prefer to discuss instead a topic that is not dwelt upon enough: the source from which we derive such strength and wisdom as this report may show us to.
We derive it from the nation—from the whole people.
The Senators and Representatives who speak for the people whose resources we marshal speak directly to me.
The record of congressional inquiries into our performance and our intentions fill a book or several books each year.
Of the forty-odd thousand employees of the Department, fewer than 5,000 are here in Washington.
The others are in the field and are in touch constantly with the people whose resources we manage.
Our bureaus and offices habitually formulate policy in consultation with spokesmen for the people who are affected by our policies, and many policies are also carried out in cooperation with representatives of the people.
We are not remote from the working and fighting fronts of this world.
Our key men are on the scene of action in all the fields into which our jurisdiction extends.
Our geologists work beside officers of the armed forces day after day to guide the high command at the front in taking military advantage of the geological peculiarities beneath the ground on which battles are about to be fought.
Our water specialists work with other officers to reveal the secrets of water resources in countries that are marked for occupation.
Some of our scientists go directly to the front in the course of this work.
In a word, so many of us are in such close and constant touch with other persons who work and fight for this Nation; we draw so much of our strength from them, and we are so conditioned by their thinking, that I hesitate to set it down unqualifiedly that we regulate anything.
If we do, then it is certain that in doing so we discharge our part of this Government's obligation to govern with the consent of the governed.
We regulate with the consent of the regulated.
I am as proud of that as I am of all the accomplishment that is vouched for in this Report.
Secretary of the Interior.
HE Bureau of Mines in 1943 geared every activity to help supply the United States and her Allies with the mineral commodities essential to victory on all fronts.
Constant modification in the Nation's production schedule, arising from alterations in military logistics and strategy and from other war developments, called for frequent variations in planning and performance by the Bureau and the other war agencies of the Government.
As the relative criticalness of the various metals and minerals changed, the Bureau shifted the emphasis of its research and exploratory work rapidly to meet each new challenge.
Coincident with its intensive and far-flung search for deposits of unexploited mineral ores within the United States, the Bureau directed all efforts in its metallurgical laboratories and testing plants toward finding means and processes for utilizing such domestic ores and for developing wider uses of known raw materials in war industries.
As a result, hitherto unknown deposits of critical and essential minerals were brought into production, many abandoned mines were enabled to resume operations, and the way was cleared for considerable expansion by a number of going operations.
The urgent necessity of carrying out the program with maximum speed made more apparent the lack of an inventory of the Nation's mineral resources at the outbreak of the war.
The exploratory program of the Bureau, conducted in part in cooperation with the Geological Survey, made known substantial additional reserves of bauxite, alumina-bearing clays, and the ores of zinc, iron, copper, vanadium, tungsten, mercury, and other critical and essential minerals, as well as ores of tantalum, magnesia, fluorspar, graphite, celestite, and corundum.
Thousands of samples of ore from deposits explored by the Bureau, and specimens submitted by prospectors, geologists, mining engineers, and property owners were analyzed by the Bureau, and many of these were subjected to beneficiation tests to determine their possibilities for use in the war.
The Bureau's engineers and metallurgists successfully completed ore-dressing tests on various ores including several of copper, zinc, and beryllium, demonstrated practical methods for mining and recovering manganese-bearing nodules from the extensive manganiferous deposits of South Dakota, developed a process for treating complex lead-copper-cobalt-nickel ore, advanced the Bureau's pioneering studies in the production of high-purity chromium metal by electrolysis, and carried on, among many other experiments, production of sponge iron from various ferrous ores.
On the basis of the results from its extensive laboratory and field work, the Bureau presented to war-production officials several suggested development programs for aluminum, zinc, lead, copper, manganese, mercury, fluorspar, magnesium, tungsten, and other necessary materials.
The difficulty and necessary delay in obtaining essential equipment for its laboratories and pilot plants prevented the Bureau from pursuing its research, testing, and development work with the speed it had set as desirable.
Such problems were particularly acute in connection with the projects on sponge iron, alumina, zinc, and electrolytic manganese and various other electrometallurgical processes.
The Bureau made available the results of its investigative and research work to the other war agencies of the Government and to private industries with which it had worked cooperatively on numerous projects.
The integration of research work was expedited by the establishment during the year of the Interdepartmental Mineral Resources Operating Committee in which the Bureau of Mines represented the Department of the Interior.
The Bureau's knowledge and long experience in fuel testing and research enabled it to make valuable contributions to the war program.
As industry pushed to new production levels coincidental with the temporary curtailments of coal output and increasing transportation difficulties, the Bureau was called upon to advise on the substitution of available coals near their points of consumption and on the substitution of coals more suitable to the needs of the particular consumer.
Technical advice also was furnished to facilitate production of high-quality metallurgical coke of uniform grade for the steel industry.
The Bureau's sampling and testing of millions of tons of coal purchased by the Army and Navy and by other Government agencies, as well as its testing and analysis of boiler water samples, increased the efficiency and power of federally operated plants and at the same time saved the taxpayers many thousands of dollars.
To demonstrate possible saving of fuel oil by industry, particularly in the critical-shortage area of the East, Bureau engineers, in cooperation with private industry, successfully demonstrated the use of colloidal fuel (a mixture of pulverized coal and petroleum) in a commercial boiler.
In solving many problems involving the storage of coal and suitability of various different types of equipment, the Bureau worked in close cooperation with the Solid Fuels Administration for War.
The Bureau's long-range studies in petroleum and natural gas proved helpful to industries seeking new production records in special lubricants, high-octane aviation gasoline, materials for synthetic rubber, and similar essential byproducts.
Petroleum engineers undertook special tasks at the request of the Petroleum Administration for War and provided data which aided production programs.
The Bureau's new petroleum field office at Franklin, Pa., completed nine projects destined to aid the output of aircraft lubricants from the Appalachian region.
Production of helium continued upward as the Bureau began operation of a new plant and speeded the construction of several others to assure sufficient supplies of the noninflammable gas for the Army and Navy and for essential civilian uses.
The Bureau's research on explosives, begun a number of years ago in order to promote the development of safer blasting materials and methods for the mineral industries, increased in volume and in range in response to the call from war agencies for information regarding the characteristics of various explosives.
The Bureau's work included examination of high explosives, analyses of seized military devices, studies of the ingredients of Army ammunition, and development of methods of handling explosives and pyrotechnics.
In connection with its studies on nonmilitary explosives for use by industry, the Bureau made hundreds of gallery and control tests as well as chemical examinations and brought the total of permissible explosives on its list to 180.
Health, safety, and plant-security programs of the Bureau became more significant during the year as the problem of industry in protecting life and property in the face of accelerated production, longer hours, and labor and equipment shortages became acute.
Trained engineers inspected nearly 2,000 mines and related plants under the Facility Security Program of the Government and advised operators how to guard against sabotage, subversive activities, accidents, and ther occurrences which might interrupt war production.
Federal oal-mine inspectors visited mines in virtually all of the coal-mining States and Alaska and reported the adoption of many Federal recommendations resulting in safer working conditions and increased working efficiency.
Safety engineers and instructors trained almost 50,000 employees of the mining and affiliated industries in first aid.
Bureau personal participated in mine rescue and recovery work following disasters.
The difficulties in recruiting, for its wartime mine safety and security program, the skilled personnel trained along the high standards fixed by the Bureau handicapped the regular mine safety program inasmuch as the safety engineers experienced in Bureau methods and procedure had to be recalled from their established duties to train the new inspectors and investigators and to form the nucleus for the emergency services.
The Bureau's staff, nevertheless, was successful in conveying to mine operators and to the State departments of mining the Bureau's policies of service and helpfulness to industry and succeeded surprisingly well in obtaining industry's cooperation.
The few criticisms were far outnumbered by commendations.
In administering the Federal Explosives Act to prevent sabotage and other unlawful use of explosives, the Bureau authorized the granting of more than 350,000 Federal explosive licenses to reliable persons and firms.
Special investigators of the Bureau, working closely with Army and Navy representatives and other war agencies, inspected and issued reports on more than 9,000 stores of explosives.
Facts provided by the Bureau regarding the domestic and foreign production, consumption, and uses of minerals helped the war agencies in their allocation, financing, production, and procurement programs.
Almost daily, special studies were undertaken by com.
The Bureau's services in this respect included the collection, analy sis, and publication of current and periodical data on all mineral commodities, studies of special economic phases growing out of th war, information on some foreign developments, and general over-al studies of the mineral situation.
Bulletins, technical papers, Minerals Yearbook chapters, and hand books, all concerned with some phase of the war program, were pub lished by the Bureau, but some curtailment in the printing of usefu information was necessitated because of the lack of funds.
Seven ne film subjects were added by private industry to the Bureau's librar of free educational motion pictures.
These films were shown on hundreds of occasions to classes of the Army, and Navy, and in the civilian industrial training program.
To assure more effective handling of local problems of the mineral industries and to coordinate all phases of the mineral exploration and metallurgical work in the field, the Bureau established, at the close of the previous fiscal vear, three regional offices: A Western Region with headquarters at Salt Lake City, Utah, a Central Region with headquarters at Rolla, Mo., and an Eastern Region at College Park, Md., with a regional engineer in charge of each.
In each of the principal mining States or groups of States, an examination office with an engineer in charge was established under the supervision of the regional engineers.
Such further decentralization by the Bureau has given it a better understanding of the problems of mining interests in all parts of the Nation, and has encouraged local initiative in mineral development.
Realizing that the United States, despite the United Nations' repeated victories over Axis forces, must be equipped for a war of indefinite duration, the Bureau of Mines rounded out the 1943 fiscal year by planning an even more intensified program to help speed the domestic production of war minerals.
The Bureau received from the Congress approval for the most extensive exploratory program ever attempted—a Nation-wide search for coking coal, quartz crystals, copper, asbestos, zinc, mercury, tungsten, vanadium, beryllium and other pegmatite minerals, corundum, molybdenum, manganese, tin, iron, chromium, bismuth, and nickel and other minerals for which a critical need may arise.
The Bureau's chemists, metallurgists, engineers, and other technologists will continue to seek and devise the best methods of utilizing known and newly proved reserves of minerals, including those which prove too complex or low grade to exploit by the usual methods.
As in the past year, all work of the Bureau will continue on a war footing.
Projects which do not directly or indirectly assist the output of war materials or the security of production facilities and manpower have not been considered in the Bureau's program for the 1944 fiscal year.
A large-scale pilot plant at Laramie, Wyo., is to be completed and studies are to begin in the solid-fuel reduction method of making sponge iron which can be utilized to supplement the steel scrap necessary for the operation of steel mills.
Exploratory programs and metallurgical research are to be intensified to help increase the production of alumina for aluminum from domestic materials, including low-grade bauxite, clays, alunite, and other alumina-bearing minerals.
Research in reduction of zinc ores by the use of methane gas will be carried out in a pilot plant nearing completion at Rolla, Mo.
Three new plants will be completed in the Southwest to increase the supply of helium by producing each month many additional millions of cubic feet of this essential gas for war purposes.
New and expanded research involving petroleum, natural gas, and various types of coal will be undertaken for the twofold purpose of facilitating production and conserving the Nation's wealth of liquid, solid, and gaseous fuels.
The Bureau also will explore methods for recovering and utilizing anthracite "fines" and will organize a Nationwide campaign to promote more efficient industrial uses of fuels.
The highly successful cooperative campaign carried on with the coke and steel industries to increase pig-iron production for war by improving the quality of coke is to be continued.
Various suggested research programs to assist the anthracite industry will be investigated, such as the prevention of floods, increased production by mechanical mining, industrial fuel oil and oil from anthracite, prevention of fires, protection of equipment from acid mine waters, and the use of anthracite as a fuel for portable gas producers.
The Bureau's long-established policy of gathering and maintaining up-to-date information regarding all phases of domestic mineral production and many of the activities in the foreign minerals field will go forward on a broader basis to serve war agencies relying on this important service.
Industries of the United Nations called for unprecedented quantities of war materials, and the Bureau of Mines quickened and broadened its search for metals and mineral products, sending its exploratory crews into new areas and maintaining day-and-night schedules in pilot plants and laboratories.
Technical information was provided for field crews, the mining and metallurgical industries, and others vitally concerned with production.
To hasten the movement of raw materials from the ground to production lines, the Bureau's three regional engineers maintained close contact with and directed the work of district and project engineers assigned to mineralrich areas of the United States and Alaska.
Because of the constantly changing economic situation in the mineral commodity field, the Bureau adapted its exploratory work and metallurgical research to increase the domestic output of the mostneeded materials in the shortest possible time.
Beneficiation methods were worked out for ore samples submitted by the Bureau's own exploratory crews and by individuals and other Government agencies.
Large-scale process projects were undertaken in sponge iron, magnesium, manganese, and alumina under special appropriations from Congress.
During the fiscal year, the Geophysical Division of the Geological Survey was transferred to the Bureau of Mines to aid in the exploratory work.
One-third of the division's activities was devoted to a special project for the Navy.
The advancements made by the Bureau in the field of war minerals are reflected in its progress reports for various commodities.
Iron and steel.
The 1943 program to help the Nation maintain its steel-production schedules included continued exploration of the iron ore deposits of the West to serve the newly established steel industry of the Pacific coast, expanded research in sponge iron, laboratory tests of the amenability of ores to concentration, and assisting in the recovery of ore pillars in a New York iron mine by employing Bureau-developed seismic instruments.
Major explorations for iron ores were carried on in Utah, Arizona, Oregon, Nevada, New Mexico, Missouri, Iowa, and Alaska.
Attention also was directed toward increasing the output of iron ore easily available to eastern blast furnaces.
Small deposits of iron ore, suitable for the production of sponge iron, have been located in 20 States, and during the fiscal year the Bureau's experiments in sponge iron emphasized the possibility of using idle commercial facilities, such as brick kilns, for the production of sponge iron to supplement steel scrap.
Sponge iron research progressed at brick kilns in Binghamton, N. Y., and Canton, Ohio.
Preliminary to the operation of its large-scale rotary-kiln pilot plant at Laramie, Wyo., the Bureau produced sponge iron in a rotary kiln at its Boulder City (Nev.) Experiment Station and also in cooperation with a Pennsylvania iron company.
Studies in the naturalgas reduction method for making sponge iron continued at a plant in Texas.
To increase the domestic production of fluorspar for steel-furnace flux, extensive dewatering and exploratory work was carried on in the Illinois-Kentucky field, leading producer of fluorspar for the eastern steel industry, and an important potential producer of fluorspar was established by Bureau drilling in Utah to serve the western steel industry.
Meanwhile, the Bureau carried on its laboratory work in the concentration of fluorspar, having pioneered and developed improved techniques for the use of concentrates in steel furnaces.
Ferro-alloys.
The increased use of ferro-alloys by industries turning out war equipment prompted the Bureau to carry out exploratory and metallurgical work on chrome, manganese, cobalt, molybdenum, nickel, tungsten, and vanadium.
Exploration was completed on the Bureau's outstanding chrome project in Montana in which several million tons of concentratable ore were charted.
This ore now is being mined on a large scale.
Several other projects in California, Montana, Oregon, and Alaska resulted in commercial operation.
The Bureau's laboratories developed methods for the concentration of some chrome ores, including the chromite beach sands of Oregon.
Research disclosed that off-grade chrome concentrates can become high-grade metallurgical products by chemical treatment and pilot-plant work indicated the commercial practicability of the process.
Further strides also were made in the Bureau's process for producing high-purity chromium metal from low-grade chromite by electrolysis, the consumption of electricity per pound of metal being much lower than that of ordinary chromium plating.
A substantial tonnage of cobalt-copper ore in Idaho was indicated by the Bureau.
The metallurgists developed a suitable method for recovering both cobalt and copper in separate concentrates and worked out a process for recovering lead, copper, nickel, and cobalt in three concentrates from a complex lead-copper-nickel-cobalt ore of Missouri.
Investigating further the production of electrolytic manganese by a Bureau-perfected method, the technologists learned that cobalt, a minor constituent of manganese ores, can be removed effectively from the manganese electrolyte.
Small pilot-plant investigations, looking to the utilization of cheap hydroelectric power of the West, were conducted on the separation and recovery of cobalt and nickel from complex ores by employing electrodeposition.
South Dakota.
Simultaneously, larger-scale tests continued in the matte smelting of nodules to recover manganese, and plans were prepared for exploiting the ore by employing the Bureau's smelting process.
Several millions tons of low-grade nickel ore were indicated by exploration in Colorado, Montana, Oregon, Washington, and Alaska.
While nickel cannot be produced economically from these ores by standard methods, it could be extracted at a higher cost should the need for the metal become more acute.
In the Cle Elum-Blewett Pass region of Washington there are indications that a large tonnage of ore containing 0.75 to 1 percent nickel may be developed.
While the Bureau continued exploration of this area, a process was developed whereby the ore, containing iron, nickel, and chromium, can be smelted in an electric furnace to produce a nickel-iron alloy having 13 percent or more nickel with virtually complete recovery of the nickel, thus yielding an immediately useful melting stock directly from the ore.
The widespread use of tungsten for special steels in armor plate, guns, and projectiles and other war equipment prompted the Bureau to place still greater emphasis on methods for increasing the Nation's output of this material.
During the year more than 100 tungsten properties were examined, 10 exploratory projects were begun and 7 of these—in Idaho, Colorado, Nevada, Wyoming, New Mexico, and Alaska—were completed, and more than 500,000 tons of low-grade ore were indicated.
Two projects were outstanding.
In Lincoln County, Nev., several hundred thousand tons of tungsten ore were indicated, and in Lemhi County, Idaho, sufficient reserves were charted to supply a 200-ton-a-day mill.
The Bureau's exploratory work in vanadium included projects in the active Colorado-Utah field and the potentially important western Wyoming area.
The Bureau conducted laboratory studies of the recovery of vanadium from the Wyoming ore.
Nonferrous metals.
Although the United States is the world's largest producer of zinc and copper, mine output has failed to keep pace with requirements.
The Bureau made consistent gains in helping increase their production.
In copper alone 17 exploratory projects were undertaken and 872,000 tons of copper ore containing 33,000,000 pounds of copper were discovered.
In Vermont, sufficient reserves of ore were indicated to merit construction of a mill, and this plant went into production in March 1943.
In Idaho, 75,000 tons of ore assaying 2 percent copper and 0.3 percent cobalt were indicated.
In a southwestern mine, the finding of additional ore justified the expansion of mining operations.
An idle western mine resumed operations after the Bureau's field crews discovered high-grade copper.
To speed the conversion of ore to metal, the Bureau conducted successful ore-dressing tests on materials from three deposits.
Equally impressive were the gains made in zinc.
The Bureau's 20 exploratory projects conducted in 14 States revealed 8,000,000 tons of zinc and zinc-lead ores.
Programs now are under way for mining and milling 7,000,000 tons of the newly found reserves.
Correlated laboratory tests established ore-dressing methods both for reserves discovered by the Bureau's crews and for a wide range of other ores.
As another aid to the zinc industry, the Bureau began construction of a pilot plant at Rolla, Mo., to study the reduction of zinc ores with methane gas.
Seven exploratory projects for mercury were active through the year, and the known reserves of ore were increased by 600,000 tons.
This ore averages 4.7 pounds of mercury per ton.
In Valley County, Idaho, an exploratory project was completed after 133,500 tons of mercury ore had been indicated.
As a result, the output of a mine was doubled.
In southwestern Alaska, an exploratory crew charted 115,000 tons of ore containing 9 pounds of mercury per ton.
Other work in mercury included the preliminary sampling of 11 deposits in Nevada.
An initial shipment of high-grade tantalum ore from a deposit in New Mexico was concentrated in the Bureau's pilot mill at Rolla, Mo., and exploratory drilling by Bureau engineers revealed the most extensive source now known in the United States.
Tantalum is in heavy demand for special war uses, particularly in vacuum tubes for radios and surgical and dental instruments.
Other activities in the nonferrous metals field concerned beryllium and tin.
Exploratory work was conducted on beryl-bearing pegmatites in New England, and a drilling crew was sent to the rare helvite deposit at Iron Mountain, N. Mex.
Ore from Iron Mountain was tested to ascertain the most feasible method of extracting the beryllium, and new ore-dressing processes were developed to separate beryl from its ores.
Despite adverse weather and difficult terrain, the Bureau's exploratory crews continued their search for tin in Alaska and reported that, although domestic tin reserves are small as compared with foreign resources, the most extensive known sources of tin possessed by the United States are on the Seward Peninsula.
Light metals.
Anticipating the Nation's demands for more aluminum and magnesium for airplanes and other war equipment, the Bureau continued on a larger scale its correlative exploratory, laboratory, and pilot-plant projects for increasing the domestic output of these metals.
Exploratory crews increased the known reserves of bauxite by more than 10,000,000 tons, although much of it proved too low grade for existing plants, which are geared to high-grade imported bauxite and the limited amounts of best-grade domestic bauxite.
The Bureau ascertained that much of the low-grade bauxite can be concentrated to produce a suitable feed for the alumina-producing plants (Bayer plants) and proposed to the War Production Board that a mill be constructed in Arkansas to beneficiate the large reserves of low-grade material.
By so doing, Bureau engineers ascertained, the low-grade material could be utilized quickly without new facilities other than a mill.
Other exploratory crews established additional reserves of alunite, another alumina-bearing material, which will be mined for alumina plants authorized in Utah by the War Production Board.
At the same time, Bureau crews drilled clay deposits in various parts of the Nation and reported that large quantities of aluminous clay are available.
In a 12-month period the exploratory crews charted 100,000,000 tons of alumina-bearing clays, and the Bureau's chemists and metallurgists worked unceasingly on methods of utilizing these clays and other lowgrade aluminiferous materials, including alunite, to produce alumina.
Partly as a result of these studies and the efforts of the Department of the Interior to demonstrate the need for using the Nation's extensive reserves of clay for aluminum production, the War Production Board approved the construction of five plants in Utah, South Carolina, and the Pacific Northwest, each with 50 tons daily output of alumina from materials other than bauxite.
Many months of study in the Bureau's laboratories and pilot plants at Boulder City, Nev., resulted in the development of a process to produce magnesia from a 400,000,000-ton dolomite deposit near Las Vegas, Nev., in the Boulder Dam area.
The dolomite deposit is in the vicinity of the Basic Magnesium, Inc., plant, and utilization of the Bureau's process could eliminate a difficult transportation problem because material now used for the plant is transported more than 1,000 miles by rail.
In addition to the process worked out for Sloan dolomite, the Bureau advanced in its studies in producing magnesia from impure magnesite by the acid-leaching process.
At the same time, small-scale pilot-plant work was completed on the Bureau's newly developed method of producing magnesium metal directly from magnesia made either from the dolomite or from impure magnesite.
Other research by the Bureau in the carbothermic reduction process for producing magnesium from magnesia is continuing.
Large quantities of iron-free alum are needed urgently in the war program for use as a catalytic agent, and the Bureau's chemists developed a process for obtaining this product from domestic clays.
Nonmetallic minerals.
Largely because of the Bureau of Mines' work, the United States was freed from dependence upon imported talc suitable for high-frequency insulators in military radio equipment.
Prior to the war only one mine in the United States produced a satisfactory-grade talc for this purpose, but examination, testing, and processing of talc deposits by the Bureau revealed that sufficient supplies are available from domestic sources.
Millions of radio insulators for planes, tanks, and ships were processed in a Bureau laboratory.
Since more flake graphite is needed for war uses—as a lubricant, for foundry facing, and in the manufacture of crucibles, stoppers for steel ladles, and core washers—The Bureau explored two groups of flake graphite deposits in Alabama and proved the existence of 1,174,000 tons of measured ore.
Following the Bureau's work, three graphite mills, under the WPB program, were constructed or rehabilitated and put into operation in the Alabama field.
Graphite prospects also were examined by the Bureau in Pennsylvania, New York, and Texas.
Exploration of Texas celestite (strontium) established 130,000 tons of celestite which can, if necessary, be concentrated to meet the requirements for military pyrotechnics.
Strontium minerals are used chiefly for tracer bullets and flares, military experts looking upon strontium as the best all-around tracer for both day and night use.
Activity increased in the examination of domestic deposits containing abrasive-grade corundum for grinding optical glass.
Five former corundum mines were visited by the Bureau, and four were recommended for exploratory projects.
Research workers in nonmetallics prepared a syllabus for the qualitative testing of domestic clays to ascertain their adaptability to specific uses in place of clays formerly imported.
Increased production of high-quality coke of uniform grade, testing of thousands of coal samples, efficient storage of millions of tons of coal, production of synthetic liquid fuels from coal, conditioning of water fed to Government boilers, and conversion of heating systems from oil to coal headed the many war problems studied by the Bureau of Mines as the Nation leaned more heavily on solid fuels.
In a 12-month period nearly 23,000 samples of coal were analyzed in connection with fuel purchases by Government agencies, particularly the millions of tons used by the Army and Navy.
Testing all coal purchased by the Army, the Bureau's coal-sampling trucks visited 500 mines in 18 States and obtained 1,500 specimens.
The volume of work in the testing of water fed to boilers was doubled, lengthening the life and increasing the efficiency of Army boiler plants.
Coal analysis.
While coal sampling for Government purchases continued on an expanded scale, the Bureau's work in coal analysis likewise increased tremendously because of the coal-dust samples submitted by coal-mine inspectors in their work of promoting health and safety in the Nation's mines.
More than 10,000 of these samples were analyzed.
Coke studies.
With the Nation's wartime steel-production schedules calling for more metallurgical-grade coke, the Bureau sent a mobile laboratory into the beehive field to provide operators with technical data that were essential in the production of better-grade coke of uniform quality.
The Bureau's work in fostering the output of cleaner coal and adoption of improved coke-plant practices probably helped prevent the closing of some war plants running short of suitable metallurgical coke.
A scarcity of petroleum coke led the Bureau to develop a method for producing, from low-ash coals, electrode carbon suitable for use in aluminum plants.
Coal storage.
To insure sufficient supplies of coal, industry began storing larger amounts in off-peak periods.
Many of the storage and procurement problems that arose were solved through the help of the Bureau.
Information was supplied regarding the best methods of storing particular coals to avoid spontaneous combustion and other hazards which cause loss.
Special assistance was provided operators of docks in the Great Lakes area in preventing deterioration and possible loss in more than 50,000,000 tons of stored coal.
Other Bureau experts tested the efficiency of various materials for excluding air from subbituminous coal stored for use by the Army and Navy.
Colloidal fuel.
In cooperation with an oil company, a method was developed for making colloidal fuel-a mixture of pulverized coal and oil-to relieve fuel-oil shortages created by the war.
Tests in commercial plants proved this fuel can be employed satisfactorily with reasonable attention to maintenance of proper conditions.
Liquid fuels from coal.
The continuing decline in the discovery of new oil pools in the United States, heavier wartime consumption of natural petroleum, and transportation difficulties threw greater emphasis on the Bureau's research in producing synthetic liquid fuels from coal.
Earlier tests on 14 American coals, including lignite, subbituminous, and high-volatile bituminous types, proved that fuel oil, Diesel oil, motor gasoline, and aviation gasoline can be obtained from them by hydrogenation.
Experiments progressed in the operation of the laboratory-scale pilot plant for the direct hydrogenation of coal, and laboratory-scale investigations were begun on the indirect process for making synthetic gasoline from water gas derived from coal.
While two members of the Bureau's staff visited coal-liquefaction plants and research laboratories in England, a measure was introduced in Congress proposing the construction and operation of demonstration-size plants by the Bureau to pave the way for ultimate commercial production by private industry of liquid fuels from coal, oil shales, and other materials.
Fuel conservation.
The progress made in determining the causes of corrosion of boiler-furnace wall tubes resulted in means of preventing further loss of steaming capacities in electric power plants.
Cooperating with the Solid Fuels Administration for War, municipal authorities, trade and manufacturing associations, engineering societies, real estate boards, publishers, and other interested groups, the Bureau of Mines participated in a fuel efficiency campaign to conserve supplies of gaseous, liquid, and solid fuels for the war.
Programs of this nature in certain Government plants already have resulted in fuel savings ranging from 9 to 20 percent.
Safety and efficiency.
To conserve electricity, Bureau engineers issued findings describing how the use of electricity can be cut down in coal mines.
Other tests indicated that rock dust, used to minimize explosion hazards in coal mines, does not hasten the decay of mine timbers.
In minimizing hazards in war industries, research workers determined the explosibility of various dusts and safer methods for their control.
As the growing power of the United Nations' fighting strength increased the demands for special lubricants, liquid fuels, and the wide variety of petroleum byproducts necessary for maintaining supremacy of the land, sea, and air, the Bureau of Mines enlarged its schedule of technical research to assist the petroleum and natural-gas industries in meeting wartime production goals.
Special projects were begun to inventory crude oil for war needs, to apply improved methods for producing petroleum, and to determine new and additional sources of petroleum products.
Bureau's fund of technical information on various crude oils, condensates, and natural gasoline, making possible the more efficient blending of aviation gasoline and the manufacture of toluene and benzine from petroleum in large quantities.
The engineers studied deep, high-pressure fields of the condensate type and prepared reports on four important fields in the Gulf coast for the Petroleum Administration for War which permitted PAW and the operators to develop programs for producing the optimum amounts of liquid hydrocarbons and at the same time prolonging the life of the fields.
A mobile field laboratory was built by the Bureau to determine the composition and phase relations of reservoir fluids—information which was necessary in developing operating plans which will leave minimum quantities of liquefiable products in the sands.
Several months of field testing and study were devoted to a complicated natural-gas reservoir in Oklahoma supplying war industries.
The Bureau's continuing study of the effect of well spacing on the quantity of extractable oil grew in importance because of the scarcity of steel for drilling new wells.
Engineering reports were prepared on an analysis of the oil-producing history of the Mexia-Powell fault-line fields of Texas, studies of Rodessa field in Louisiana, Texas, and Arkansas, and reservoir conditions of the Magnolia field in Arkansas.
Reservoir fluids were analyzed to assist operators in the Cut Bank field of Montana in determining optimum production rates.
Water flooding and air- and gas-repressuring methods, employed to increase the extractable oil with a minimum use of material and labor, were studied and reports were issued on water flooding in Oklahoma and on brine-disposal systems in western Kansas.
Bureau technicians ascertained that salt water produced with oil can be conditioned and used as a repressuring medium in several areas.
To assist the 15,000 oil producers in the Appalachian region, the Bureau established a petroleum field office at Franklin, Pa., in April 1942, and this office reported during the fiscal year on nine air- and gas-injection projects in widely separated parts of the Appalachian region and on the cost of reconditioning wells to guide further efforts in stimulating the production of paraffinic oils needed for aircraft lubricants.
A chemical engineering study of the proper blending of oil-base drilling fluids suggested that they may prove extremely valuable in increasing the supplies of recoverable crude oil.
The Bureau also published a report on the tools and techniques employed in rehabilitating wells which require the removal of sand, mud, and other obstructions.
Research work on aviation gasoline was expanded to include both natural and synthetic components, and exacting analyses were made on crude oils, condensates, and natural gasolines to find new sources of aviation gasoline, toulene, and benzine.
Several crude oils were analyzed by superfraction action and 17 naphthas from high-sulfur crude oils were desulfurized and tested for octane rating and tetraethyl lead response.
Other research continued in the analysis of asphaltic materials, and plans were laid for constructing an experimental plant to recover microcrystalline wax from waste for munitions and other war uses.
During the year 132 special reports were prepared on properties of materials available from particular crude oils and distillates for war uses.
The Bureau also resumed its semiannual survey of motor gasoline.
At the request of the PAW, work was begun on the thermodynamics of hydrocarbons and derivatives primarily as an aid to the synthetic rubber program.
Meeting greatly increased demands for helium for the Navy's antisubmarine blimps, for meteorological balloons of the Army, Navy, and Weather Bureau, and for Army barrage balloons, the Bureau of Mines completed its new helium plant in Texas, modified and supplemented the equipment of its Amarillo plant in Texas and rushed construction of three other helium plants.
Production of this lightweight, noninflammable gas was increased to about 25 times that of pre-war days and was meeting the current requirements for military and civilian uses.
Additional wells were drilled in the famed Cliffside helium-bearing gas field of Texas.
While the armed services used most of the helium, considerable quantities also were employed for medical purposes, in diving and caisson work, and in the welding of magnesium airplane parts.
The experience of the Bureau of Mines in handling and testing explosive and inflammable materials used by the mineral industries provided an ideal background for the successful completion of important research for the War and Navy Department and other war agencies.
While continuing their normal research in the causes and prevention of industrial fires and explosions, experts carried on investigative work under the Bureau-administered Federal Explosives Act, working closely with representatives of the armed forces, particularly the Safety and Security Branch of Army Ordnance, which named several Bureau men to technical boards and committees.
Certain new types of ammunition were analyzed for the Ammunition Development Branch of Army Ordnance, and other studies were made in the handling of explosives and pyrotechnics.
At the request of the Army Engineer Board, all available military high explosives were examined to determine physical characteristics important to demolition work.
Such tests included rates of detonation and the action of humidity and subsurface moisture at extreme ranges of temperature.
Other studies involving explosives were conducted for the Navy Department, the Bureau of Standards, and the Board of Economic Warfare.
Typical problems of a confidential nature concerned the action and construction of seized enemy military devices and the clearing of land mine areas.
New methods for testing explosives were devised at the request of miltary authorities.
Despite the increased volume of war work, technical experts made consistent gains in obtaining data regarding commercial explosives.
In this field of activity 149 chemical analyses were made, 967 gallery tests were completed, and 2,248 control tests of a physical nature were conducted.
At the close of the fiscal year, 180 explosives were on the Bureau's permissible list as being safer to use in mines.
Also specifications were developed for Diesel engines that may be operated safely in mines and in other confined spaces, such as ordnance plants and synthetic rubber plants where inflammable atmospheres may be encountered.
Gas- and dust-explosion research.
Other services for war industries and agencies included determinations of the inflammability characteristics of gases and metallic and nonmetallic dusts.
Considerable study was devoted to the prevention of explosions involving butadiene, a principal constituent in the manufacture of synthetic rubber.
The dusts of aluminum, antimony, cadmium, chromium, copper, magnesium, tin, zinc, and other war metals were tested and industries were advised regarding precautionary measures which should govern their handling.
Loss of skilled manpower in the mineral industries, equipment shortages, and the plea by war agencies for increased production formed the backdrop for greatly expanded safety and security programs executed by the Bureau of Mines.
Safety education, accident-prevention work, investigative activities, and testing of materials were aimed at the conservation of men and machinery.
Despite increased production, additional man-hours of labor, and the employment of many inexperienced workers, the anticipated upward trend of accidents in the mineral industries was relatively small.
Under the Federal Coal Mine Inspection Act of 1941, inspectors visited a larger number of coal mines during the ficsal year in their duties of furthering health and safety in this vital field of production.
Safer storage, handling, transportation and use of commercial explosives resulted from the Bureau's administration of the wartime Federal Explosives Act.
Public and industrial security was enhanced as operators of mines, metallurgical plants, quarries, and similar plants responded to Bureau recommendations for means of preventing sabotage and subversive activities.
The experienced safety engineers of the Bureau performed valuable service in directing and assisting in the administration and field activities of coal-mine inspection, the explosives control program, and mineral production security activities.
During 1943, engineers and safety instructors trained 45,952 employees of the mining and affiliated industries in first aid, and the total completing such courses under the Bureau's sponsorship reached 1,584,774.
About 675 persons qualified as first-aid instructors, swelling the ranks of persons so trained to 16,500—a vital link in the program of civilian defense training.
Forty-nine plants received certificates attesting to the training of all employees in first aid.
Certificates were awarded 72 persons as qualified first-aid judges, and Bureau workers aided in conducting 42 first-aid contests in 8 States.
Basic mine rescue training, which has saved the lives of many industrial workers, was given to 2,498 mine workers; and 154 persons completed the advanced course.
Because of their ability to use rescue equipment and their knowledge of rescue and recovery procedures in connection with fires, floods, and other disasters, these men can serve effectively in civilian defense work.
Bureau engineers investigated 41 mine explosions in 14 States, 30 mine fires in 16 States and Alaska, and 97 miscellaneous accidents in 26 States during 1943.
They participated, in many instances with hazard to themselves, in rescue and recovery operations involving explosions, fires, and floods, and helped fight numerous mine fires.
At the request of the owners, careful inspections were made of 63 privately owned mine rescue stations.
Meanwhile, accident-prevention training continued to grow in popularity, 566 persons enrolling in these courses and bringing the number completing such instruction to 10,865 and those receiving partial training to 6,450.
Motion pictures, slides, exhibits, testing galleries, and other mediums were employed in the safety education program.
Sound motion pictures on safety subjects were shown 208 times.
Bureau representatives participated in 547 safety meetings in 33 States.
To determine the degree of safety afforded by electrical machinery and equipment for use in mines, the Bureau continued its special testing work on devices submitted by manufacturers.
Formal approvals covering 35 complete machines were issued and 19 formal letters of suitability were granted covering individual parts, together with 48 extensions of letters of suitability for safe use against gas and dust ignitions.
The Bureau also made 589 explosion tests for the Navy of explosion-proof enclosures intended for ships.
The numerous safety improvements made voluntarily by officials and workers in coal mines were among the concrete results of the Federal coal-mine inspection program.
Lower accident rates in many mines in spite of increased output due to the war and the receipt of many letters from both company spokesmen and workers' organizations commending the manner in which Bureau of Mines representatives conducted the investigations attested to the success of the inspection work.
During the fiscal year, Federal inspectors visited 1,149 coal mines in 22 States and Alaska, representing a combined annual production of 293,218,266 tons, or 46 percent of the total annual 1942 coal production.
These mines employed a total of 233,160 men.
Since Federal inspections began on December 1, 1941, 62 percent of the coal mines employing more than 25 persons each have been inspected; these mines employ 66 percent of the workers.
Recommendations designed to increase safety and promote healthful conditions were made by the Federal representatives and mines were credited for existing safeguards and for improvements effected subsequent to the inspector's visits.
State mine-inspection departments cooperated with the Bureau by requiring compliance with State mining regulations and urging adoption of many suggested safety measures not included in State statutes, but recommended in Federal inspection reports.
Ventilating improvements made as a result of Bureau of Mines inspections have, the Bureau believes, prevented some mine explosions.
Very few companies disregarded the Federal recommendations or deliberately delayed in carrying out certain improvements; there were several mine explosions and other accidents in mines which, in the opinion of the Bureau, would not have occurred had Federal suggestion been followed.
Special investigations regarding explosives and electrical equipment in mines were made by mining-explosives engineers and miningelectrical engineers of the inspection staff and other special studies of mine hazards and problems were undertaken by coal-mine inspectors.
Guarding against sabotage and misuse of the hundreds of millions of pounds of explosives used annually in the United States in commercial operations, the Bureau of Mines tightened its surveillance over the manufacture, purchase, sale, storage, use, and possession of nonmilitary explosives and their ingredients as authorized under the Federal Explosives Act.
By a system of licensing, Federal control of explosives was maintained from the manufacturer to the lawful consumer.
Fifty-two explosives investigators were stationed in various States and Alaska to supervise and guide the 4,500 Federal licensing agents and to investigate the handling, storage, and use of explosives.
The licensing agents, who serve without pay except for the 25-cent fee they are entitled to collect from each person to whom they deliver a license, issued about 350,000 licenses to vendors, purchasers, and foremen during the year.
The Bureau examined and acted upon 4,000 additional applications from manufacturers, schools and colleges, and laboratories.
Investigative work under the Federal Explosives Act was woven closely with the safety and security programs of the Bureau.
Investigators made reports on more than 9,000 stores of explosives and were assisted by other engineers and technicians of the Bureau of investigating fires and explosions in mines, quarries, munitions plants, and factoriés manufacturing fireworks for military and industrial purposes.
In carrying out its duties under the Federal Explosives Act, the Bureau maintained liaison with the Army and Navy Intelligence services, the Office of Civilian Defense, and the Office of the Chief of Ordnance of the Provost Marshal General.
Strengthening home-front production and supply plants against losses due to sabotage, subversive activities, injuries to workers, fires, floods, and other eventualities, the Bureau of Mines sent a corps of specially trained engineers into 1,968 mines and related facilities during 1943 under the facility security program.
At the request of the Provost Marshal General's office, the Bureau of Mines assisted in the inspection of mineral facilities and undertook inspections for the security status of surface and underground workings of all mines, including those on the Army's master responsibility list.
Joint inspections were made by Army officials and Bureau engineers, and recommendations were jointly approved by the War Department and the Bureau before they were transmitted to the operators.
Bureau engineers acted for the War Department in making recurring inspections of mines and related facilities on the Army's list and submitted reinspection reports to Service Command headquarters.
In addition to the many original inspections made during the year, the Bureau's small field staff of 65 engineers assigned to mineralproduction security work made 132 reinspections to check improvements made since the initial inspections.
Reports received by the Bureau indicate that these inspections resulted in the adoption of many precautionary measures to prevent sabotage and subversive activities and curb accidents.
Mineral-production security inspectors, as well as Federal coal-mine inspectors and other field workers of the Bureau, because of their familiarity with mines in all parts of the country, assisted in the scrap-metal drive by locating scrap material in abandoned and active mines and by helping in its recovery or rehabilitation.
Increased production of essential war materials by preventing occupational diseases and improving the efficiency and morale of the workers through better environment was emphasized by the Bureau during the year.
Inspections were made of the hygienic aspects of working conditions in anthracite mines and zinc, manganese, and ordnance plants, and suggestions were made for eliminating or controlling hazards.
Several investigations were made at the request of the Navy Department regarding health and safety aspects connected with certain of its operations.
The field investigations and studies made by other Bureau engineers required the analysis of approximately 12,000 air samples, compared with 5,300 in 1942.
About 400 dust samples also were tested.
Approximately 10,000 air samples were analyzed for Federal coalmine inspectors and other field workers.
Five hundred air samples were analyzed for the Army and Navy, and 1,500 samples were tested as part of the research work regarding the safety of electrical mining equipment, respiratory protective devices, and -similar equipment.
Dust samples were tested as part of the health and safety surveys in mines, studies in explosives and coal hydrogenation, and in aiding research work conducted by the Army.
The protection of workers against noxious gases, fumes, and dust grew increasingly important as a wartime health measure, and demands for Bureau-approved respirators increased along with requests for suggestions regarding their correct use and care.
Such requests came from various mines, labor organizations, ordnance plants, the Maritime Commission, and others concerned with war production.
Special tests also were made by the Bureau for the armed forces and the Maritime Commission to obtain certain information regarding respirators.
Since dwindling margins between wartime requirements and domestic production of many of the leading mineral commodities during 1943 required closer control of their distribution and uses, there were steadily increasing demands on the Bureau of Mines for comprehensive statistical and economic information to guide those charged with maintaining adequate supplies of mineral products.
Both the volume and frequency of the information surveys handled by Bureau experts climbed to new levels, many special studies were undertaken, new services were inaugurated, and scores of conferences were held to provide executive legislative branches of the Federal Government with factual data.
Partly because of the unusually heavy pressure of war activities and the necessity of maintaining secrecy regarding sources, production, reserves, and uses of many commodities, publication of the 1941 Minerals Yearbook was delayed.
This authoritative publication included 14 chapters on critical and essential minerals which could not be released for general distribution and the Yearbook thus was issued as a confidential document for the use of a limited number of Federal officials.
Certain other chapters containing important data, but not considered in the category of being of "aid and comfort to the enemy," were distributed after deletion of certain tables and other confidential material.
Continued expansion of plant facilities and the resulting accelerated tempo of production placed a heavy strain on the Nation's supply of metals.
The supply of such metals as aluminum, cadmium, tin, magnesium, copper, zinc, molybdenum, nickel, vanadium, tungsten, and chromium was insufficient for both war and civilian demands.
The Bureau conducted monthly or quarterly surveys of these materials and more than a score of other commodities, and in many instances this information was utilized by the War Production Board in determining its allocation systems.
In 1942 many additional studies in metal production and consumption were undertaken, and this trend continued upward during 1943 as war agencies, particularly the WPB, called for up-to-date confidential data on a larger scale.
During the year, 415 confidential reports were distributed to war agencies and 35 nonconfidential reports were released to industry.
New monthly or quarterly reports were undertaken on cobalt, iron ore, selenium, tellurium, vanadium, zirconium, lead and tin scrap, and zinc scrap.
In addition, 26 chapters were prepared for the Minerals Yearbook.
Monthly reports giving the mine production of copper, lead, and zinc by individual workings were employed by the joint War Producrion Board-Office of Price Administration Quota Committee in forming bases for control and were used extensively by other war agencies.
In conjunction with Bureau of Labor Statistics reports on mine employment, the Bureau of Mines information was used by the War Manpower Commission and other agencies in mine labor and productivity problems.
The series of monthly reports for the production of copper, lead, and zinc by States was extended to include gold and silver.
Field offices of the Bureau assigned to the compilation and interpretation of mineral production information served in an advisory capacity to other Federal agencies concerned with mining porblems, particularly in the Central and Western States.
In addition, Minerals Yearbook chapters on the production of gold, silver, copper, lead, and zinc were prepared.
Requests from agencies of the Federal Government and various non-Federal offices for facts regarding accidents and production in mines were used in programs involving the protection of plant facilities, the placement of prisoners of war, and the distribution and utilization of manpower for maximum benefit to war-production schedules.
To reduce the number of reports from industry and to promote uniformity of basic information concerning accidents in coal mines, conferences were held with State mining officials and State compensation and industrial commissions regarding the merits of a standard report form.
This form was suggested for companies providing accident information to States and to the Bureau of Mines.
Through the cooperation of the National Coal Association and State associations of coal companies, the conference resulted in the adoption of a single standard report form by States producing 85 percent of the Nation's coal.
The Bureau began a preliminary survey to obtain accident data in the petroleum industry.
Other informational services included the annual production, consumption, and distribution of commercial explosives and the estimated quantities of nitroglycerin and other ingredients used in the manufacture of blasting materials.
The Bureau of Mines conducted 18 surveys in the nonmetallic industries during 1943, many of them being undertaken at the specific request of officials in other agencies of the Government.
Typical of these were facts regarding the availability of mica for airplane spark plugs, asbestos for fireproof wire coverings, magnesia for refractories, cement for airfield runways, gypsum for military housing, mineral pigments for camouflage paints, and celestite for tracer bullets and flares.
From the Bureau's storehouse of information came answers to the approximately 500 inquiries received each month.
Data files, started a quarter of a century ago and augmented each year by the addition of from 4,000 to 5,000 new items, supplied basic information which led to the solution of many war problems.
Research workers prepared 21 chapters for the Minerals Yearbook and compiled 48 other publications regarding nonmetallics, 10 of which concerned such vital subjects as furnace refractories, strategic mica, kyanite, lithium, mineral pigments, olivine, a review of mineral progress, and home insulation with minerals to promote the conservation of fuels.
Studies were begun regarding cement developments in Latin America and the functions of corundum, vermiculite, and minor fertilizer materials in the military program.
Mineral Trade Notes, comprising abstracts of consular reports and special contributions primarily concerning foreign mineral developments, was prepared monthly for the confidential use of certain war agencies.
Gasoline and fuel-oil rationing, transportation changes, and everrising war needs for petroleum products multiplied the difficulties of the Bureau of Mines in forecasting demands for motor fuel and crude petroleum, but monthly reports were continued successfully and the cumulative forecasts showed an approximate divergence of only 1 percent from actual demand.
While the preparation of regularly supplied information proved extremely useful to war agencies, special studies also were requested for certain supplemental material regarding petroleum and natural gas and these surveys were undertaken immediately by the Bureau.
Outstanding among the regular services was the survey on the production, stocks, and demand for aviation gasoline.
Bureau statistics were combined with those from other sources to maintain a complete check on the trends of supply and consumption in the critical Atlantic and Pacific coast areas.
Information was obtained in the field of international petroleum trade for agencies concerned with export control and demand.
Expanding its work in collecting facts regarding the anthracite and coke industries, the Bureau of Mines provided currently an over-ali picture which enabled war agencies to keep abreast of economic and technical developments in the solid fuels field, to control prices, and to manage efficiently the distribution of supplies to war plants and civilian users.
Information was provided the War and Navy Departments on international fuel, power resources, and production.
Surveys covering the consumption of foundry coke, classification of contract tonnages of merchant byproduct-coke plants, production of coke and byproducts at coal-gas retort plants, and sources of coking coal for byproduct and beehive plants were completed at the request of the Solid Fuels Administration for War and the Bureau began a study of the distribution of Pennsylvania anthracite at the retail dealer level for the 1942-43 coal vear.
Confidential industry surveys for coke, coke byproducts, and Pennsylvania anthracite were compiled monthly.
Annual reviews covering developments in the byproduct and beehive coke, Pennsylvania anthracite, lignite, peat, fuel briquets and packaged-fuel industries were prepared for the Minerals Yearbook and summaries of these chapters, with confidential material deleted, were issued for general distribution.
Through arrangements with the Department of State and the Board of Economic Warfare the Bureau of Mines was given the responsibility of the technical direction of mineral attachés and the publication for Government use only of economic facts regarding mining conditions in foreign countries.
On recommendations of the Bureau, mineral attachés were appointed to American embassies in Cuba, Mexico, Peru, and Bolivia.
Similar assignments are contemplated for Brazil, Argentina, Chile, and certain countries outside the Western Hemisphere.
During the year, detailed reports were prepared by the Bureau regarding mineral resources of Peru, North Africa, and Turkey and similar information was assembled regarding British West Africa and French West Africa.
All publications not compatible with the prosecution of the war were eliminated during the fiscal year and general distribution of the Minerals Yearbook was discontinued.
Economies also were effected by distributing abstracts of many reports in place of the full publication.
Few press releases were distributed.
Because of the heavy demand for statistical data and other informative material regarding all phases of the mineral industries, the Bureau issued a series of confidential reports for restricted distribution among war agencies and certain producers of war minerals.
Some chapters of the Minerals Yearbook—with all confidential information deleted—were released to persons and industries requesting such publications.
In all, 551 bulletins, technical papers, handbooks, Minerals Yearbook chapters, and contributions to technical journals were prepared.
The Bureau's Washington library of selected reference material was increased by 2,732 books; 247 periodicals, many on an exchange basis, were received regularly, and 24,471 publications were circulated for use outside the library.
Many thousands of letters were written in response to requests from the public for information concerning the mineral industries.
The Bureau's free educational motion pictures, produced in cooperation with industry with production costs paid for by private industry, were in constant demand by the Army, the Navy, and the Office of Civilian Defense for use in war-training programs.
They also were shown in South American republics, Canada, China, South Africa, and Great Britain.
During 1943 the Bureau's films were shown on 95,876 occasions to audiences totaling 7,928,201 persons.
Since 1922, the Bureau's films have been shown on 957,936 occasions and the audiences have totaled 103,584,650.
To handle more effectively the larger volume of administrative work, the Bureau reorganized its administrative branch, establishing an administrative officer and two assistants, one in charge of an Office of Business Management and the other in charge of budgetary matters.
As in past years, the Bureau's activities were administered from Washington, D. C., but were carried on mainly in the field offices, laboratories, and pilot plants.
The records as of June 30, 1943, show that the property of the Bureau had a total valuation of $6,908,426.77, of which $2,531,187.35 was for land, buildings, and improvements; $1,242,280.85 for laboratory equipment; $901,597.44 for machinery and power-plant equipment; and the remainder for certain helium properties, office furniture, automobiles, and other goods.
The property of former Albany College, at Albany, Oreg.
The total funds available to the Bureau of Mines for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1943, including direct appropriations, departmental allotments, reappropriated balances, and sums transferred from other departments for service work, were $32,178,548.44.
Of this amount $26,034,197.82 was spent, leaving an unexpended balance of $6,144,350.62.
On the regular work of the Bureau, $24,708,880.38 was expended.
These figures are subject to revision because of unpaid obligations.
Includes proceeds from sales of residue gas.
Table 1 presents classified information regarding the financial history of the Bureau for the fiscal years ended June 30, 1941–44.
Table 2 gives a statement of the distribution of congressional appropriations to the branches and divisions and the expenditure of these funds in 1943 by Bureau divisions.
UCCESSFUL conduct of the war is today the first duty of this Nation.
American soil must be guarded against further conflict, and victory on foreign shores must and will be won.
For these purposes, our armed forces must have a ceaseless supply of weapons, munitions, and fighting and transport vehicles—a supply that can be kept up only by adequate sources and production of many metals and minerals.
Furthermore, they must have ample supplies of water for all plants that are making war implements or furnishing power for their production, for military and naval installations, and for troops at the front.
Finally, military leaders must have accurate maps and other information about the lands in which fighting is or will be in progress.
The Geological Survey is devoting its every effort toward meeting those imperative needs.
Its trained personnel, its techniques, and its 60-year store of information are directed intensively to war problems.
By investigating and reporting on ore deposits in this country and Latin America it contributes largely to an adequate supply of minerals for war purposes.
By many special studies, supplementing its accumulated information on the surface and underground water resources of this country, it is rendering to the armed forces and to war industries thousands of helpful reports on available water supplies.
It is preparing maps of great areas of strategic importance in this country and abroad and is making for the armed forces many special reports on foreign lands—their terrain, water supplies, building materials, and other features affecting military operations.
During the fiscal year ended June 30.
1943, with augmented funds and personnel, all these tasks were carried forward with intensified vigor; the work accomplished is set forth in detail in the pages that follow.
Despite its concentration on wartime tasks, the Geological Survey has not lost sight of the fact that the results being obtained will be invaluable also for many peacetime uses.
Great tasks lie aheaa Under the dire necessities of war and the will to win, this Nation is pouring out its wealth of manpower and resources without stint or hesitation.
When vietory is won and this country must undertake its share in rebuilding a war-torn world, it will face problems no less grave and baffling than those of armed struggle.
It will face them shorn of much of its choicer mineral resources and must thereafter inereasingly rely on inferior grades or on foreign supplies.
To meet those aspects of the problem, the Nation must call upon the zeal and inspiration of its scientists, its engineers, and its technologists.
The Geological Survey must do its part in those future tasks; and it is looking forward and planning ways in which that part can best be aecomplished.
The rapidly expanding scale of war production has created an almost insatiable demand for mineral commodities, and this demand has increased until not only those materials hitherto classified as of strategic and critical importance are included but also a great number of other minerals and metals that either have been considered adequate in amount or in the past have been in relatively slight demand.
The shortage of shipping tonnage caused attention to be focused more sharply than ever on domestic sources of these materials and on sources in the other American Republies.
The Geologic Branch, with its experienced professional staff, was especially qualified to evaluate these sources and directed its activities almost exclusively to that task.
Cooperation was carried on with several States and with Federal organizations, many of which transferred funds to the Survey for the undertaking of particular tasks.
The Geologic Branch was thus placed fully on a war footing, acting as a fact-finding organization and as an adviser on mineral-production policies and on reserve problems.
More than 700 reports on field examination of mineral deposits were made to the various Federal agencies, many of them at the direct request of those agencies.
As the civilian economy of the country became more restricted during the year and a greater proportion of industry was converted to war work, practically all metals and minerals became war materials, and increased quantities of most of them were demanded.
Wash., Rolla, Mo., and College Park, Md.
Recommendations were made to the Bureau of Mines for exploration of many deposits, and pecessary geologic information was provided for most of the projects actually undertaken by the Bureau.
Although confidential reports for use by the war agencies and the Bureau of Mines constituted the bulk of the Survey's output during the year, 24 Strategic Minerals bulletins and 55 press memoranda were published making detailed mine maps available to interested operators.
Detailed records of the history, geology, mineralogy, reserves, and economic possibilities of essentially all known manganese deposits, mines, and prospects in the United States were completed.
Studies of manganese were completed in California, eastern Tennessee, and the Batesville district, Arkansas, but were continued in active areas in 18 other States.
Studies of copper, lead.
Attention was given both to minor districts that offered possibilities of increased production and to larger productive districts.
More than 100 chromite deposits in California, Montana, Oregon, and Georgia were studied, most of them in cooperation with Bureau of Mines exploratory programs.
These studies were important factors in demonstrating the presence of sufficient reserves to justify the erection of mills that are now producing 90 percent or more of the domestic chrome.
More than 100 separate tungsten areas, including more than twice that number of individual deposits, were examined.
This work was distributed over all of the Western States.
Detailed studies and reviews were made of a number of the more promising distriets.
Work was continued on domestic mercury deposits, and by the end of the year most of the important producing areas had been mapped in detail.
These studies have already resulted in the discovery of new ore reserves, notably at New Idria, Calif., and they have yielded a working basis for exploration and development elsewhere.
Vanadium investigations were continued, particular attention being paid to the Colorado Plateau and Idaho-Wyoming deposits.
Substantial progress was made in the estimation of ore reserves, and specific drilling programs in geologically favorable areas were initiated in cooperation with the Bureau of Mines and the war agencies.
A special survey of possible new sources of molybdenum, nickel, and cobalt was undertaken.
Altogether, 40 or more deposits of these metals received some attention in all the Western States, as well as in Wisconsin, New Hampshire, North Carolina, Arkansas, and Maine.
During the year the domestic situation with regard to antimony, bismuth, and arsenic was reviewed, and special studies and examinations were carried out or begun on deposits of these metals.
The search for raw materials from which aluminum and magnesium may be extracted continued during the year.
Alunite, magnesite, and dolomite deposits in the Western States, bauxite and highalumina clays in both the West and East were examined and reserves were estimated.
Deposits of talc, graphite, and strontium ores were studied.
General and detailed examinations of pegmatite deposits containing sheet mica, feldspar, beryllium, tantalum, and lithium were made in Maine, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Virginia, North Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, South Dakota, Colorado, New Mexico, Arizona, Nevada, California, Idaho, and Washington.
The pegmatite deposits of New England and the southern Black Hills were studied with a view toward composite mining of the pegmatite minerals.
Quartz crystals have been used for many years in radio communication, but until recently the quantity needed was only a few tons a vear, for which the United States was chiefly dependent upon imports from Brazil.
In view of the greatly increased demand for radio equipment to meet war requirements, the Geological Survey has undertaken a search for domestic deposits of quartz of oscillator quality in various parts of the country, particularly in Arkansas and in the Southeastern and Western States.
Results to date indicate that a modest supply of quartz of fine quality can be developed in Arkansas.
To meet the growing needs of the steel industry, work was focused on projects of special interest to war agencies to help relieve the eritical situation in iron-ore supplies, particular attention being paid to finding readily accessible reserves of direct-shipping lump ores of low phosphorus content.
Examinations were made of deposits in 22 States throughout the country.
Bauxite districts in Arkansas, Tennessee, Mississippi, Alabama, and Georgia were mapped in detail.
Many new deposits were discovered, and recommendations were made by the Geological Survey to the Bureau of Mines for the drilling of selected areas.
In the Appalachian region no large deposits of commercial grade were found.
In the Gulf Coastal Plain drilling was begun on four projeets which, by the end of year, showed about 900,000 tons of new commercial ore.
In Arkansas 20 areas were drilled, and it is estimated that at least 31/ million tons of commercial ore has been found in addition to the previously known reserves.
Although the eurrent expanded program of exploration and mining is meeting the present demand, it should be borne in mind that the Nation's reserves of metallurgical bauxite will be exhausted within a few years if the present rate of production is maintained.
The Geological Survey is therefore continuing its investigations of high-alumina clays in the hope that a-satisfactory process for extracting alumina from them will be perfected.
The Survey is also extending its search for bauxite into the West Indies in cooperation with the State Department.
Because of the increased need for fluorspar in the steel, aluminum, and chemical industries, the Geological Survey renewed the search for domestic deposits.
Detailed geologic mapping was completed in many localities, and recommendations for drilling and other exploratory work were made.
Additional fluorspar reserves have been found in the Kentucky-Illinois field and in Colorado, New Mexico, Utah, and other Western States.
The results of a more exteusive program of investigation carried on in cooperation with various States, particularly Illinois, Texas, and Idaho, are being made available through the Geological Survey to the several war agencies.
Geologic studies of mineral fuels included the search for additional deposits of coking coal suitable for western steel plants and studies of areas that give promise of promptly yielding additional supplies of oil.
At the request of the Petroleum Administrator for War, the oil and gas map of the United States was revised.