Y DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: The time approaches when the and stable uses for the facilities which we have developed in the greatest proportions in order to hasten victory.
During the past fiscal year, we have concentrated upon those facilities that provide the necessities of war from the natural resources.
We have hastened the construction of huge dams and the installation of generators to furnish power for war production plants.
We have extended our irrigation facilities to increase the production of food for war.
We have developed and improved technological processes to account for more fuels and minerals for war and to produce them faster.
If we could lump together as "power" the final results of such developments, then the Department of the Interior would be the steward of an accumulation of power which is probably the greatest that was ever administered under one jurisdiction.
A glance at a few of this Department's developments indicates how enormous they are in the aggregate.
The Department's installed capacity for the generation of hydroelectricity at the end of the fiscal year was nearly 2,500,000 kilowatts, roughly three times the entire developed capacity in South America in 1935, or one-half of that in Asia (including Soviet Asia), at the same time.
We generated 13,- 747,000,000 kilowatt-hours of electricity during the past fiscal year, about four times the amount that was used in Michigan in the manufacture of automobiles and automobile parts in 1939.
We irrigated more than 4,000,000 acres of land, equivalent to the acreage that is planted to crops in Louisiana in a normal year.
We have affirmed the presence of so many large deposits of essential ores that the effect would not be different if we had annexed a couple of mineral-rich States.
Our job soon will be to turn this vast block of power from war to peace.
It is a Herculean job but I think that we can master it by shifting, gradually if possible, from war to its nearest economic equivalent in the field of conservation; namely, regional development.
But it must be regional development at its boldest.
The program must embrace entire areas, usually the basins of great rivers and their tributaries; it must provide for full and unified development of all of the resources within the region, and an ideal program would call for simultaneous attack upon all phases of the job.
There is scarcely a facility of ours that is now producing for war that could not be put to use in such an undertaking.
It would absorb such material developments as dams and such tributary activities as surveys and metallurgical processes.
The benefits of such a project would be so widespread that, in my estimation, they could easily hold community interest and effort together in the post-war years.
Working in a typical region under a program for unified and simultaneous development, we would provide for irrigation at the upper reaches of a river, for deep-water navigation as far upstream as would be practicable, for barge transportation above that point, and for flood control wherever floods occur.
We would impound water for municipal supply, generate hydroelectric power and transmit it for use in factories and homes and on farms.
We would determine the location and volume of the ores and the bases of plastics that are amenable to processing or manufacture by means of electricity, and improve the means of processing them.
We would forestall or ameliorate the pollution of streams, safeguard the soil against erosion, protect wildlife, and develop recreational areas.
Considered as a means of transition from war to peace, conservation unitized on a great scale, is especially timely, but I think that it is to be commended as well for other reasons.
In the long view it is the most economic procedure.
When we plan all phases of the job as one we foresee some of the frictions that might develop between one facility and another, and dispose of them in the planning stage.
That is where alterations are cheapest.
We discover others and correct them at the next cheapest point—early in our operations.
By committing ourselves to the development of all of the resources of a region we preclude those conflicts that result from a commitment to half measures; conflicts, for example, between those who would profit and those who would suffer if we generated power for industry without providing against the pollution of the rivers.
We reap another advantage in the tendency of each phase in a large-scale development to assist each other phase and to assure its success.
A navigable river may join with power in attracting industries that need cheap transportation for raw materials and heavy output.
The advantage of reciprocal benefits among facilities was demonstrated, as on a prearranged proving ground, in the Pacific Northwest where the demands of war production—not our own independent planning—drew our numerous, large, and dissimilar developments into a close-knit unit.
The primary need was for hydroelectric power to energize the region's war production plants.
But plants needed more ores and deposits that were easy of access.
They required water for processing and for municipal supply in the new communities that grew up around new industries.
They required improved metallurgical processes and pilot plants and laboratories in which these processes might be proved.
In response, we affirmed the presence of iron ores that were a thousand miles nearer than the usual supply, and, as nearby as Arkansas, we disclosed huge new additional deposits of bauxite for urgently needed aluminum which, otherwise, would have had to be shipped from Dutch New Guinea.
In many other ways we responded to the region's needs by unitizing our facilities.
We have been justified already by a magnificent record in war production in the Pacific Northwest, and we may be justified again by that region's readiness to seize any opportunity that peace may offer for continued functioning.
It is ready precisely because its developments are a unit.
The functioning of no facility would be delayed for lack of supporting facilities.
Other regions are equally in need of coordinated development of their natural resources.
The hurried demands of war production merely dramatized the need in the Pacific Northwest.
There are vast areas throughout all of the West in which great potentials would be realized by similar coordination.
If we launched a program of full measure to make actualities of these potentials, we might require stronger implementation, but we would not have to strike out on new lines in the field of conservation.
From its beginnings this Administration has proceeded in that direction.
We have sought better coordination in the development of our resources, and we have assumed increasingly greater responsibility for the equitable distribution of the resulting benefits among the greatest possible number of persons.
You will recall that we requested the return of the Bureau of Mines to the Department to team with the Geological Survey, and that under your second and third Reorganization Plans we brought in the Bureau of Biological Survey and the Bureau of Fisheries, and consolidated them as the Fish and Wildlife Service, the better to unify our conservation program.
We proceeded toward the same goal in establishing such new agencies as the petroleum Conservation Division, and in organizing centralized controls such as the Office of Land Utilization.
We have consistenly shaped our policies toward an equitable use of the natural resources.
We have rejected the old conception of a dam proximately 135,000 new irrigated farms would be created and the livelihood of more than 150,000 additional families would be stabilized in regions in which a maximum erop production is uncertain because of a deficient water supply.
The new irrigation systems would serve 6,705,000 aeres of new land and furnish supplemental water for an additional 9,364,000 acres of land, now without adequate irrigation supplies.
The same reservoirs that would impound the storage water for this irrigation would make possible the addition of 1,765,000 kilowatts of power on existing or authorized projects and would make available 2,579,000 kilowatts of firm power capacity, on projects that are under investigation.
The inventory, surpassing in scope any other program that the Bureau has presented in its 42-year history, was prepared in recognition of the fact that approximately 3,000,000 returning service men, demobilized war workers and others in the West will seek employment.
More than 260,000 of this number will be fitted by training and experience to undertake farming on irrigated land.
Furthermore, the program is well suited to meet the need for intensified reclamation in the West.
In the 11 far-western States the population increased about 60 percent from 1920 to 1940, while the increase in irrigation has been less than 10 percent.
The extension of irrigation, as outlined in the inventory, would increase the purchasing power of the West for products that are produced elsewhere by $1,250,000,000 annually.
The construction cost of all of the projects in the program would be nearly $3,000,000,000 on the basis of 1940 prices.
An expenditure of $793,000,000 would be required to complete the 40 projects that are authorized or under construction, so that work on them could be undertaken or intensified immediately.
Most of the program consists of potential projects, many of which would require special legislation before construction could be undertaken.
Substitutions may be made in the list as surveys of projects and basins are completed.
Approximately 170 irrigation and multiple-purpose projects, and 50 river basins and sub-basins, were under study during the year.
Seventy-eight detailed field reports which involve construction that would cost $547,000,000 are ready to put into effect.
The Bureau's peacetime planning for the orderly agricultural and industrial development of the West and for its accelerated wartime activity continued to bear fruit in the field of power and crop production.
There were spectacular additions in our power installation in the fiscal years 1942 and 1943, but achievements during 1944 surpassed even the records of those years.
More than 500,000 kilowatts of new power capacity—exceeding the total pre-war installation of the State of Nebraska—were added during the year, the greatest expansion of this kind by a single organization in a single year.
Our total installation of approximately 2,360,000 kilowatts exceeds Reclamation's pre-Pearl Harbor capacity by 1,330,000 kilowatts.
The additions that the Bureau made during the war in the 11 far-western States constitute 84 percent of the expansion made in the area by all systems.
The power output matched the unparalelled increases in rated capacity.
Approximately 14,500,000,000 kilowatt-hours of energy—a 52 percent increase over the preceding year—were produced.
Nearly all of the new energy made available played a direct part in war production.
The war industries in the Pacific Southwest were dependent for 50 percent of their power on Boulder, Parker, and other Reclamation installations.
The world's largest magnesium plant used a fourth of Boulder's huge 6,333,000-kilowatt-hour output, and aluminum plants took a major portion of the power of Grand Coulee Dam in the Pacific Northwest.
Gross revenues from the sale of Reclamation power reached a new high of $18,992,000, an increase of $4,438,000 over the fiscal year 1943.
These returns are highly significant to the Reclamation program.
Power revenues will repay half of the investment in projects that were outlined at the beginning of the war.
Reclamation's contribution of food for war was increasingly impressive.
Increases in 2 basic crops indicated the spirit in which the Bureau and the farmers on its 44 irrigation projects responded to the threat of a food shortage.
Potato production in the calendar year of 1943 increased by 52 percent over 1942, and bean production increased by 23 percent.
The potato output was sufficient to provide a year's supply for 31,000,000 persons, and the bean yield to serve 30,000,000.
Alfalfa production was also at an unprecedented high.
This crop, fed to beef and dairy herds, would provide annual rations of milk for 4,800,000 persons and a yearly supply of beef for 5,500,000 persons.
The acreage in production, the total volume of crops, and the crop values also increased.
A total of 4,055,329 acres was served a full or partial supply of water by Bureau systems.
These lands produced 10,660,000 tons of food and forage crops, which were valued at $388,670,969.
Eighty-three percent of the area for which the Bureau was prepared to supply water was in cultivation.
Despite the continued restrictions on critical materials, and on manpower for irrigation construction, the Bureau made progress in bringing water to land on which agricultural production could be increased.
Under the war food program, the War Production Board issued clearances that will bring under irrigation 243,657 acres of new land and will provide supplemental water to 1,022,125 acres that are handicapped by shortages in moisture.
All authorizations were granted in the fiscal year except for four projects on which work had previously been cleared.
The Reclamation service of providing municipal-industrial water also aided in the prosecution of the war.
Supplemental supplies were served to important municipalities, in which the demand was inereased by an influx of industrial workers, and to major war industries, including a $200,000,000 steel plant near Provo, Utah, and the world's largest magnesium plant at Basic, Nev.
At the close of the year the Bureau had in operation, under construction, or authorized, 78 projects in 16 western States.
In nearly all of this area rainfall is inadequate for sustained crop production and hydroelectric power is the main driving force in industry.
The area that was served by the 52 Bureau projects that delivered water or produced power is populated by more than 5,000,000 persons.
As we enlarged our hydroelectric installations and increased our flow of power, new complexities arose in the fields of operation and marketing.
The increase in our own installation and production was, in itself, enormous; and on September 1, 1943, the power from the Grand River, Norfolk, and Denison dams was added to our own, bringing the total of more than 3,000,000 kilowatts of installed capacity.
Consequently, we assumed a heavier burden of work and responsibility in the Division of Power.
Here we strove, in operating our system and in marketing our power, to prepare for transition to a peacetime economy while meeting the immediate interests of a Nation at war.
This Division organized the Southwestern Power Administration to operate the Grand River Dam and to market the power from the three dams that added their output to ours.
This agency, created by authority of Executive order as a wartime measure, is now in full operation.
In the Division of Power as a whole our activities were especially directed toward the establishment of rate schedules and the negotiation of power sales contracts.
The Division reviewed or participated in the establishment of a number of rate schedules and in the negotiation of various contracts for the sale of power by the Bonneville Power Administration, by the Southwestern Power Administration, and by the Bureau of Reclamation, and helped to establish rates for the sale of power from the Fort Peck Dam, which was turned over to the Bureau of Reclamation for marketing.
Most of the contracts were negotiated on a war duration basis.
The Division also took an active part in determining the allocation of the costs of the Grand Coulee Dam as one step in the ultimate establishment of rates for the sale of Grand Coulee power.
Closely allied to the Coulee allocation are the studies, participated in by the Division, regarding the Central Valley project of California.
These were undertaken to determine the best method and the rates at which benefits from the project will be made available to the people of California.
In anticipation of the time when the need of power for war will cease and industry can return to peacetime production, the Division has given considerable attention to the proparation of post-war plans and programs.
It has participated in studies that concern the further development of the river resources of the Nation, and in this pursuit it has given much assistance to congressional committees and to individual members of Congress.
Attention has been devoted to the problem of the conversion and disposition of Government-owned war plants, and to the establishment of peacetime industrial economies which would be based upon the liberal use of low-cost power.
Discussions also have been initiated concerning the disposition of fuel-operated power plants that were constructed during the war for use of Military Establishments.
The objective is the incorporation of these fuel plants into the facilities of Federally owned hydroelectric plants as a means of economically providing peaking power or standby power which must now be purchased.
In the event that Congress passes legislation authorizing the delivery of power to the Secretary of the Interior for marketing from dams constructed by the United States Corps of Engineers, it is also anticipated that the Division will be called upon to undertake the organization of additional marketing units to dispose of such power.
In the Bonneville Power Administration we have also worked toward the restoration of the Nation's industrial balance after the war.
The wartime industrialization of the Pacific Northwest has contributed much toward this end.
It is widely recognized both throughout this region and the Nation that these gains must be fostered in the interest of a sound economic posterity.
From its inception the Bonneville Power Administration's activities have been planned upon the fundamental idea of regional development.
Through the war years, the acceleration of the Government's transmission grid construction program to serve war industries at the same time has provided, some years in advance of schedule, a potent tool for both reconstruction and regional development.
In making available low-cost hydroelectric power to the people of the Pacific Northwest, the Bonneville Power Administration is earning both the confidence of the people of the region and a sound position of leadership in regional developmental programs.
Administration has established certain guiding principles or objectives in the interest of securing the greatest possible benefit from the resources of the region for the greatest number of people.
To máke power a tool for true development.
The cheap and abundant electric power of the region must become the means for opening new opportunoties for investment, enterprise, and employment—for agriculture, for new industries, for small business and for the home owner.
To provide larger quantities of power at lower rates, thereby increasing over-all consumption.
The development of the resources of the region through the use of power as a public enterprise provides a vital ingredient for establishing a sound economic base for private enterprise.
To create new jobs in enduring projects for returned servicemen, demobilized war workers, and others.
There will exist a readjustment problem for some 500,000 workers in the Pacific Northwest alone when the war is finished.
To add new wealth creating activities to the taxable wealth of the community.
In the final analysis, the economically secure community is the very foundation for solvent national Government.
To establish a higher general standard of living.
With the distribution of abundant low-cost hydroelectric power throughout the region, living can become more enjoyable and work can be made easier for farm dwellers and city dwellers alike.
To insure the national investment in developmental projects of the region.
The multiple benefits of the dams and the transmission system which the Federal Government has built-reclamation and irrigation of thousands of acres of formerly unused farm lands, widespread distribution and sale of facilities for bulk freight movement on our rivers—will proyide full protection for the taxpayers and full payment of their investment, besides accomplishing the basic objectives of regional development and the enhancement of our national economic position.
Approximately 45 percent of all of the electric energy that was consumed in the five Pacific Northwest States of Oregon, Washington, Idaho, Montana, and Utah during the 12-month period ending June 30, 1944, was supplied by the two Federal power plants at Bonneville and Grand Coulee Dams.
During fiscal year 1944, the Bonneville Administration sold 8,741,- 106,000 kilowatt-hours of electric energy at a total cost to its customers of $20,893,363, or an average of 2.39 mills a kilowatt-hour.
The rapid growth of the Bonneville Power Administration to its present position as one of the three largest power marketing agencies in the Nation is shown clearly by a comparison with fiscal year 1939 power sales, which totaled only 30,042,911 kilowatt-hours at a cost of $49,835.
The output of the Bonneville and Grand Coulee power plants is averaging between 25,000,000 and 30,000,000 kilowatt-hours a day, or approximately 10,000,000,000 kilowatt-hours a year.
During the 6 years beginning in the fiscal year 1939, when the first generators at Bonneville dam were placed in operation, the Bonneville Power Administration had sold 17,927,787,000 kilowatt-hours with revenues amounting to $40,885,633.
This record of service evidences not only a material contribution to the progress of the war but also a substantial participation in strengthening the industrial and economic base of the region.
Our war and post-war policy has been further reflected in the work of the Southwestern Power Administration.
Although conditions may change before we are able to foresee them, this Administration is designing a construction program to provide carrying capacity which will be essential to our post-war operations.
Changes in the program may be necessary before it can be carried out.
But the basic plan is being drawn in anticipation of a definite need.
Through the year this Administration provided adequate power and continuity of service at the lowest rates that were consistent with reasonable economic requirements.
The average rate was 4.21 mills per kilowatt-hour, and, since approximately 95 percent of the power delivered went to war industries, this low rate has resulted in a decided saving to the tax payer.
It has enabled industries to provide essential war needs more economically.
Power continued to flow to the great aluminum reduction plant near Lake Catherine, Ark.
In this service to the aluminum plant this Administration continued to operate and maintain 200 miles of transmission lines, constructed and owned by the Ark-La Cooperative of the Rural Electrification Administration.
Delivery of power was continued to the Oklahoma Ordnance Works for the manufacture of explosives and also to Camp Gruber, an Army cantonment near Braggs, Okla.
The Administration furnished power, as we had previously, to municipalities and Rural Electrification Administration Cooperatives which, in turn, furnish it to war industries.
The Administration pursued its system-interconnection policy with private utilities which aided them in fulfilling their power commitments without service interruptions.
With military requirements dipping deep into domestic petroleum reserves and discoveries of new oil fields declining, the Bureau mapped out a long-range program of research in the production of synthetic liquid fuels from coal, oil shale, and other materials.
This will involve the construction and operation of demonstration plants to provide a blueprint for private industry.
Meanwhile the Bureau continued laboratory-scale investigations of the various synthetic fuel-making processes and gained widespread attention as.the war rationing of gasoline made American motorists conscious of motorfuel shortages.
One pilot plant for the complete gasification of subbituminous coal and lignite was designed, built, and successfully tested in 1944, and another was under construction.
The completion of three new helium plants increased the total to five, enabling the Bureau to meet every demand of the armed forces and to release large quantities of this lightweight, nonburning"miracle gas" to scientific, medical, and industrial consumers.
The United States enjoys a world monopoly of helium, but the supply is not inexhaustible.
However, an adequate reserve for the future is assured by the Bureau's conservation plan in which helium, extracted from natural gas going to the commercial fuel market, is returned to the original subterranean vaults for storage until it is needed.
Official recognition of the Bureau's extraordinary achievements in helium production for war came in January 1944, when the Army-Navy "E" was awarded to the plants at Amarillo and Exell, Tex.
Charged with the seemingly paradoxical tasks of helping supply more oil for war and prolonging the life of the Nation's natural crudeoil deposits, the Bureau achieved both.
Research disclosed new sources and improved the quality of ingredients that were needed to increase the production of high-octane fuel for war planes, toluene for explosives, and other petroleum products.
At the same time, application of the modern engineering principles of secondary recovery extended the period in which the United States can depend upon petroleum reserves as its main source of liquid fuels.
A number of surveys were made of oil field practices and reservoir components, and more than 40 engineering reports were submitted to the Petroleum Administration for War, operators, and others who were concerned with meeting the war needs for special lubricants, fuels, and chemicals.
Wartime shortages of labor and equipment, longer working hours, and the need for greater production called for increased emphasis on the Bureau's health and safety programs in the mineral industries.
Safety experts trained thousands of workers in first aid and in minerescue and accident-prevention procedures.
Approximately 3,000 coal mines in the United States and Alaska had been surveyed for safety conditions and practices, many for the second time, and Federal inspectors reported thousands of improvements that protect life and property.
The effect of these precautions was demonstrated as accident-frequency rates in reinspected operations declined about 6 percent and as the industry's fatality rate reached the lowest point in coal-mining history.
Achieved despite adverse conditions related to the war, these gains foretold greater attainments after victory.
The opposition expressed by many operators to the legislation and the early phases of the coal mine inspection program turned to praise and wholehearted cooperation.
Cooperating with the Bureau's wartime plant-security programs, the mineral industries' record was not blemished by a single clearcut case of sabotage.
Under the Federal Explosives Act, the Bureau inspected stores of nonmilitary explosives and licensed the manufacturers, distributors, and users of nonmilitary explosives and their ingredients.
The mineral production security program was so effective that it was curtailed after Bureau engineers, trained in the prevention of sabotage and of subversive activities, examined mines, mills, and smelters to suggest suitable precautions.
Thousands of chemical analyses and explosives control tests were made in the Bureau's laboratories, the majority of them for the Army and Navy.
To promote safety in the manufacture and handling of explosive and inflammable materials, experiments were conducted to determine the characteristics of military pyrotechnics, explosives, powdered metals and plasties, coal dust, vapors, gases, and liquids.
Gas masks and other respiratory devices were tested, and inspections were made to improve hygienic conditions in mines, plants, and some Army Establishments.
Increasing requests from war agencies and industries for factual reports on minerals to guide their programs resulted in a further step-up in the Bureau's statistical services which already had been operating at high speed.
The Bureau compiled up-to-date information on such subjects as domestic and foreign production, consumption, requirements, trade, uses, and stocks of mineral commodities.
Many special studies were undertaken for the War and Navy Departments, War Produetion Board, Solid Fuels Administration for War, and Petroleum Administration for War, and many more will be required in the solution of national and international post-war problems.
The Geological Survey prepared plans within the fiscal year for two related but distinct programs—one for the investigations and mapping that it should promptly undertake to provide the fundamental information required by the agencies that are now laying out plans for post-war construction and development projects, and the other for the long-range investigative and mapping program that it should undertake after peace returns.
The Geologic Branch has continued to devote itself very largely to studving deposits of minerals and ores that are needed in war, and to estimating the reserves and grades of these materials.
Many thousands of deposits have now been examined, and the information obtained constitutes an inventory of the Nation's reserves of metals and minerals which is essential to peacetime industry as well as to the conduet of the war.
A number of minerals at first considered critical in the war program are now known to be adequate in quantity, at least for the present, but the accelerated use of minerals to meet the war demands has resulted in a serious depletion of the reserves of many of the more common metals.
A wise policy, therefore, demands that the national inventory of mineral reserves be intensified and kept current as new deposits are discovered and older ones become exhausted.
Among the outstanding war projects carried on by the Alaskan Branch was the continued compilation of aeronautical maps and charts for the Army air forces.
The method of compilation from air photographs was largely devised by civilian members of its staff.
By this trimetrogen method, so named from the camera lenses used, the Survey has furnished planimetric maps covering about 5,300,000 square miles of strategic area widely distributed throughout the world.
The Branch has also prepared reconnaissance topographic maps of selected areas totaling more than 500,000 square miles.
Another important project has been the attempt to unify many of the activities concerned with the search for or development of Alaskan oil resources.
Although these negotiations are still in progress, the Alaskan Branch has made a start on carrying out its part of such a program by sending five parties into the field to conduct such preliminary work as can be done within the limits of its regular appropriations.
Adequate topographic maps showing woodland coverage and highway facilities are a necessity in the successful waging of any war.
The Topographic Branch has bent every effort to the making of such maps of vast areas of strategic importance within the United States and also in Europe and other theaters of war.
Special topographie maps were made for Army maneuvers; for the investigation of critical minerals which are indispensable to successful military operations; for coal explorations; and for river utilization and flood control.
Of great importance for the defense of our island possessions was the completion of the topographic mapping of Puerto Rico and Vieques.
The importance of water to both war and post-war activities has been emphasized by more than 5,000 requests made of the Geological Survey within the year for special reports on water in relation to problems that have arisen in the construction and operation of military, naval, and industrial establishments and in post-war planning.
These problems have involved the quantity and quality of the surface and ground water that was available or could be made available for use at hundreds of different sites in every State and in the Territories of Alaska and Hawaii.
This important public service by the Water Resources Branch has been possible because of its mass of published and unpublished information whieh has been collected regularly for many years and supplemented by numerous special field investigations.
The staff is decentralized, and it operates from about 100 field headquarters.
Much of the work was done in cooperation with Federal, State, and municipal officials, who have aided materially in the solving of special problems.
Water experts of the Survey have continued to serve with the armed forces, either as officers or civilians, in obtaining water for the Armies in the field.
The Conservation Branch has two prineipal functions.
The first is to make surveys and investigations of the water and mineral resources of the public domain and to apply the results to public-land administration.
The second is to supervise operations for the development of power and the production of minerals, including oil, gas, coal, potash, sodium, lead, and zine, from public lands, Indian lands, and naval petroleum reserves.
Additional funds, made available to the Conservation Branch during the year, provided extra assistance and equipment -necessary for initiating war-related field investigations and the preparation of reports dealing with power and fuels and with minerals essential to the national war program.
This activity, if maintained on the present scale, will reveal new reserves of such resources and will provide engineering information that is essential to the elimination of waste.
Our work in the Solid Fuels Administration for War helped to strengthen the coal industry for this emergency, but no legislation has been designed specifically to help us to stabilize the industry after victory.
We so regulated the distribution of coal that war industries, first of all, might receive their necessary supplies, and, after them, other consumers were taken care of according to their relative needs.
This helped to stabilize war manufacture in coal-burning plants, and to facilitate the operations of railroads and public utilities.
By establishing relative needs for other than production use, and by regulating distribution accordingly, we forestalled widespread suffering among householders.
The distribution of coal was so arranged that we developed and put into effect over-all distribution programs which fully related the anticipated supply to estimated requirements, and the programs were designed to assure an equitable distribution of all of the coal which can be produced under present conditions.
We helped to maintain maximum production at the mines, striving to retain mine manpower and to increase working hours and the number of days of work in the pits.
We helped to furnish additional machinery and equipment and in the development and extension of mines.
All of these measures were carried out with the cooperation of the coal industry and of coal consumers.
The SFAW encountered a coal supply crisis only a few days after its establishment, when the first in a series of widespread mine strikes occurred.
These strikes cost an estimated 40,000,000 tons of potential production in 1943.
Thereafter, through 1943 and into early 1944, we dealt with a series of major and minor crises caused by coal shortages.
While meeting the demands of the day, we enlarged the SFAW staff, formed advisory committees of experienced leaders of the coal industry, and began the development of long-range plans to avert further difficulties.
The programs that are now in effect cover coal distribution from the mine to the industrial plant and to the household consumer, and take into account differences in grades, kinds, and sizes of coal and the varying requirements of consumers.
These programs will continue, subject to any modifications which changes in the coal supply may dictate, until March 31, 1945.
Then they may be extended if necessary.
They allocate scarce hard and soft coals among users in accordance with their needs and essentiality, encourage the use of alternative coals, where available, and spread the supply by limiting the amounts of the scarce coals that domestic consumers may receive.
This will necessitate the extensive use of alternative fuels by such consumers and the practice of rigid conservation.
The SFAW was given the added responsibility during the year of distributing equitably the limited supply of coke available for domestic consumption.
A Nation-wide network of industry committees has been established to keep the SFAW informed of conditions in retail distribution and supply in order to avert local emergencies.
If unavoidable crises occur, the committees will function to pool the resources of their communities, thus mitigating the distress of individual consumers.
The major production problem has been a growing shortage of manpower in the mines.
This has placed a definite limit upon the productive capacity of the Nation's mines.
Operators and miners have performed a difficult task in producing coal in spite of handicaps.
Much of the increased production has been in the strip-mined coal from temporary operations, and in low-grade coals which are suitable only for certain industrial uses.
However, industrial consumers who are able to utilize these coals have been required to accept them so far as possible, thus freeing the scarcer coals for use by industries which cannot shift, and for the use of domestic consumers.
Consumption of coal, in view of the production losses during the strikes and the impossibility of increasing production because of manpower shortages, would have been severely curtailed in the fiscal year except for the millions of tons of bituminous coal in consumer storage piles.
This supply was accumulated in 1941 and 1942 against apparent emergencies.
By compelling users with adequate stocks to draw upon them for part of their current consumption, the SFAW freed large tonnages of newly mined coal for the use of industries with insufficient stock piles and for distribution by retail dealers.
With the production lag in some coals that are most essential to industry and to domestic users, it is evident that the Nation's coal problems are not solved.
Nevertheless, a smooth-functioning mechanism now exists to lessen the impact of difficulties and to facilitate the flow of coal for essential uses.
As a result of our work in the Coal Mines Administration the strikebound coal industry was brought back to full production without our resorting to force.
Before the end of the year we were able to return to private possession and control all except two of the Nation's anthracite and bituminous coal mines of which we took possession under your orders when the industry was paralyzed by strikes.
By the time the mines were returned, harmony had been restored between management and labor, firm wage contracts were in effect, bituminous coal production had increased to the largest volume it has ever reached, and anthracite output was at its wartime peak.
Under a Government-mine-workers’ contract, which provided for no increase in the basic rate of pay specified in the miners' pre-war contracts with the operators, but which called for substantially increased working time, the men improved their efforts to augment coal output.
This contract served as the model for the operators and miners who, as a result of our intercession, were brought together by mutually acceptable wage contracts within the terms of the national stabilization program.
For years the industry has failed to operate in the absence of a contract between its owners and employees.
As rapidly as the new industry contracts were effectuated, we began to return the mines to their private owners, and by June 21, 1944, all of the mining properties had been returned, except the two mines of one bituminous coal company which was engaged in a legal test of the portal-to-portal compensation which was provided for under the industry-mine-workers' agreement.
The Government first took possession of the mines on May 1, 1943.
October 12, 1943.
On November 1, 1943, possession was taken for the second time.
During the 13 months that the mines were in the possession of the Government, production per man was the highest on record, and the mine fatality rate from November 1943 through May 1944, was the lowest for any comparable period in our mining industry.
We organized the Coal Mines Administration early in July 1943, to administer Government possession of the mines.
Its personnel was kept at a minimum by utilizing, in large measure, the trained workers in existing Bureaus of the Department of the Interior.
The Coal Mines Administration, having done its work, is now being liquidated.
In the General Land Office we have worked as hard to fit ourselves for the best post-war land administration as we have worked to make our great contributions to the war program.
One of our big post-war jobs will be the administration of a carefully developed system of stabilized-land settlement in Alaska.
Settlement in the Territory has a strong appeal, particularly to those vigorous and adventurous citizens who seek the opportunity to pioneer.
We must do our utmost to foster that undertaking, for through such a spirit America has grown great.
It is equally essential that the disastrous ghost-town experiences of earlier settler days on the mainland be avoided in the development of Alaska.
Plans already laid by the General Land Office for the attainment of that objective can be facilitated by congressional authority to extend to Alaska the requirement that public land, before disposal, must be classified as suited to the use for which it is sought.
Land settlement in the United States by returned service men constitutes another high priority problem.
We could assist greatly in its solution by the establishment and maintenance of an inventory of all Federal lands, in order that a fresh determination may be made of the locations of the comparatively few tracts on the public domain which may still be suitable for homesteading.
Increasingly mechanized armies require greater amounts of minerals for war and call for the highest degree of efficacy in our national mineral economy.
But we cannot achieve that efficiency without a rejuvenation of our Federal mining laws.
Vast areas of public lands, and lands acquired under many Federal laws, constitute a storehouse of essential minerals, yet, under present statutes, no method exists by which the United States may catalog and, in cooperation with private initiative, develop the resources on those lands through leases based on sound principles of conservation.
Legislation that would provide for the marshalling our full complement of mineral resources is a necessary adjunct to adequate stockpiling.
The soundness of this Administration's conservation policies was clearly demonstrated by the accomplishments of the General Land Office in the administration of the public domain during the past fiscal period.
Although a full realization of the program for maximum benefits to the people from the use of natural resources, particularly minerals, was blocked by opposition to a much-needed revision of the Federal mining laws, there were other distinct gains registered during the year.
For example, operations for the 12-month period were featured by the highest bid ever received by the Government for the privilege of drilling for oil on a single acre of Federal land, when $26,216.21 per acre were offered as a bonus for leased land in the Elk Basin field in Wyoming.
Moreover, the cash receipts from the activities of the office were the largest in 20 years, exceeding expenditures for its maintenance at a ratio of $6.18 to $1, and producing a total cash return of more than $14,000,000.
In addition to furnishing minerals for war through the administration of the mining and mineral leasing laws, the office made a greater aggregate contribution of public land and resources for war uses than ever before.
More than 15,400,000 acres of the public domain have been made available for training areas, target ranges, and other military uses during the emergency period, and approximately 70,000,000 other acres were set aside to permit the exploration and development of minerals for war.
Timber for war uses was furnished from the revested Oregon and California railroad grant lands under its jurisdiction.
Stability for industries and communities in that region will result from the wider establishment, contemplated for the near future, of economic units for sustained yield forestry operations.
In the Office of Land Utilization we placed special emphasis on plans for extending our land conservation and development programs after the war to furnish interim employment, if needed, during the demobilization and reconversion period.
A major forward step in administrative management was taken by the establishment of a Water Resources Committee in the Office of the Secretary, to assemble and disseminate essential information concerning water-development programs involving the Department; to review water-development projects proposed by the bureaus and offices of the Department; and to formulate such recommendations as will assure an all-inclusive departmental water conservation policy.
Although continuing to operate on reduced wartime budgets, the land-conservation programs which are coordinated by this office made satisfactory progress in the protection of resources and of strategic facilities on the public domain during the fiscal year.
Forest and range fires were held to low levels.
Excellent cooperation on the part of range users increased the effectiveness of soil and moisture operations.
The 11 conscientious objectors' camps operated by the Department continued to give first priority to conservation programs, including fire, insect, and disease control.
Our post-war plans in the Grazing Service provide for the employment, on a 3-year basis, of 31,000 men on 60,000 projects of 16 major types, including soil, water, and forage improvements, in 200 western counties.
This work would aid in the restoration and better use of the Federal range, and would condition these long-neglected lands to contribute their fair share to the local and national economy.
Such projects would increase production on the range, and would protect the water and the soil on the public and other lands.
Although primarily concerned with the administration, protection, and development of the grazing and related resources on the 142,000,000 acres of Federal range in the 60 grazing districts in 10 western States, the work of the Grazing Service during the year just closed included many other activities relating to the war and after-war period.
The Grazing Service made available 14,428,919 acres of public land for maneuvers, precision bombing, gunnery ranges, training camps, airfields, and other military purposes.
Grazing privileges were issued to 22,562 livestock producers for 10,694,305 head of livestock.
Alternating military and grazing uses in large areas enabled range lands to serve two war uses.
Extensive range improvements were postponed to conserve man power and materials.
Access roads of 788 miles were constructed, making a total of 1,570 miles in 2 years to tap 20 types of critical materials in 8 States.
Changes in administrative objectives and procedures necessitated by wartime economy surely will carry over into our post-war activities in the Fish and Wildlife Service.
It has been necessary, for instance, to give rather close attention to labor problems in the fishery industries.
As a result of the benefits obtained, it is planned to establish a labor unit, the operations of which will contribute to the solution of post-war problems in employment and social security.
Methods have changed through an increased adoption of scientific management principles in fish production, whether in the farm ponds that are now being built by the thousands, in the lakes and streams providing important recreational angling, or in the bays and seas which are the source of the greatest commercial yield of fishery products.
A 3-year development program in fish and wildlife conservation is ready to be put into action whenever required.
This program will provide employment for thousands of persons and will benefit numerous industries which manufacture the supplies that will be needed.
A record take of fur seals brought returns expected to exceed $4,500,000, and economic uses of the wildlife refuges yielded an income of $244,700.
The Fish and Wildlife Service has put boats and buildings to war use, its refuge lands are used on a vast scale for military training and for actual fighting bases, and its personnel cooperates in obserying enemy submarines and in guarding against sabotage and subversion.
We have brought about the accomplishment, to an encouraging degree, of the primary tasks which we undertook in the Office of the Coordinator of Fisheries.
This applies to the Nation's war and postwar needs.
With the demand for fishery products greatly increased by the war program, the most essential need was to halt the decline in production which set in early in 1942, and, if possible, to restore the yield to the pre-war level.
Through the unceasing and closely coordinated efforts of industry and Government, this aim is now being accomplished.
The total yield of fishery products in 1943 was slightly more than 4,000,000,000 pounds, a substantial increase over the 3,700,000,000 pounds landed in 1942, and approximately equivalent to the catch in 1940.
While the yield in 1944 cannot be foreseen with accuracy at this point—June 30, 1944—the upward trend appears to be continuing and a total production of approximately 4,300,000,000 pounds is anticipated.
The restoration to the fishing industry of the greater part of its machinery of production is largely responsible for this improvement.
The requisitioning of 700 of the finest fishing boats for the Army and Navy caused a loss in productive capacity amounting to 50 percent or even more in certain fisheries.
Restoration of the depleted fleet is proceeding rapidly.
Total returns of requisitioned craft now amount to approximately 40 percent of those originally taken; while authorizations for the construction of new vessels totaled 1,010 by June 30.
Of these, 661 were scheduled for completion by the middle of 1944.
When construction of the authorized craft has been completed the fishing fleet will have regained its full strength and will consist of a larger proportion of new vessels than ever before.
Similarly, the situation with respect to the repair and maintenance of vessels and shore plants shows further improvement over last year, while the gear situation is generally satisfactory.
Not all of the wartime problems of the fishing industry have been solved.
There are not enough men to operate the vessels, the shortage of captains, mates, and other skilled personnel being especially serious.
Labor is critically scarce in many processing plants.
Operating programs administered by the coordinator's office are still required in the salmon and pilchard fisheries to obtain the maximum production and the most efficient utilization of the catch.
Difficulties of refrigerating, storing, and transporting the products of the fisheries have not yet been satisfactorily resolved.
One of the most significant and gratifying facts, however, is the sound condition of the fishery resource.
Because the precepts of wise conservation have been followed even while attempts were being made to inerease production, many important commercial species are actually showing signs of an increase in abundance.
Instead of being impaired by the heavy demands of war, the fisheries will be in excellent condition for post-war development.
In the National Park Service we have contributed toward the Nation's post-war future by holding intact those priceless remnants of the American scene entrusted to our guardianship.
Despite the issuance of more than 1,000 authorizations to war agencies for the use of park lands and facilities, there has been but little impairment of park features.
They would have been impaired if we had yielded to organized group pressures, without questioning the alleged critical necessity for invading the parks, or if we had not helped to explore alternative courses of action, when the use of resources in the parks was proposed.
Credit is due to the representatives of war agencies, military and otherwise, who have realized the value to the Nation of preserving the national parks unimpaired.
The National Park Service during the past year has been subjected to some unwarranted and unjust criticisms by interests that have seen in the war an opportunity to utilize, for their own gain, certain natural resources hitherto denied them because of well-established park policies.
These resources include representative areas of virgin forest, the forage available for cattle and sheep in the meadows, water resources, and minerals.
Although these do not bulk large in the total economic life of the Nation—the acreage of the Park System is only three-fourths of 1 percent of the land area of the United States groups that stand to gain thereby have tried to reopen old issues as to exploitation of the parks under the pretext of war needs.
These interests represent small, but vociferous, minorities.
Despite a country-wide campaign of misrepresentation, against designating the Jackson Hole as a national monument, I am convinced that the persons who have directed this eampaign do not represent publie opinion nationally or in the region concerned.
There recently was published in the Congressional Record, by the chairman of the Public Lands Committee of the House of Representatives, a petition signed by more than 100 leading citizens and business people of the Jackson Hole region, asking that this area, rich in scenery, wildlife, and historical interest, be preserved for park and recreational purposes, rather than allow it to go the way of unplanned exploitation.
Although we have stood ready to sacrifice the park spruce for Army aircraft construction, if absolutely necessary, the need was met without destroying the magnificent "rain forests" of Olympic National Park in the State of Washington.
It has not been necessary, either, to open the national parks of California to cattle grazing.
The situation that confronted the cattle industry in the State during the drought was serious, but the use of the meadows and uplands of the parks in the Sierra Nevada for grazing would have accommodated fewer than onehalf of 1 percent of California's approximately 1,400,000 beef cattle, and that only for a brief period.
This inconsiderable aid would have been out of proportion to the resultant damage to public properties.
Two important areas were added to the National Park System during the year—the 700,000-acre Big Bend National Park on the Rio Grande in Texas, through the donation of lands by that State, and the home of Franklin D. Roosevelt national historic site.
Since the attack on Pearl Harbor, 4,135,000 men and women in uniform have visited the national parks and allied areas, including scenes of important events in the Nation's history, and, as a result, they have the better appreciated the greatness of America.
The progress in the Office of Indian Affairs has been better than could have been expected considering the innumerable hampering restrictions that are placed upon our administrative procedures.
Administration will be good, in my opinion, to the extent that a competent administrator is left free, within reasonable limits, to apply his energies and his funds as shifts of circumstance require.
But the Indian Office is restricted to an uncommon degree in its activities and in the exereise of the Commissioner's judgment by means of limitations which are written into its appropriation bill.
The budget for this office is broken down into about 200 separate appropriations, each hedged with limitations—so much for salary to an Indian school superintendent, for instance, so much for his assistant, so much for drayage, so much for repairs, ete.
There is a specifie appropriation for each of our many Indian boarding schools and while unforeseeable circumstances may cut the cost of conducting one of these and increase the cost of conducting another, still we are prohibited by legislation from diverting more than 10 percent of an appropriation from one school to another.
Some of the restrictions strike at the very base of our fundamental policies—for example, bills to issue patents in fee and to remove all restrictions on the sale of specific tracts of Indian lands.
The enactment of such measures has the effect of removing our authority to protect the Indians' interests in the sale of their lands.
Such bills are introduced ordinarily after the Office of Indian Affairs has determined that a proposed sale would not be in the best interest of an Indian who proposes to sell.
More than 20 such bills were introduced before the Seventy-eighth Congress.
Despite such limitations and restrictions the Office of Indian Affairs has accomplished much during the fiscal year.
Indians, in cooperation with field employees of the Office of Indian Affairs, began work on proposals for post-war programs to meet the needs of various reservations.
Sixty-four detailed proposals, dealing with the problems of 120 tribes, have been submitted, and these are now being carefully analyzed.
When approved in their final forms they will point the way to economic self-sufficiency and integration with the national life.
Increased interest in education on the part of Indians was in evidence, and a number of tribal councils passed compulsory education ordinances and enforced others that had been neglected.
Indian communities have taken an active part in planning school programs and many throughout the country have requested that Indian Service schools be equipped for the training of home-coming soldiers who may wish to take advantage of the opportunities that are offered by the Servicemen's Readjustment Act.
Plans are being made to meet these requests.
The contribution of Indians to the prosecution of the war has been most remarkable.
On the first of April, 21,756 had joined the armed forces and were serving with conspicuous gallantry on all fronts.
Indians have won all decorations, including the Congressional Medal of Honor and the Croix de Guerre.
Approximately 15,000 Indians are regularly employed in war industries, and in addition, 10,000 men, women, and children have left their homes for varying periods to work on farms and ranches.
Notwithstanding the great exodus from reservations, the total value of all Indian agricultural products last year was more than $19,000,000.
The production of food by the Indian schools was 50 percent greater than in the previous year.
Fifty-eight thousand gallons of fruits and vegetables were canned and 10 tons were dehydrated.
In addition, 17,000 tons of stock feed were raised.
At the end of the year Indians owned 1,500,000 head of livestock— 90,000 more than they owned in the fiscal year 1943.
It is estimated that war bond sales to Indians had reached a total of $50,000,000 by the end of June.
The rebuilding of the Indian landed estate has continued, and approximately 700,000 acres were added within the United States proper.
In Alaska, 6 new reservations, with a total of approximately 13,000 acres, were established, and proposals for 16 additional reserves, comprising nearly 4,000,000 acres, are under consideration.
The democratic approach to the solution of Indian problems has been emphasized during the year.
On a number of reservations Indians have organized health councils for the purpose of combating communicable diseases, and these organizations are functioning with enthusiasm for the task.
Further progress was made in solving the difficult problems of fractionated land ownership through inheritance.
The Rosebud Tribal Land Enterprise is the latest organization to attack the problem.
Indian arts and crafts have not languished, despite the fact that many young craftsmen have left home.
In many cases there has been an increase in production and sales, owing to the sponsorship of cooperative producing and distributing centers.
Plans have been made for an expansion of craft activities after the war.
In the Division of Territories and Island Possessions we have been occupied with the economie and social adjustments in our offshore areas which are becoming more pressing as the end of the war approaches.
The key positions held by Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico in international travel and as way stations between the world's greatest production centers and the world's greatest markets have brought them into sharp focus and emphasized the urgency for preparing them for their post-war roles.
Owing to progressive reductions in its appropriations for personnel, however, the Division has been seriously hampered in trying to perform its duties effectively.
If the Department is to be charged with responsibility for the territories we must be provided with funds that will be adequate for the purpose.
The importance of Alaska is universally recognized.
The Territory remained a "combat area" throughout the year, although the last Japanese were ejected last summer.
Health and welfare problems that have been aggravated by war conditions continued to be serious.
The Division has worked and will continue to work closely with other bureaus and Departments on these problems and on development programs for the Territory.
The Alaska Railroad for the second successive year has exceeded all previous records in its volume of freight and in passenger traffic.
The manpower shortage has presented an acute problem, but despite this handicap, the railroad has continued its improvement program.
To meet wartime demands much additional equipment and rolling stock were purchased, most of which was second-hand, due to immediate necessity which would not permit delays incident to the securing of new equipment.
The relaxation of military rule in Hawaii has been an important factor in relieving tension.
Many conferences were held with the War Department looking to the termination of martial law, while maintaining such restrictions on civilian activities as may be necessary in view of the importance of Hawaii as an offensive base.
Civilian shipping requirements, housing, and public health have had the attention of the Division.
Political advances in territorial areas should keep pace with the aspirations of the territorial people and with their skill in political self-management.
During the past year, the concerted desire of the people of Puerto Rico for greater home-rule, expressed there by groups of every political shade, found response in your declaration that the Organic Act of Puerto Rico should be revised so that it would include the right of the people to eleet their own governor, and in your appointment of four able and distinguished Puerto Ricans and four continentals, of whom I had the honor to be one, to draft recommendations for such action.
The people of the island have the skill and ability to manage their local affairs.
I believe that the enactment into law of the recommendations made by the advisory committee which vou appointed would give substance to this Nation's declared policies, and that the Puerto Rican people would use this law to strengthen democratic self-government.
At the same time there has been in the island an upsurge of hope and an energetic striving among these people to cure the severe economic dislocations.
Some parts of the program which they are executing may not work.
They may find it necessary to discard certain features.
This must certainly be a period of trial and error, but I believe that there will develop a measure of economic improvement which will at least give the masses of people some hope of a better standard of living.
Steady progress is being made by the Government of Puerto Rico in the introduction of new industries to supplement the island's agricultural economy.
The shipping situation has continued to improve so that food supplies, which reached a desperate state of depletion both in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands during the German submarine campaign, are now ample.
Through the coordinated efforts of the Division of Territories of this Department, the Office of Distribution and the War Shipping Administration, distribution of the necessities of life throughout the island at stabilized prices has been maintained.
It has been possible to return the responsibility for supplying all except a few basic articles to former importers, and it is hoped that the Government may soon be able to withdraw entirely.
An increase of approximately 178 percent in income taxes in the Virgin Islands materially improved the condition of the municipalities' treasuries.
The Selective Service and Training Act of 1940 was applied for the first time to the Virgin Islands, and at the close of the fiseal year there were 3,660 registrants between the ages of 18 and 44 in St. Thomas and St. Croix.
The Islands were handicapped by the elimination of the Federal appropriation for the position of Government Secretary.
This, combined with the frequent absences of the Governor, whose duties by law devolve upon the Government Secretary, threw a very heavy burden on the small administrative staff.
In conformity with your letter of instructions of September 16, 1942, the Department has been engaged in an intensive study of the problems with which we will be faced in the Philippines after reoccupation.
There is every reason to look forward to driving the enemy out of the Islands in the not too distant future, and when that time comes the loyalty of the great mass of people encourages the hope that a sound solution of their difficult problem will be found.
On February 16, 1943, the War Relocation Authority was transferred to the Department of the Interior.
This agency was created to assume responsibility for 110,000 persons of Japanese ancestry who had been evacuated from the West coast in the spring of 1942, and to resolve other diffieulties that resulted from evacuating the Japanese from the coast.
Two major accomplishments have resulted from our work in this agency.
We have segregated from the principal population of the relocation centers those persons who have declared a preference for the Japanese way of life, or who are not considered suitable for resettlement in outside communities.
And we have developed an effective program for returning the loyal and law-abiding majority of evacuees to the mainstream of American life.
At the close of the fiscal year, 18,672 persons who are not suitable for resettlement were residing in the Tule Lake segregation center in northern California.
Segregation, however, had not proved satisfactory as a permanent measure.
Among the segregants were approximately 3,300 children under 17 years of age and an additional 1,800 persons who were placed in the center solely to avoid disrupting family units.
Careful studies of the segregants indicate that only a few of them are disloval to the United States.
Many older people sought to be segregated simply because segregation seemed to offer them a haven for the duration of the war.
Others went to the center in protest against the evacuation and the restrictions that were placed upon them.
They interpreted these restrictions as evidence of unfair discrimination.
It is extremely doubtful that deportation after the war will dispose of the Tule Lake problem.
The conversion of Tule Lake into a segregation center left nine centers populated principally by individuals and families that are eligible for relocation.
At the end of the year the progress of relocation had enabled us to close one of them—the Jerome center in southeastern Arkansas.
A total of 16,846 persons departed from the centers on indefinite leave during the 12-month period, making a grand total of 23,693 to that date.
Mainly, they were younger people without family responsibilities, though an encouraging increase in the relocation of older people and family groups occurred toward the end of the year.
The relocation of those who remain in the centers becomes more difficult as the younger people leave.
Every departure increases the percentage among the residue of evacuees who, because of age, infirmities, unfamiliarity with English, and indigency, are less amenable to rehabilitation in strange environments.
Many evacuees have developed a reluctance to leave the comparative security of the centers for the uncertainties of life outside.
This reluctance is hard to combat, but we are working constantly to overcome it.
The departure of the younger, more able-bodied evacuees also has augmented the difficulty of recruiting evacuee-workers to maintain essential services at the centers.
No essential service has been allowed to lapse, however, and no phase of the relocation program has been abated to hold workers in the centers.
The full force of the War Relocation Authority has been exerted to relocate the evacuees as rapidly as possible.
On June 9, the War Relocation Authority was assigned to take charge of an emergency shelter that was to be established at Fort Ontario, N. Y., for approximately 1,000 European war refugees.
Plans to receive the refugees were under way at the end of the fiscal year.
Through the concerted work of the Solicitor's Office and the legal divisions of the bureaus and offices under the supervision of the Solicitor, the attorneys of the Department have done much during the past year to advance the Department's post-war programs, to support the fighting of the war, and to protect and conserve the Nation's resources for their best long-term use.
Since most of the Department's post-war programs require legislative authority, the Solicitor's Office and the legal divisions of the interested bureaus proceeded to put these programs into legislative form.
Some of the bills were enacted.
The most important legislative proposals provided for the opening up of greater homestead and industrial opportunities to veterans and other persons in the territories and in the continental United States through reclamation and power developments.
Another important bill, prepared in anticipation of post-war liquidation problems, provided for the administration of surplus Federally owned real property.
Toward the winning of the war the attorneys of the Department originated the legal mechanisms for the equitable and beneficial allocation of supplies of coal and other solid fuels and of fishery resources.
They prepared the necessary documents for the operation of the coal mines and for the termination of Government possession, undertaking extensive research to protect the Government.
They drafted regulations for the storing, handling, and transportating of explosives and their ingredients by civilians, and for the operation of relocation camps for citizens and aliens of Japanese ancestry and for other persons who had been removed from military areas.
They reviewed leases, permits, and other agreements whereby agricultural, grazing, timber, and mineral resources of the Nation were made available for military uses or for the greater production of food and other necessities of war.
They gave attention to the legal problems that were involved in the application, under martial law, of military orders to civilians in Hawaii, and engaged in numerous conferences on such problems with the War Department and the Department of Justice.
They also drafted contracts for the operation of experimental metallurgic laboratories.
In the field of a long-term conservation of resources, the attorneys helped to prepare Public Law 273, establishing the principle of sustained-yield to forest management on Federal lands, and Public Law 106, strengthening the Alaska game and fish protection law.
They protected title to certain public lands that were subjected to invalid elaims and passed upon the title to new acquisitions of grazing, timber, and park lands.
They maintained Indian property rights on the Pyramid Lake and Allegheny Reservations through successful litigation and undertook the protection of Indian lands in Alaska through the study of Indian land claims.
They also devoted increased energy to the protection of the civil rights of various groups toward which the Federal Government has assumed special responsibilities, notably the inhabitants of Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and other Territories and possessions, as well as Indians and evacuees of Japanese descent.
To stimulate the interest of the Department's attorneys in the opportunities of Government service and in the possibilities for improvement in standards of work, the Solicitor put into effect a strict application of the Department's advancement from within poliey and undertook the establishment of an in-service training program.
From all of the foregoing I conclude that we have so far advanced conservation that nearly every individual on this continent may improve his lot if only we have the will to make our gains serve their logical purpose—the advancement of human welfare.
The consolidation within a brief time of gains that have been long in the making, is not new in our history.
Steam propulsion spent a century in the toy and novelty stage, then developed enough in a decade to reshuffle our industrial processes.
Electricity followed the same course to the point at which it revolutionized domestic economy.
So did automotive transportation.
The advent of hydroelectricity, so developed that it can revolutionize heavy industry, and accompanied by equally developed supporting facilities, serves mainly to introduce a new generation to an historic occurence.
There are some differences, of course.
One difference appears especially important to me.
All of the other great additions to the world's power have reached the world-changing stage under divided ownership.
Public will, no matter how united, could not have demanded the prompt development and the equitable use of the potential power in steam or in the internal combustion engine.
The development of potential power usually has been delayed while individuals have warred over who should profit when the development occurred.
The consumers eventually financed such wars.
The final results of conservation that I have referred to as power— the product of our dams, our irrigation projects and other developments—is the first great accumtlation of new energy that ever belonged to all of us.
In that there is a huge advantage and a corresponding responsibility.
The advantage is that we can put our new acquisition of power to work for all of us, and do it promptly.
The responsibility is that we must do these things for ourselves.
Homold 5.
Secretary of the Interior.
DREPARATION to safeguard the western economy in the criti-I cal postwar transition period was emphasized in activities of the Bureau of Reclamation in the fiscal year 1944.
Reclamation developments have greatly increased food and power production for war, but today the Bureau is making ready to enable the people to utilize western water and land resources in a great peacetime expansion.
Plans call for completion of irrigation and multiple-purpose projects now authorized, involving costs of more than three-quarters of a billion dollars, and for construction of 236 potential projects.
These were described in an inventory placed before the Senate Committee on Postwar Economic Policy and Planning on June 6, 1944.
This presentation emphasized the fact that authority for projects which would not be entirely self-liquidating would have to stem from Congress, and that funds also would have to be voted before detailed plans could be completed.
In anticipation of approaching industrial reconversion, the Bureau is getting ready for quick employment of hundreds of thousands of demobilized servicemen and civilian war workers.
Equally important is the objective of permanent homes for veterans and others on irrigated farms in 17 Western States—homes which will assure large new markets for produets of eastern as well as western farms, and for factories in all parts of the Nation—a true expansion of our western frontier.
Planning was carried forward simultaneously with Bureau activities to inerease food production and hydroelectric output to drive the wheels of a war industry which sprang up with incredible rapidity to pour forth aluminum, airplanes, warships, ammunition, and which without this power would have limped.
Throughout this planning, there was intense awareness of the difficulties all will face—but particularly the West—in making the adjustment to peace.
But as a result of this foresight, it will be possible to put to work demobilized men at project sites in the Western States almost as soon as peace comes, provided enabling legislation is passed; and the benefits will spread to industries and transportation systems in the other 31 States as soon as orders are placed for equipment and supplies that will be needed in the construction of the Bureau's projects and in the creation of farms that will be established upon them.
For the discharged men who are qualified by previous training and experience to undertake irrigated farming, 135,000 new farms ultimately would be made available.
In the wake of the new development would rise new eities and towns, having a population equal to that of the rural areas.
Markets and production centers throughout the Nation would be stimulated by the enlarged western purchasing power.
Toward the integration of western industry and agriculture, which must be developed together if the region is to reach full economic maturity, the multiple-purpose projects in the program would offer large blocks of new low-cost electric power.
Revenues from the sale of the new energy would pay for a sizable portion of the project construction costs which have been estimated, on the basis of 1940 prices, at nearly 3 billion dollars.
Reclamation construction is ideal as a postwar undertaking because the volume and speed of the construction can be readily geared to the volume of employment and settlement needs.
And what is doubly important, the development and utilization of unused water supplies for the production of hydroelectric power and expansion of irrigation will permanently enrich the West.
Continued study of the land and water resources of the West during times of peace and throughout the war, have made it possible for the Bureau to present its concrete postwar blueprint.
From the beginning of the war, it has advanced, as rapidly as emergency conditions permitted, investigations of more than 200 individual projects, and of approximately 70 river basins and subbasins.
The Bureau made notable progress in advancing postwar plans during the year without relaxing its war activities in the fields of power and food production.
Outstanding records were made in both.
Reclamation generators delivered nearly 141/2 billion kilowatt-hours of electric power, about 52 percent more than in the preceding fiscal year.
The increase since the fiscal year ending a few months before Pearl Harbor is 400 percent.
More than 90 percent of the new energy made available during war was consumed by war industries—aluminum and magnesium plants, airplane factories, shipyards, and munitions plants.
The 3-year increase in production was about five or six times the percentage of increase in aggregate production recorded over the same period by all plants in the United States.
The expansion in output resulted from a highly accelerated program of hydro power installations.
During the war a million and a third kilowatts of new installed capacity were added-—about half a million this year—to bring the Reclamation installation to about 2,360,000 kilowatts.
The Bureau's war power contribution constitutes 84 percent of the total new capacity made available in the 11 Far Western States since 1941.
No less spectacular were the achievements of farmers on Bureau projects in production of vital war food crops.
The more than 4 million acres served in 15 Western States during the calendar year of 1943 produced 52 percent more potatoes than in 1942 and 23 percent more beans.
The expansion in these basic food crops is indicative of the manner in which Reclamation helped forestall threatening food shortages.
Throughout the fiscal year the Bureau, in recognition of the great need for increased agricultural production, sought to construct new facilities to bring under cultivation additional areas of arid and semiarid lands and to provide supplemental water for farms on which crop production was being reduced by an inadequate supply of water.
Since the fall of 1942, when the Bureau's ability to expand irrigation was limited by diversion of critical materials to other war uses, it has requested the War Production Board to clear many projects on which food production could be expanded.
On June 30, 1944, this agency, on recommendation of the War Food Administration, had approved construction of projects on which irrigation service is being extended to 1,265,782 acres.
Another significant Reclamation wartime service was the provision of municipal and industrial water to major war plants and cities and towns which were important in war activity.
Municipal areas of 3 million population, including Los Angeles, depend on Bureau projects for supplemental supplies.
The wartime benefits of Federal Reclamation are the result of 42 years of activity by the Bureau of Reclamation in the field of land and water conservation in the West.
Under the Reclamation Act of 1902, the Bureau has put into operation, or has under construction or authorized, in the 17 States west of or bisected by the 100th Meridian, 78 irrigation and multiple-purpose projects.
On several operating projects important features remain to be completed.
On 9 projects that have been authorized, work has been deferred because of the war.
In the area to which the Bureau's activities are confined the rainfall is inadequate to support agriculture, and conservation of water for irrigation is essential for the maintenance of civilization.
The need for low-cost power for irrigation pumping, industries, and other uses has given added emphasis to the importance of double and triple use of limited water resources.
The Reclamation developments also provide, in addition to benefits mentioned earlier, flood control, river regulation, repulsion of salt water encroachment and reduction of clogging silt deposits.
They aid fish propagation, and create recreational areas and waterfowl and wildlife refuges.
Nearly 5 million persons live in areas in which Bureau of Reclamation systems are operated.
About 312 million persons benefit from power and domestic water, and 1,257,395 live on the 91,120 farms or in cities and towns on Federal irrigation projects.
These developments support 338 towns, 1,207 schools, 1,514 churches, and 137 banks (with deposits totaling half a billion dollars) (see table 3).
When the construction program now authorized is completed, the various Bureau services will be extended to areas in which reside more than 10 million persons.
The Federal investment in Reclamation developments at the end of the year totaled $930,000,000.
See table 5, p. 34.)
More than 95 percent of the cost is reimbursable under Reclamation law.
The remaining 5 percent is allocated to flood control, aid to navigation, and nonreimbursable labor costs.
Mindful of the Seeretary's words—"in time of war we must prepare for peace"the Bureau laid a sizable portion of the foundation for a stabilized peacetime western economy, warped out of proportion by the dislocations of war.
Near-the end of the fiscal year, it completed for the Senate Committee on Postwar Economic Policy and Planning an inventory of irrigation and multiple-purpose projects in the West, which could be ineluded in a postwar public works program to provide employment for discharged veterans and war workers, and make available to those who are qualified, livelihoods on irrigated farms.
In the program are 40 projects already authorized for construction, and about 200 under study.
On many of the projects authorized, work is in progress to advance the Bureau's war food and war power programs.
Construction on others has been halted or deferred because of the war.
Carried out in full, the contemplated program would furnish employment equivalent to 1/ million men working 1 year, and create an estimated 135,000 new farms.
In addition, it would bring greater security to 150,000 additional families, now handicapped by inadequate water supplies which do not permit maximum crop produetion.
The need for postwar employment and settlement opportunities was indicated to the Bureau in a report by labor experts, which stated that 141/2 million persons will be demobilized from the armed forces and war plants.
About 3 million of those who will face reemployment problems live in the 17 Western States, and, what is of prime importance to the irrigation program, some 265,000 of this number will be equipped by previous training and experience to undertake irrigated farming.
While the proposed construction would be centered in the western half of the country, 56 percent of the employment—the equivalent of 698,000 men working for a year—would be provided in the mines, mills, and factories of the Midwest, East, and South.
The remaining 44 percent, or 553,000 men, would be employed at the sites of construction.
The effectiveness of the Reclamation construction as a shock absorber in the postwar reconversion is enhanced by the fact that it permits a "quick get-a-way".
Provided with funds and manpower to complete field investigations and preconstruction work, the Bureau could put more than 300,000 men to work the first year.
A peak employment of 400,000 could be reached in the second year.
From the long-term point of view, the inventory is an important milestone toward the expansion of western irrigated agriculture in which lies the basic hope of the region for increased growth and prosperity.
The dry-land farming potentialities of the West are virtually exhausted, but water is available for the irrigation of 22 million additional acres of land, approximately the acreage now served.
The projects in the inventory would extend irrigation service to a third of the new area—6,705,000 acres—and, in addition, furnish supplemental water for 9,364,000 acres now inadequately watered.
Construction of irrigation features on authorized projects alone would create 70,000 new farms and overcome the water deficiency of 100,000 existing farms.
The growing need for added agricultural production in the West is known to all who have analyzed the western economy.
The area is becoming increasingly deficient in crop produetion to meet its own requirements.
Expansion in cultivated acreage has not kept pace with population increases.
While the number of people living in the Far Western States has increased 60 percent from 1920 to 1940, the irrigated acreage has béen expanded but 10 percent.
Integrated industrial and agricultural development is one of the basic prerequisites for orderly economic growth of the West.
The same reservoirs which will serve irrigation could provide 1,765,000 kilowatts of new power for industrial use, if the Bureau increased its installations, and 2,579,000 kilowatts of firm power capacity on projects under study.
Through revenues derived from the sale of this energy, projects not otherwise economically feasible, can be made sound.
The full development of the new farms and the new communities will inerease the purchasing power of the West for products manufactured elsewhere by 1/4 billion dollars, at 1940 prices.
The estimated construction cost of the projects in the inventory, on the basis of pre-war prices, is $2,952,393,000.
About $793,000,000 would be required to construct irrigation features on projects already authorized.
The construction of most of the 196 potential projects included in the list would require special legislation by Congress.
The inventory may be changed as basin surveys are completed, with additional projects added or substitutions made for those now included.
The greatest expansion of electric power generating facilities ever made by a single agency in a single year was the wartime record established by the Bureau of Reclamation in fiscal year 1944 to meet emergency industrial demands.
More than half a million kilowatts of hydro power were added in 31 plants on Reclamation projects in 12 Western States.
The increase surpassed by about 55,000 kilowatts the additions made during the previous fiscal year, and by about 100,000 kilowatts, the capacity added in fiscal year 1942.
The new facilities, whose output was almost wholly consumed by airplane factories, aluminum and magnesium plants, shipyards, and other industries that made fighting equipment, brings to nearly 1,400,000 kilowatts the capacity made available since July 1, 1941—a few months before Pearl Harbor.
Additional installations proposed by the Bureau, aggregating 865,000 kilowatts, were halted by the War Production Board in the fall of 1942 to conserve eritical materials for other war uses.
The present Reclamation installation totals about 2.360,000 kilowatts.
When all generators on existing projects and on those authorized are placed into operation the capacity will be 4,863,075 kilowatts.
The rapid enlargement of power facilities on Bureau projects was the result of farsighted construction, in time of peace, of multiplepurpose projects designed to meet current and potential industrial and agricultural requirements of the growing West.
On these projects, stored water serves both irrigation and power generation.
The output of Reclamation generators paralleled the great gain in capacity.
During the fiscal year the plants produced 141/ billion kilowatt hours, highest on record.
This was an increase of more than 50 percent over the preceding period.
The new power developments during the fiscal year were confined to three projects.
Early in the year the Bureau began transmitting power from Fort Peck Dam (Montana), constructed by the War Department.
At Grand Coulee, three of the world's largest hydroelectric generators, each rated at more that 100,000 kilowatts, were put into operation.
At the end of the fiscal period, two units, each of 75,000- kilowatt capacity, began service at Shasta Dam of the Central Valley project (California).
The immense blocks of Reclamation power made available in the West, particularly on the Pacific coast, have made possible its recordbreaking increase of industrial production.
Energy from Boulder Dam supplies the great aircraft plants in the Los Angeles area, the largest magnesium plant in the world near Boulder City, Nev., and other basic war industries, while power produced at Grand Coulee serves a half dozen large aluminum plants, the biggest carbide plant west of the Mississippi, large shipyards, and many other plants.
Gross revenues from the sale of electric power produced in plants operated by the Bureau reached an all-time high during the year of 1944, $18,992,000.
This was a $4,438,000 increase over fiscal year 1943.
Production of power, while regarded as incidental to the Bureau's major function—irrigation of arid and semiarid land—is highly important as a source of revenue for reimbursing the United States for the cost of Reclamation construction.
Power will repay half the investment of the Reclamation program as outlined at the beginning of the war.
Boulder Dam's gross revenues are the largest of all Bureau plants.
In its 7 years of operation, this development has returned to the United States Treasury $25,200,000 in net revenues, and in addition, has-paid the states of Arizona and Nevada, $4,200,000, and the Colorado River development fund, through which potential projects in the Colorado River Basin are investigated, $3,500,000.
Preparations for the sale and transmission to war industries of the output of two 75,000-kilowatt generators at Shasta Dam of the Central Valley project (California), were completed during the year.
In September 1943, a wartime contract, guaranteeing the United States an annual payment of $2,775,000 after January 1, 1945, was made with the Pacific Gas & Electric Co.
The 97-mile Government transmission line over which the energy will be delivered to company facilities at Oroville was completed in July 1944.
Like their sons on the fighting fronts, reclamation farmers, through record-breaking increases in vital crops, brought the Allies closer to victory during the calendar year of 1943.
Toward meeting emergency food requirements, they increased potato production to 64,044,814 bushels, 52 percent greater than the 1942 aggregate yield, and bean production to 4,175,797 bushels, an increase of 23 percent over the preceding year.
The 3,507,723 tons of alfalfa produced, vital as a winter feed for beef and dairy herds, also was at a new high.
These three critical war food crops were grown on 36.4 percent of the total acreage in cultivation.
The expansion was due both to the concentration of farmers on the more important war crops, and to the increases in irrigated acreage resulting from enlarged farm activity and from additional facilities provided by the Bureau under the war food program.
The irrigated area was increased to 4,055,329 acres, highest on record.
It is expected that the total 1944 agricultural production on Bureau developments will be brought to an even higher level than that attained in 1943.
From the day—soon after Pearl Harbor—when the Secretary of Agriculture called for "the greatest production in the history of American agriculture" the Bureau has been seeking to extend irrigation systems to bring additional acreages under cultivation and to supply areas suffering with water shortages with a supplemental supply.
The Bureau prepared several accelerated construction programs (see the annual report for fiscal year 1943), listing the projects on which new areas could be served promptly, the amount of critical materials required in the construction, the year crop production could be expected, and other pertinent factors.
The detailed information was presented to the War Food Administration, which has the wartime function of evaluating the potential food yield against the amount of strategic materials required, and of recommending clearance of projects to the War Production Board.
The Bureau's activities resulted in approval being given to construct irrigation facilities on 25 projects, which are bringing under cultivation 243,657 acres of new land and providing a supplemental supply for 1,022,125 acres.
All clearances were granted in this fiscal year except those for Friant Dam and Madera Canal of the Central Valley project (California), facilities on the Gila project (Arizona), to protect an air base from dust storms, and Scofield Dam (Utah), which would provide both flood control and irrigation service.
Of equal importance with war power and war food production was a third major Reclamation wartime service—providing municipalindustrial water for major industries and military encampments, and for communities that were important in the war program.
As a multiple-purpose benefit, five operating projects met this need.
Through construction on three other projects, additional areas in which shortages exist or threaten will be served with new supplies.
Boulder and Parker Dams in the Pacific Southwest, working as a team, stored fresh water from the Colorado River for diversion through the Metropolitan Water District aqueduct to busy Los Angeles and 12 nearby cities.
Direct from Lake Mead above Boulder, 30 million gallons a day were piped to the world's largest magnesium plant at the peak of its activity.
The Contra Costa Canal of the Central Valley project (California) furnished water to important industries in the cities of the Upper San Francisco Bay area.
The Rio Grande project (Texas-New Mexico), served El Paso, Tex., and nearby military encampments.
Reclamation projects in Utah provided water for the cities of Salt Lake, Ogden, and Provo and a huge, new steel plant.
Raising the height of Altus Dam (Oklahoma) during the year will extend domestic water service during the fiscal year to important consumers in that area.
Under construction are the Rapid Valley (South Dakota), and the Tucumcari (New Mexico), projects, which, in addition to providing irrigation service, will supplement the municipal supplies of the cities of Rapid Valley and Tucumcari, respectively.
Through enlargement of the Weber-Provo Diversion Canal, principally for irrigation, and the construction of the Salt Lake Aqueduct, supplies will be made adequate for the Salt Lake and Provo areas, where the demand for water has risen sharply due to increased population and military centers.
With irrigation activities accelerated in accord with the demands for increased war food supplies, all records on Reclamation projects as to the acreage in production, total volume of crops, and crop values were broken in the calendar year 1943.
The 4,055,329 acres served wholly, or in part, by Bureau facilities en 44 projects in 15 Western States produced 10,660,000 tons of food and forage crops, valued at $388,670,969.
The gross returns were 43 percent, or $116,622,453, greater than in calendar year 1942, which in turn exceeded the previous year's total by $112,162,519.
The skyrocketing of aggregate values was due partly to the fact that Reclamation farmers, despite labor difficulties and equipment shortages, had nearly doubled their actual production since the year of Pearl Harbor, and partly due to the sharp increase in market prices received for the commodities produced.
The returns cited are exclusive of the values of livestock fatted on Reclamation projects and of dairy and poultry products.
These would increase quoted totals by about 25 percent.
The inventory of livestock and equipment on hand December 31, 1943, was valued at $116,170,312, an increase of $16,081,407 over the preceding year.
Livestock values amounted to approximately $950 per irrigated farm.
The cultivated area, exclusive of areas temporarily suspended and leased lands, was at a new high of 3,906,821 acres in 1943.
This was an increase of 85,122 acres over 1942.
On projects entirely constructed by the Bureau, the cultivated area rose to 1,900,088 acres.
In 1942 it was 1,873,978 acres.
Crop values in 1943 amounted to $138,181,276, as compared with $185,263,326 in 1942.
The cultivated area on projects furnished supplemental storage from Bureau works and on those under special and Warren Act contracts, totaled 2,006,- 733 acres in 1943, as compared with 1,947,720 acres in the preceding year.
The crop values were $198,315,622 in 1943 and $133,867,240 in 1942.
On leased areas, Japanese relocation centers, etc., the cultivated area totaled 54,027 acres, and crop values, $3,498,169.
Eighty-three percent of the irrigable area for which the Bureau was prepared to supply water—4,807,522 acres—was under irrigation in 1943.
Because of labor difficulties and price conditions, the area planted to sugar beets was reduced to 139,014 acres in 1943, a decrease of about 25 percent over 1942.
The 1943 yield totaled 1,996,213 tons, which was valued at $17,494,670.
Reclamation projects also produced small grains, fruit and nuts, long-staple cotton, flax, hops, vegetables, and seeds.
Due to the war, no new land has been opened to homestead entry during the last 3 years.
Foresight in the programming of its studies and investigations of potential projects and of river basins and subbasins made it possible for the Bureau of Reclamation to present to Congress in June 1944 a comprehensive inventory of postwar construction.
Planning activities directed in pre-war days toward an orderly agricultural and industrial development of the West, and early in the war toward increasing production of electric power and war food supplies, created a large shelf of projects which can be undertaken after the war to provide emergency employment and permanent settlement opportunities.
During this fiscal year, with the emphasis shifted to planning for the postwar readjustment, additional projects were added to the reserve.
About 170 irrigation and multiple-purpose projects and approximately 50 river basins and subbasins were under study during the year.
The Bureau investigates river basins in conjunction with studies of individual projects to assure orderly regional development.
The most impressive of the basin-wide studies completed during the year was the report on the Missouri River.
It proposes construetion costing a billion and a quarter dollars in the upper basin area, which construction would ultimately bring under irrigation 434 million acres of new land in seven States and supplement the water supply for half a million acres suffering shortages.
In connection with the June 1944 project inventory, there are on hand 53 detailed field reports involving construction costs amounting to $526,000,000, and 25 detailed field reports of Water Conservation and Utilization projects under the war food program, estimated to cost $21,000,000.
Postwar planning was given added impetus in June 1944, when Assistant Commissioner William E. Warne held conferences with Bureau regional officials in each of the six regions to determine the status of investigations and to plan for increased activity in this field.
As a result of the meetings definite deadlines calling for the completion in the field of basin reports were set for early in the next fiscal year.
These are: Columbia River Basin, December 1; Rogue River Basin, December 1; Central Valley, October 15; Santa Barbara County, September 15; Russian River Basin, September 1; Lower Colorado River Basin, November 1; Upper Colorado River Basin, November 1; Great Salt Lake Basin, December 1; Nueces River Basin, August 15; Rio Grande Basin, September 1; Red River Basin, September 15; Pecos River Basin, October 1; Guadalupe River Basin, October 15; Colorado River (Texas) Basin, November 1; and Arkansas River Basin, December 1.
As part of its planning activities, the Bureau reviewed flood control reports of the Corps of Engineers, War Department.
This work was carried on under the terms of an agreement, dated August 14, 1939, through which the Bureau, the Department of Agriculture, and the:War Department interchanged information on multiple-purpose projects.
On December 29, 1943, this agreement was superseded by a four-party agreement, which made the Federal Power Commission also a participant, and changed the name of the joint committee to the"Inter-Agency River Basin Committee."
Forecasting the great need for postwar expansion of reclamation in the West, war veterans and emergency workers evinced a growing interest during the fiscal year in obtaining farms on Federal Reclamation developments.
A growing number of inquiries concerning land settlement opportunities were received in the Washington, D. C., headquarters and in the many Bureau offices near military posts and war production centers.
Further evidence of the demand for land was the enlarged activity in the transfer of ownerships on irrigation projects, particularly near war industries where workmen, receiving high wages, purchased land for postwar homes.
In preparation for meeting the enlarged requirements for land, the Bureau's land use and settlement activities were pointed to postwar objectives.
At the end of the year the Bureau had completed a program for presentation to Congress as a possible basis for legislation to provide settlement opportunities commensurate with anticipated needs.
The program contained various recommendations for settlement preference for veterans, and provisions to assure that suitable farm units will be available on reasonable terms and conditions.
It also called for farm advisory services.
Three special studies of settlement and development problems advanced by the Bureau during the fiscal year will be of definite postwar value in making farm opportunities available for returning servicemen.
To provide maximum benefits from the complex multiple-purpose Central Valley project of California, a great volume of factual material on all phases of the proposed development has been collected through a series of project studies.
These investigations are to be concluded early in the next fiscal year.
Many Federal and State agencies are participating in the programming.
The Bureau has substantially completed the studies known as the Columbia Basin Joint Investigations, which have as their objective a general plan for the settlement of a million-acre area to be watered by Grand Coulee Dam, and to prepare detailed plans for areas to be irrigated relatively soon.
The investigation of economic and agricultural aspects of the practical problems which will confront settlers on the type of arid desert soil that characterizes the Yuma-Mesa Division of the Gila project (Arizona) was advanced during the year.
This large-scale predevelopment demonstration was undertaken in January 1942 in accordance with a directive from the Senate Committee on Appropriations.
At the end of the fiscal year 320 acres were planted to alfalfa, and 590 acres prepared for planting of this crop next fall.
The development of 4,200 acres of publie lands which the current schedule, approved by the War Production Board, contemplates, will aid in meeting the demand for new farms and new homes.
A total of 150,000 acres of new lands, both public and private, may be developed rapidly on the Yuma-Mesa as a result of the knowledge gained from the investigation.
Construction activities of the year were highlighted by the completion of Shasta Dam, second largest concrete structure in the world, and key feature of the Central Valley project (California), and the “holing through" of the 13.1 mile long Alva B. Adams tunnel of the Colorado-Big Thompson project (Colorado).
Both Reclamation achievements were accomplished at the close of the fiscal period.
Shasta Dam is 602 feet high, 3,500 feet long at the crest, and 265 feet wide at the base.
On June 30, 1944, it contained 6,391,682 cubic yards of concrete.
Construction was begun in September 1938.
The transmountain tunnel cuts through the Rocky Mountains near Estes Park, Colo.
When lined with concrete, which operation is now in progress, it will carry a supplemental supply of water from the headwaters of the Colorado River, on the west side of the Continental Divide, to 615,000 acres facing shortages in northeastern Colorado, on the east slope.
The Bureau’s construetion activities were retarded on most projects as the aftermath of a sweeping War Production Board stop-construction order issued in the fall of 1942, which halted all work except power installations on five projects.
Since that time the War Froduction Board has cleared a number of projects to create work for Japanese evacuees from the Pacific coast and for conscientious objectors, to supply municipal-industrial water, to provide dust control for an air base, and to expand food production.
Twenty-five projects were cleared under the war food program.
Work remained at a standstill on Davis Dam (Arizona-Nevada); Payette Division, Boise Project (Idaho) ; Friant-Kern Canal of the Central Vallev project (California) ; irrigation features of the Columbia Basin Project (Washington) ; Eden, Kendrick, and Riverton projects (Wyoming).
Additional details on construction activities are provided in the summary of the activities of the various regions.
Since 1902 179 dams—5 of them the largest concrete structures in the world-have been constructed by the Bureau of Reelamation on 61 irrigation and multiple-purpose projects in 16 Western States.
The 5 mammoth monoliths, which have given Bureau engineers the reputation of being foremost in the field of dam designing and construction are, in order of volume: Grand Coulee (Washington), Shasta (California), Boulder (Arizona-Nevada), Friant (California), and Marshall Ford (Texas).
The Bureau has also built the following existing facilities: 31 powerplants, 5,937 miles of transmission lines, 212,549 canal structures, 14,421 bridges, 358 tunnels having a combined length of 110.7 miles, 5,121 miles of ditches and drains, 23,683 culverts, 6,555 flumes, 2,322 miles of pipe, and 4,344 miles of roads.
In the 42 years of its existence as a Federal agency, the Bureau has excavated 621,790,400 cubic yards of earth and rock—more than 60 times the bulk of the 7 great pyramids of Egypt.
A total of 34,225,500 cubic vards of conerete have been poured, more than 6 times as much as used in all the locks and structures of the Panama Canal.
In the preparation of this concrete, 38,475,900 barrels of cement were used.
The storage capacity of 81 Reclamation reservoirs was increased by about 5 million acre-feet during the fiscal year.
The June 30, 1944, capacity was 69,174,919 acre-feet.
The active water storage—more than 531/ million acre-feet—was also at a record level.
The largest of the man-made lakes were impounded by Bouder Dam (Arizona-Nevada), Grand Coulee Dam (Washington), and Marshall Ford Dam (Texas).
Storage of water in the reservoir behind Shasta Dam was begun on December 30, 1943, and behind Friant Dam on February 22,1944.
Increased war food production, valued at $460,272, resulted from the activity in 1943 of persons of Japanese ancestry on 3 Reclamation projects, to which they were evacuated from West Coast military zones early in the war.
The approximately 38,000 men and women housed in the War Relocation Centers harvested 4,861 acres of hitherto undeveloped land.
The camps are located on the Gooding Division of the Minidoka project (Idaho), which at the peak of the year's activity held 10,000 persons; the Tule Lake Division of the Klamath project (Oregon-California), 18,027; and the Heart Mountain Division of the Shoshone project (Wyoming), 9,800.
In addition to farm activities, the Japanese aided in Bureau construction operations on the Minidoka and Shoshone projects.
The camps were erected by the Army engineers, and the Bureau had charge of the work crews.
Construction was advanced on three medium-sized irrigation dams on the Rapid Valley (South Dakota), Deschutes (Oregon), and the Mancos (Colorado) projects by conscientious objectors housed in Civilian Public Service camps, established by the Selective Service System.
The assignees also helped clear the reservoirs and performed other work.
At the end of the year 124 men were stationed in the Rapid Valley camp, 90 in the Deschutes center, and 117 on the Mancos project.
In the first 2 camps a religious organization was responsible for the welfare of the men, and the Bureau was in charge of the work.
On the Mancos project all operations were supervised by Reclamation officials.
A small group of men in a camp administratively assigned to the Farm Security Administration was employed on Reclamation activities on the Buffalo Rapids project (Montana).
Enactment of amendments to the Water Conservation and Utilization Act, and added emphasis on expansion of production of war food crops, caused increased activity under the Water Conservation and Utilization program during the year.
Work continued on six projects authorized for construction before the war.
Preconstruction activities were underway on six additional projects approved under the war food program.
The amendments to the Water Conservation and Utilization Act authorize, for the duration of the war, the expenditure of appropriated funds for project construction in lieu of contributions formerly made by the Work Projects Administration and the Civilian Conservation Corps.
The projects under construction are: Mirage Flats (Nebraska), Buffalo Rapids No. 2 (Montana), Newton (Utah), Rapid Valley (South Dakota), Mancos (Colorado), and Scofield (Utah).
Other projects cleared for construction and the acreages involved are: Intake (Montana), Missoula (Montana), Dodson (Montana), Bitterroot (Montana), Post Falls unit, Rathdrum Prarie project (Idaho), and Balmorhea (Texas).
Construction remains at a standstill, due to War Production Board stop orders on the Fallon unit of the Buffalo Rapids project (Montana), and on the Eden project (Wyoming).
During the year the Farm Security Administration, in accordance with the original approval by the President, assumed supervision and control of the operation and maintenance work on the Buford-Trenton project (North Dakota), which is providing water for 4,000 acres.
The Farm Security Administration is also in charge of land development and settlement activities on the Buffalo Rapids No. 1 project, on which about 15,000 acres of land have been put under irrigation.
While not yet fully effectuated, chiefly because of difficulties in obtaining suitable personnel, the regionalization of the Bureau of Reclamation, begun in September.
1943, intensified operations in all fields of Reclamation activity.
The following is a summarization of the most important activities in each of the areas.
The outstanding wartime activities in Region I during the fiscal vear were the expansion of power production at Grand Coulee Dam (Washington).
The region includes the States of Oregon, Washington, Idaho, and western Montana.
The Bureau's power program at Grand Coulee was spectacular.
Three units rated at about 325,000 kilowatts were installed to complete, in 3 vears, the transformation of an empty shell of a building into the second largest powerplant in the world.
The fiscal year output was approximately 5,800,000,000 kilowatt-hours, double the production of the preceding year.
In March 1944, the plant produced 621 million kilowatt-hours, a world's record for quantity of power generated during 1 month by a single hydroplant.
About 98 percent of the Grand Coulee energy is consumed by war industries.
On the Roza Division, the acreage under irrigation was increased during the vear from 9,000 to 15,000 acres.
Ultimately the gravity system, under construction, will serve a total of 47,000 acres, whereon excellent settlement opportunities for returning servicemen and demobilized war workers could be provided.
Construction work in Region I was continued, under wartime restrictions, on the Deschutes project (Oregon), Anderson Ranch Dam of the Boise project (Idaho), and the Gooding Division of the Minidoka project (Idaho).
Construction of Anderson Ranch Dam, which when completed will be the highest earth-fill structure in the world and will provide supplemental irrigation water for 340,000 acres in the fertile Boise Valley, was resumed after delay of about a year due to War Production Board restrictions.
About 1,300,000 cubic yards of embankment and 75,000 cubic yards of rock-fill were placed during the year to bring the total yardage in place to about 21/ million.
Ultimately the dam will contain 9,600,000 cubic yards of material.
Design and location of irrigation features and development of a settlement pattern for the Columbia Basin project (Washington) was advanced.
This project, of which Grand Coulee Dam is the key strueture, offers the largest settlement oportunities of any single project in the Bureau's postwar program.
Completion of Shasta Dam, dominant structure of the Central Valley project (California), at the end of the fiscal year, elimaxed the construction activities in this region, which includes central and northern California, and a small portion of Oregon.
The Shasta Reservoir, gradually filling since December 30, 1943, contained 1,175,129 acre-feet of storage on June 30, 1944, more than a third of its maximum capacity.
The first two of five 75,000-kilowatt generators to be installed in the Shasta powerplant began production in June 1944, sending their output, under a wartime contract, over the newly completed Government transmission line to a connection with the Pacific Gas & Electric Co. system at Oroville, Calif.
Three other major items of the Central Valley project were featured in the region's construction program.
Keswick Dam and powerhouse, construction of which was halted for a time by the War Production Board, were practically completed.
Work was being advanced rapidly on four contracts for the construction of 28 miles of the Madera Canal, which when completed will serve 20,000 acres of new land and provide supplemental service to 80,000 acres.
Eight miles of the canal had been completed previously.
Installation at Friant Dam of needle valves borrowed from Boulder Dam to provide temporary control over the San Joaquin River was practically completed.
Water storage in Millerton Lake was begun on February 22, 1944, and had reached 290,490 acre feet—approximately half maximum capacity—at the end of the year.
Construction of the 160-mile Friant-Kern Canal of the Central Valley project remains at a standstill.
An application for clearance is pending before the War Production Board.
With War Production Board authorization under the war food program, granted on September 8, 1943, construction was resumed on the Modoc unit of the Klamath project (Oregon-California).
On June 23, 1944, the War Production Board approved construction of the extension of this unit.
Region II is featured prominently in the Reclamation postwar inventory.
Twenty-nine projects, which would serve 1,281,500 acres of new land and provide supplemental water to 3,485,000 acres now inadequately served are contemplated.
Power installations on authorized projects would be increased by 446,500 kilowatts and an estimated 288,900 kilowatts of firm capacity would be provided on projects under study.
The over-all cost of the postwar program in this region, on the basis of 1940 prices, would be $551,360,000.
With more than half the electrie power produced by Reclamation power plants on projects in 12 States coming from Bureau installations within its boundaries, Region III was outstanding as a contributor to the prosecution of the war.
This region includes nearly all of the State of Arizona, Southern California, and small portions of Nevada, New Mexico, and Utah.
Approximately 7 billion kilowatt-hours of energy were generated during the year.
More than 50 percent of all the power used by the war industries of Southern California, southern Nevada, and Arizona was produced by Bureau generators in this area.
These are located on five projects: Yuma and Salt River (Arizona); Boulder Canyon (Arizona-Nevada); Parker Dam (Arizona-California) and All-American Canal (California).
After the war, and as the need arises, the present installation can be doubled.
Although no capacity was added, the output of the Boulder Dam power plant, largest in the world, was increased by 20 percent over the preceding year.
By increasing the production of its generators, the output was brought to a new high of 61/3 billion kilowatt-hours.
Revenues from the sale of this energy and for generating charges totaled $8,162,422.86.
One-fourth of the plant's production was consumed by a huge magnesium plant nearby.
A new 82,500-kilowatt generator is scheduled to go into operation in September 1944.
Region III also contributed heavily toward the Nation's war food supply.
The 744,380 acres of land served by Reclamation facilities produced crops having a gross value of $109,371,178—an all-time high for the area.
Twenty-three of the projects in the postwar inventory are located in this region.
The over-all cost of constructing these developments, on the basis of pre-war prices, is estimated at $720,015,000.
Three of the projects have been authorized for construction, namely: Boulder Dam, with 287,500 kilowatts additional power capacity remaining to be installed, the Mesa Unit of the Gila project (Arizona), to provide water for 33,000 acres of new lands, and the All-American Canal (California) from which 400,000 acres of new lands may be irrigated and 20,000 provided with supplemental water.
Construction of a fourth project, Davis Dam, to provide river regulation and 225,000 kilowatts of power, was halted by the War Production Board late in 1942.
Nineteen projects which will irrigate 454,235 acres of new lands, furnish supplemental water to 374,200 acres, and provide 1,099,200 kilowatts of firm power are under study.
With large-scale construction halted or retarded by emergency conditions, project planning activities received major attention in region IV.
This region includes practically all of the States of Nevada and Utah, the southwestern portion of Wyoming, and that portion of Colorado west of the Continental Divide.
Work was advanced on more than 25 individual projects and subbasins, with 6 reports completed and 14 reports nearing completion.
The reports form the foundation for that portion of the reclamation inventory planned for region IV.
The outline calls for the construction of 46 projects.
These would serve 313,790 acres of new land, provide supplemental service to 684,940 acres, make available 8,600 kilowatts of new energy on authorized projects and 148,000 kilowatts of firm power capacity on proposed developments.
On the basis of 1940 prices, the estimated construction cost is $237,603,000.
Construction continued during the year on four projects.
Conscientious objectors aided in constructing a medium-sized dam on the Mancos project (Colorado).
The Newton Dam on the Newton project (Utah) was practically completed, and work was advanced on the Scofield project (Utah).
Sufficient work was completed during the past 2 years on the canals of the Provo River project (Utah) to provide supplemental water in 1943 to more than 25,000 acres of highly developed lands and serve an industrial supply to the new $200,000,000 Geneva Steel plant near Provo, Utah.
Progress was also made on the Salt Lake Aqueduct of the Provo River project to make additional water available to Salt Lake City.
Planning for postwar construction received primary consideration in Region V. In this region, comprising all of Texas and Oklahoma, that portion of New Mexico east of the Continental Divide, the southeast quarter of Colorado, and the southern half of Texas, 2 projects are in operation, 3 under construction, 3 authorized, and 26 are under study.
More than 2,653,000 acres of land are now irrigated in the area; 194,000 of which are included in Federal reclamation projects.
Construction of 30 projects outlined in the postar inventory would provide an irrigation water supply for 637,310 acres of additional land and furnish a supplemental supply of 1,615,980 acres now partially irrigated.
About 18,000 kilowatts of additional electric power could be installed on authorized projects and 36,000 kilowatts of firm capacity made available on proposed developments.
Total construction costs, based on 1940 prices, are estimated at $296,786,000.
Construction was in progress, under the war food program, on the Tucumcari project (New Mexico), and the Altus project (Oklahoma).
Work on both was suspended by the War Production Board in December 1942.
In April 1944 both projects were cleared for war food construction.
Development plans for the Tucumcari project call for 17,000 acres to be brought into production by 1945, with additional acreages subsequently.
The Altus project by 1945 is to provide irrigation service to 20,000 acres and a domestic water supply to the city of Altus.
It is scheduled to serve an additional 20,000 acres in 1946.
The three projects authorized are Valley Gravity Canal and Storage project (Texas), San Luis Valley project (Colorado), and the Balmorhea project (Texas).
The latter was approved by the President in May 1944, and construction work will be begun as soon as negotiations for the purchase of additional water rights and for repayment contracts are completed.
Construction on the Valley Gravity and San Luis Valley was halted by the War Production Board.
The Bureau of Reclamation's project planning activities in the West drew national recognition in the fiscal year bécause of the accomplishments in this region.
Completed here was a comprehensive report on the conservation, control, and use of the water resources of the entire Missouri River Basin, one of the Nation's greatest drainage areas.
Region VI includes the States of North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, the northern half of Kansas, northeastern Colorado, all of Montana east of the Continental Divide, and a major portion of Wyoming.
The investigations report was the culmination of more than 5 years of planning work.
It was presented to Congress early in June 1944, and bills were introduced in both houses that would authorize the construction of the initial stages of the development planned.
Constituting a major item in the Bureau's postwar outline, the report proposes the irrigation of 4,760,000 acres of new land, the construction of about 90 multiple-purpose reservoirs, 16 power plants with a total installed capacity of 723,500 kilowatts and interconnecting transmission systems, flood control for the lower reaches of the Missouri River and many of its tributaries, and a sustained flow for navigation from Sioux City to St. Louis.
The estimated total construction cost of the entire program is $1,250,- 000,000, and the initial developments recommended for conștruction would involve an expenditure after the war, of approximately $200,- 000,000, for the irrigation and power features alone.
Completion on June 10, 1944, of the excavation of the 13.1-mile long transmountain tunnel of the Colorado Big-Thompson projeet through the Rocky Mountains to carry supplemental water from the west to the east slope was the most important construction achievement of the year in this region.
The operation and maintenance of irrigation systems constructed by the Bureau was directed towards assuring water supplies for more than 4 million acres of land and the protection of the Federal investment.
Supervision was given to 15 projects or completed portions of projects operated in their entirety by the Bureau, and to the dams, reservoirs, and other reserved works on 6 other projects.
Administration also extended to 26 projects or portions of projects where operations are conducted by water users' organizations under contract with the United States.
Approximately 120 separate water users' organizations on these projects have contracts with the Federal Government.
Maximum war food production through improved farming methods was one of the year's prime objectives for the Branch of Operation and Maintenance.
Settlers were assisted in effectuating up-to-date practices in the proper utilization of land and water both by regular Bureau employees and by assistant county agents of the Extension Service of the Department of Agriculture, under a Memorandum of Understanding, dated June 12, 1940.
The work performed included assisting landowners and water users in laying out and constructing farm irrigation systems, preparing land for irrigation, rendering advice in the economic use of water, alleviation of seepage conditions, and control of noxious weeds.
Considerable educational material was prepared and disseminated, including slide lectures and films designed to assist farmers in the development of pastures, measurement and proper use of irrigation water, and weed control.
Extensive field work in the lining of canals to conserve water and prevent damage to irrigable lands by seepage·was carried on under the Soil and Moisture Conservation program.
Asphalt and bentonite linings were installed and tested from the standpoint of design, placement, effectiveness, and cost, and results compared with standard concrete and earth linings.
Other activities included: Prevention of canal bank erosion by vegetative plantings, investigation of methods to reduce siltation of canals and reservoirs, drainage work to relieve seeped land, installation of accurate devices for measurement of irrigation water, and studies of the requirements for and application of irrigation water by reason of relative impermeable characteristics of some soils.
More than a million acres of land, most of which was publie land withdrawn by the Bureau in connection with completed or partially completed projects or projects under investigation, were restored to entry during the fiscal year.
Approximately 929,500 acres of public land were under lease during calendar year 1943; 688,000 acres for grazing purposes, 53,500 for agricultural uses (8,500 more than in 1942), and 188,000 for other special uses, including the areas reserved for Japanese evacuee centers.
Some additional lands were leased early in 1944 for expanding livestock and farming operations to increase food production.
Reclamation land temporarily transferred to the Grazing Service to provide for efficient range administration under the Taylor Grazing Act was reduced by the vacation of reclamation withdrawals and by transfers to the War Relocation Authority for Japanese encampments.
Under the Bureau's reorganized plan of procedure, active progress was made at the close of the fiscal year toward completion of negotiations of amendatory repayment contracts with a number of water users' organizations.
To date eight contracts have been executed.
A contract negotiated with the Klamath Drainage District of the Klamath projeet (Oregon-California) was approved by Congress on June 17, 1944.
Power features contained in several agreements were given special attention.
Reclassification of irrigable lands under provisions of the 1939 Act was completed or in progress on approximately 298,000 acres on 14 projects or divisions of projects.
With farm incomes in 1942 and 1943 at high levels and prospects good for continuing high returns in 1944, requests and authorizations for temporary relief from the payment of accrued construction charges dropped to new lows during the fiscal year.
Applications, in the amount of $108,092.33, were submitted by eight water-users' organizations.
Relief totaling $21,916.44 was granted to four applicants.
In comparison, applications totaling $189,922.44 were received in the fiscal year 1943 from six water-user groups and seven individuals.
Relief in the amount of $24,530 was authorized.
Three major items of legislation affecting Reclamation activities were enacted during the year.
The Water Conservation and Utilization (Wheeler-Case) Act was amended, construction of the Hungry Horse Dam (Mont.) was authorized, and Congress gave its consent to the Belle Fourche Compact.
To provide for a quick expansion of potential food-producing acreages on projects in the process of construction under the Water Conservation and Utilization Act of October 14, 1940 (54 Stat. 1119), Congress amended this legislation on July 16, 1943 (Public, 152, 78th Cong., 1st Sess.).
The amendments authorize the expenditure of appropriated funds for construction in lieu of nonreimbursable money or services formerly contributed by the Work Projects Administration and the Civilian Conservation Corps, which were disbanded early in the war.
The original Act has as its objective the stabilization of agriculture and employment in the Great Plains and other semiarid areas to the westward which are most seriously affected by periodic droughts.
The long-standing controversy between the States of South Dakota and Wyoming over the division of waters of the Belle Fourche River was brought to an end in February 1944, when Congress gave its consent to the Belle Fourche Compact.
The legislation clears the way for construction of works to provide supplemental storage for irrigation projects in South Dakota and also storage for potential projects in Wyoming.
Ineorporated in the compact is a provision giving Federal recognition of water rights as against an assertion of power under the Commerce Clause of the Constitution.
It requires the Federal Government to respect established water rights as property and to consult with State officials with respect to specific Federal programs or projects.
Construction of Hungry Horse Dam, a major feature of the comprehensive plan for multiple-purpose development of the Columbia River in the Pacific Northwest, was authorized by Congress on June 5, 1944 (Public, 329, 78th Cong., 2d Sess.).
This structure, to be erected 4 miles above the confluence of the South Fork and Flathead Rivers in Montana, is a prominent item in the Bureau's inventory of irrigation and multiple-purpose projects for postwar construction.
It would increase the firm power output of Grand Coulee and Bonneville Dams through regulation of the flow of the Flathead River.
The act also authorizes an irrigation development in the vicinity of Kalispell, Mont.
Under tentative plans, the settlement program would be handled by the Department of the Interior in cooperation with the agencies that are charged directly with the administration of veteran affairs.
The Bureau's legal staff is engaged in preparing a report on and drafting amendments to H. R. 3179, introduced by Congressman Murdock of Arizona, which would provide opportunities for veterans to reestablish themselves on irrigated farms.
Pending before Congress was legislation which would amend Sections 4, 7, and 17 of the Reclamation Project Act of 1939.
The principal objective of the bill, reported out by the Senate Committee on Irrigation and Reclamation, is to extend the time within which amendatory contracts may be made to December 31, 1950, or 5 years after the end of the war, whichever period is the longer.
With additional personnel available in the postwar period, it is expected many amendatory contracts can be negotiated.
Relief provisions of the Act would also be extended by the méasure.
Decentralization of the Bureau of Reclamation through the establishment of six regional offices and five administrative branches in Denver, Colo., the objective of which was to "streamline" the organization for greater efficiency in meeting war and postwar problems, was effectuated during the fiscal year.
Six outstanding Bureau officials were placed in charge of each region as Regional Directors of Reclamation, and five others, experienced in their respective fields, were named to head the branches.
These are: Design and Construction, Project Planning, Operation and Maintenance, Fiscal and Administrative Management, and Power Utilization.
Regional offices were established in Boise, Idaho; Sacramento, Calif.
Boulder City, Nev.
Salt Lake City, Utah; Amarillo, Tex.
The Regional Directors are responsible for coordinating all Bureau activities within their regions, and they report directly to the Conmissioner.
They have extensive latitude for independent action.
Assistance in technical phases of their work is provided by the Branch heads.
On the basis that the improved organization would provide added protection of the Federal investment in irrigation and multiple-purpose projects, and that it was essential because of the Bureau's greatly expanded activities, nonreimbursable funds were sought for the cost of administration, without success.
Further efforts to obtain these funds will be made in fiscal year 1945, with continued emphasis to be placed on the fact that the decentralization extends a significant portion of the Commissioner's function (the cost of which is nonreimbursable) to the field.
Military furloughs, resignations, and transfers reduced the number of Reclamation employees from 6,543 on June 30, 1943, to 6,513 on June 30, 1944.
Twenty-one Washington employees and 1,643 field employees were in the armed forces of the United States.
Twelve have given their lives and 2 are missing.
The number of persons employed in the various Bureau activities were: Commissioner's office, 98; branch offices (Denver Colo.), 820; legal office (Denver), 13; Region 1, 1,733; Region 2, 833; Region 3, 1,050; Region 4, 312; Region 5, 1,109; Region 6, 545.
During the year the number of field offices, exclusive of headquarters for project planning work, was reduced from 54 to 50.
Harry W. Bashore, Assistant Commissioner of Reclamation since May 27, 1939, and for more than 37 years a Bureau employee, took office as Commissioner on August 3, 1943, upon appointment by the President.
He replaced John C. Page, who resigned in June 1943 because of ill health.
Mr. Page had served as Commissioner since January 25, 1937.
Secretary of the Interior Harold L. Ickes appointed two Assistant Commissioners during the year; namely, William E. Warne, former Chief of Information for the Bureau, and Kenneth Markwell, former Regional Director of the Federal Works Agency.
Mr. Warne took office on August 9, 1943, and Mr. Markwell on April 18, 1944.
In the 42 years of the Bureau's history, the accretions to the Reclamation fund have totaled $220,910,306.02.
See table 4.)
These have come from the sale of publie lands, proceeds from the Oil Leasing Act, from Federal water power licenses, potassium royalties, and rentals and receipts from Naval petroleum reserves from 1920 to 1930 under the act of May 9, 1938.
Collections—construction and operation and maintenance repayments, water rentals, power revenues, etc.
Disbursements during that period have totaled $349,523,020.29, leaving a balance in the fund on June 30, 1944, of $31,135,346.91.
Repayments of construction charges to the Reclamation fund during the fiscal year 1944 totaled $400,000,000.
Operation and maintenance collections amounted to $1,400,000, and water rental, power, and other receipts aggregated $6,000,000.
The total collections reflect the improved financial condition of Reclamation farmers and their continued response to the President's anti-inflation policy by maintaining a good record of repayments.
The high level of the Reclamation fund provides resources for the extension of irrigation investigations and for the extension of irrigation systems when the resumption of construetion is possible.
The Federal investment in Reclamation since June 17, 1902, when the Reclamation law was approved, topped the $900,000,000 mark in 1944.
Expenditures for construction on all projects during the 12- month period totaled $51,665,144.79, bringing the total Federal outlay under Reclamation to $921,770,619.71.
See table 5, p. 34.)
Despite the war restrictions on materials and manpower, progress was made on the construction of irrigation systems under the war food program.
While clearances from the War Production Board were not available sufficiently early in the fiscal year to complete war food schedules as planned, the Bureau of Reclamation was able to lay the groundwork for more rapid construction during the fiscal year 1945 and 1946.
The funds available for advancing power installations under the war power program enabled the Bureau to increase substantially not only the Federal investment in power facilities on reclamation projects, but to provide facilities, through additional storage and generating equipment, that are providing revenues for assisting in financing the cost of irrigation systems.
The importance from a financial standpoint of the power installations on Reclamation projects is illustrated by preliminary studies which indicate that about 50 percent of the repayable costs of the entire reclamation construction program as laid out at the beginning of the war, will come from power revenues.
Approximately 45 percent of these costs will be repayable by irrigation water users, and the remaining costs will be allocated to nonreimbursable purposes such as flood control, navigation, and contributed labor, or will be repayable by municipalities for supplemental water supplies.
The Congress appropriated $18,907,200 for construction of irrigation facilities during the fiscal year 1945.
The total unexpended balance for construction purposes of all kinds brings to $80,628,000 the total funds available for this activity by the Bureau of Reclamation during 1945.
Control over the constructien of irrigation, power, and other facilities remained in the hands of the War Production Board.
Construction of irrigation facilities is recommended to the War Production Board by the War Food Administration, and the construction of power facilities is subject to the direct consideration of the War Production Board.
FTER the war the problem of how to cope with abundance will beset our economy all along the line, and unless it is solved, will threaten the development of vital irrigation and flood control works dependent upon the Midas touch of power.
Power facilities that were hastened to completion for war production must not remain idle to block further multiple-purpose water conservation needed throughout the Nation.
Hydroelectric power cannot stagnate without dire results any more than manpower can.
If it is unemployed the men and the capital that it supports will be unemployed also.
The country expects this Department to take the initiative in averting such a catastrophe, and quite naturally.
We operate the largest aggregate of hydroelectric capacity in the world.