THE Bureau of Reclamation during the fiscal year maintained at record levels its production of food and power.for a fighting Nation, and carried forward its plans for further development of Western resources in meeting the problems of peace.
Food production on Federal Reclamation projects during the war years has been stepped up to the highest levels in history.
In 1944 the gross value of food and fiber crops reached an all-time peak.
Power plants operated by the Bureau at its great dams in the West have been a major factor in the rapid expansion of war industries in Western States, and the power output of these plants during the past year totaled almost 14 billion kilowatts, most of which went into production of planes, tanks, ships, and other commodities to sustain our fighting forces in all parts of the world.
While directing major attention to its programs in support of the war effort, the Bureau during the year has also made substantial progress on its plans for undertaking a greatly expanded program for development of Western resources during the postwar period.
With the end of hostilities the Nation faces not only the problems of the immediate reconversion period, but also the longer range problem of maintaining a high employment and high production economy at a permanent level.
The postwar program of the Bureau of Reclamation is designed to gear into both the reconversion period and the leveling-off period which follows it.
That program, outlined before a congressional committee in April, calls for full development of the agricultural and industrial resources of 17 Western .
States through construction of multiple-purpose projects to provide irrigation, power production, flood control, and other benefits.
The Bureau's postwar inventory of projects listed 415 proposed for construction after the war, including those on which work is under way or authorized and those on which studies are still being made.
Construction of these projects, estimated to cost nearly 5 billion dollars at 1940 price levels, would provide thousands of jobs, open new lands for settlement by veterans and others, stimulate the development of new industry, and in many other ways help meet the problems of reconversion and in permanently building for a better, stronger America.
The late President Roosevelt, in a letter written a few days before his death to Representative John R. Murdock, chairman of the House Committee on Irrigation and Reclamation, emphasized the importance of Reclamation projects as a means of providing job and farm opportunities for returning veterans.
As I stated in my message to the Congress of January 13, 1944, demobilization starts long before the war ends, and it is essential that programs of assistance to veterans be authorized and adequately prepared now.
One such program has been under active study and is in the &dvanced stages of planning through the work of the Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior.
I have frequently spoken with pride of the accomphshments of this administration in western Reclamation projects.
The great Columbia Basin projeet in the Northwest, the projects in the Missouri River Basin, and others of equal significance, will, as I said at Chicago on October 28, 1944, be golden opportunities for returning veterans.
Such proiects constitute great increases in national wealth and income.
They also offer splendid opportunities for secure and abundant livelihood to men and women willing to engage in the arduous, though stimulating, tasks of pioneering these latest frontiers.
I commend and urge your favorable consideration of Federal Reclamation projects as an important opportunity for returning veterans.
A program to facilitate settlement of returning veterans on farms can be of great value in assisting them in returning to civilian life.
It can also be of great value in the reconversion of our national economy to fully prosperous peacetime basis.
Full enjoyment of the great productive resources of this Nation by all of the people requires that all have opportunity to engage in productive labor.
The purchasing power created by reclamation projects is a stimulus to industry and commerce, thus promoting full employment throughout the Nation.
Those engaged in agricultural production should secure ample livelihood so that they can participate in enjoyment of the products created by full industrial employment.
Measures in addition to those dealing with Federal Reclamation projects will be needed to round out a comprehensive program in this regard.
Projects included in the Bureau's inventory are integral parts of programs for coordinated resource development on a basin-wide scale in each of 15 major river valleys in the West.
The first of these comprehensive studies and reports was completed during the fiscal year for the Missouri River Basin, and the Congress approved the joint plan of the Bureau and the Corps of Engineers by passage of the Flood Control Act of 1944.
The postwar inventory includes 29 Bureau projects initially authorized for construction in carrying out this coordinated plan.
Production of food and power on 52 operating projects of the Bureau during the year was maintained at record levels, as was generation of power for war production.
Construction activities of the Bureau were continued during the year on a restricted basis, confined mostly to war food and war power projects approved by the War Production Board.
Work was halted by War Production Board stop-orders, or deferred because of the war on more than a billion dollars worth of construetion planned by the Bureau.
Project planning activities and the preparation of designs and specifications were also carried forward during the year, primarily on projects included in the postwar inventory.
Work was hampered by limited funds and the lack of trained personnel.
The Bureau is now resuming construction on a considerable number of projects.
Among those slated for early development are the Columbia Basin project in Washington State, the Central Valley project in California and various projects in the initial development stage for the Missouri Basin.
The report on the allocation of costs for the Columbia Basin project was submitted to the Congress during the year and repayment contracts setting forth the terms under which water users will repay part of the cost of constructing the irrigation system were to be submitted to landowners in the Basin at a special election in July.
The Federal Government now has an investment of $952,893,000 in projects built and under construction by the Bureau of Reclamation.
The cost of constructing the irrigation features of the projects actually in operation was slightly in excess of $312,000,000, of which at the end of 1944, more than $71,000,000 had been repaid by water users under Reclamation law.
The gross value of crops produced on these lands for the single year 1944 amounted to more than the cost of building the irrigation systems.
More than 91,000 family-sized farms are provided with irrigation water through the 52 operating projects of the Bureau, and nearly five million people live in the areas served with irrigation and power from its systems.
Disruptions caused by the war have affected the work of the Bureau in many ways.
More than 1,800 members of its staff, many of them skilled technicians, joined the armed services.
Operations were hampered by shortages of manpower and materials.
Needed repairs and maintenance work on irrigation systems and power plants were delayed.
An expanded irrigation acreage and development of other resources is necessary to insure the continued growth of the West.
In the Pacific States and several of the Mountain States, population growth has outstripped agricultural production.
The drought experiences of the Plains States, on the other hand, point to the need for increased irrigation to stabilize their agriculture and to stimulate development of other resources.
The war has placed a tremendous drain upon our natural resources.
It is essential that remaining resources be conserved and utilized to the greatest possible advantage if the Nation is to continue its role of world leadership.
To this objective the work of the Bureau of Reclamation is dedicated.
The Congress this vear called upon the Department of the Interior and the Bureau of Reclamation to shoulder major responsibility for the biggest single development job in the Nation's history—that of harnessing the Missouri River and putting it to work as a constructive force in expanding the agricultural and industrial frontiers of the West.
The Bureau's program to control and put to greater use the waters of one of the country's most unruly and destructive rivers was approved by the Congress in passing the Flood Control Act of 1944, under which the coordinated plan of the Bureau and the Corps of Engineers for development of the Missouri Basin was adopted.
The latter agency will be primarily responsible for flood control and navigation projects.
The Bureau of Reclamation, working closely with other agencies of the Department of the Interior, will construct projects for irrigation and power development.
The Congress authorized an appropriation of $200,000,000 each for the Bureau and the Corps of Engineers in carrying out the initial phases of the program.
This comprehensive program for coordinated development of Missouri Basin resources surpasses anything of similar nature ever undertaken.
It will affect a region embracing approximately onesixth of the area of the continental United States, extending from the eastern slope of the Rockies in Montana where the Missouri starts its twisting 2,500-mile course, to where it empties into the Mississippi near St. Louis.
The drainage area of the river and its tributaries includes 10 States—all of Nebraska, the Great Plains of Montana, North and South Dakota, Wyoming, Colorado, Kansas, parts of Minnesota, Iowa, and Missouri.
The magnitude of the engineering' tasks involved in this development program can be realized from the fact that coordinated plans call for the construction of more than 100 dams to create storage reservoirs of 63,000,000 acre-feet capacity, almost equal to the present storage capacity of all present Bureau reservoirs combined.
The works'to be constructed will provide for irrigation, the development of hydroelectric power, flood control, improved navigation, municipal water supplies, fish and wildlife conservation and opportunities for recreation.
Projects to be constructed under the coordinated plan will aid greatly in stabilizing the agricultural economy of an area which has known the devastating effects of both droughts and floods.
The projects proposed will provide for the irrigation of 4,760,000 acres of moisture-famished land never before irrigated, and for supplemental water for 547,000 acres now inadequately irrigated.
A total of more than 150 major and subsidiary units for irrigation are contemplated in the seven arid or semiarid States of the Basin.
Hydroelectrie plants with a capacity of 789,750 kilowatts and a power transmission grid are included.
The estimated annual output of the power plants would approximate 4½ billion kilowatt hours.
In the initial stage of the unified plan the Congress authorized the construction by the Bureau of Reclamation of 29 units and a power transmission grid.
When completed, these will irrigate 2,836,000 acres, and allow for installed power capacity of 321,000 kilowatts.
The Bureau has started work on the plans for the first 11 units with a view to having them ready for beginning of construction in the next fiscal year.
Kansas-Nebraska: Bostwick, Cedar Bluff, Frenchman-Cambridge, Kirwin, North Republican (Wray) (Colorado-Nebraska), pumping units for underground water in Republican Basin.
Montana: Canyon Ferry Reservoir, Glasgow Bench pumping, Hardin (including Yellowtail Dam), Marias, Missouri-Souris (Montana division), South Bench, and Yellowstone River pumping units.
North Dakota: Heart River, Knife River, Missouri-Souris (North Dakota division), and five Missouri River pumping units.
South Dakota: Angostura, Grand River (Shadehill-Bluehorse), Oahe (James River), and Rapid Valley (including Brennan Reservoir).
Wyoming: Big Horn pumping units, Big Horn project (Boysen Dam), Glendo Reservoir, Kortes, Owl Creek, Paintrock, Riverton, and Shoshone project extensions.
Transmission lineș to carry energy generated by Bureau plants complete the list of initial projects.
The Flood Control Act, putting the congressional stamp of approval on the coordinated plan for Missouri Basin development, became law in December 1944.
Two weeks later the Bureau called key members of its regional staffs at Billings and Denver to Washington for conferences with the Commissioner's staff to map out a program for starting work.
A second conference was held at Denver in June at which further plans were made, policies formulated, and the general organizational set-up for carrying out the program agreed upon.
Also selected was a group of projects, from among the 29 authorized, on which construction could be started first.
For this comprehensive development job the Bureau will have the assistance and cooperation of many Federal agencies in addition to those in the Department of the Interior, and of State and local organizations in the Missouri Basin.
Interior agencies working with the Bureau include the Geological Survey, National Park Service, Fish and Wildlife Service, Bureau of Mines, Office of Indian Affairs, General Land Office, and the Grazing Service, working through the Water Resources Committee of the Department.
Plans for proiect deyelopment are also coordinated through the Federal Inter-Agency River Basin Committee made up of representatives of the Department of the Interior, the War Department, the Department of Agriculture, and the Federal Power Commission.
In April, a special subcommittee of this latter agency was set up to deal specifically with Missouri Basin developments.
Known as the Missouri Basin Inter-Agency Committee, it is made up of representatives of the 4 Federal agencies named above and 4 governors representing the 10 Missouri Basin States.
The cost of constructing the projects approved under the coordinated plan is estimated at approximately 1½ billion dollars, based on 1940 prices.
Many of the multiple-purpose projects to be built would be self-liquidating, and a major portion of the total investment would be returned to the Federal Treasury through payments by water users and through sales of electric power.
Construction costs of flood control and navigation projects proposed under the plan would not be directly repayable but yield benefits far in excess of costs.
Construction of the initial projects in the Bureau's program for Missouri Basin development will be started as soon as the Congress makes the necessary appropriations and the manpower and materials become available.
The impact which a completed program of this magnitude will have upon the national economy can readily be imagined.
It will provide thousands of jobs for returning servicemen, war workers, and others, not only at construction sites but at supply centers many miles away.
The development of irrigation projects will help to stabilize the agricultural economy of a vast area periodically scourged by drought.
The availability of low-cost hydroelectric power will stimulate business and industry, make possible development of untapped natural resources, and lighten the burdens of farm and city dwellers.
Storage reservoirs to be constructed will minimize greatly the danger of floods in the lower reaches of the river.
Approximately 53,000 new irrigated farms will be created.
Population will be increased.
Purchasing power in the Missouri Basin States for commodities produced in other parts of the country will be expanded by many millions of dollars annually.
Food is as important in war as men and machines are.
The men and women on the farms of America are as truly"war workers" as those emploved in shops and factories to turn out planes and tanks.
And wherever our fighting men have gone on all the battle fronts they have been the best fed, the best clothed, and the best equipped troops ever mobilized.
To make possible that achievement, the farm families of America have made a record in the produetion of food and fiber that is without parallel in the Nation's history.
They have provided not only for the needs of our fighting forces but for our allies and the civilian population here at home.
The part which farmers on lands irrigated by Federal Reclamation projects have plaved in that record-breaking achievement is outstanding.
The value of crops produced on Bureau-irrigated lands has more than doubled during the war years, partly reflected in increased market prices but also due to greatly increased production of war-essential crops and to additional acreage brought under irrigation.
During the past fiscal year, more than 4 million acres of land were served with irrigation water from Bureau projects, representing an increase of 759,000 acres over 1941 and 125,000 acres more than in 1943.
The value of crops produced hit an all-time high of $411,226,000, compared to $159,886,000 in the pre-war year of 1941.
In meeting wartime food needs, farmers on Reclamation lands during 1944 produced 57,122,000 bushels of potatoes, 1,941,000 tons of sugar beets, 6,495,000 bushels of onions, 3,674,000 bushels of beans, 36,672,000 bushels of grain, and 49,000,000 bushels of truck crops.
To maintain production of meat and dairy products at a high level, they also produced 4,360,000 tons of forage crops, including 3,830,000 tons of alfalfa hay.
Production of apples, oranges, grapefruit, peaches, and other fruits and berries totaled 729,000 tons, and crops produced for seed amounted to 4,512,000 bushels.
The average per acre value of crops on Bureau-irrigated lands in 1944 was also the highest on record, an average of $99.27 per acre, compared with a per acre average of $47.30 in 1941.
The highest average crop value in 1944 was reported for the Tieton division of the Yakima project at $598.34 per acre, closely followed by the Okanogan project at $592.32 per acre.
Both are apple-growing districts in the State of Washington.
Gross crop values exceeding an average of $100 per acre also were reported on the following projects: The Salt River (Arizona); Yuma (Arizona-California); Orland, Imperial Irrigation District and Central Valley (California); Fruitgrowers Dam and the Orchard Mesa division of the Grand Valley project (Colorado); Rio Grande (New Mexico-Texas); Klamath (Oregon-California); Owyhee Ditch Company (Oregon-Idaho); and Provo River and Weber River (Utah).
Tonnage of food and forage crops increased from 10,660,000 tons in 1943 to 11,369,000 tons in 1944.
Of the cultivated area 26.1 percent was in alfalfa with production valued at $67,978,000, 4.9 percent in potatoes valued at $50,211,000, and 4.3 percent in seed crops with a value of $24,333,000.
Gross value of other crops produced in 1944 were: cotton, $18,446,000; beans, $13,363,000;sugar beets, $20,623,000; truck crops, $59,178,000; grains, $39,610,000; and fruit, $56,140,000.
Principal volume increases occurred in alfalfa hay, grains, truck crops, and fruit.
The returns cited are exclusive of the values of livestock fattened on Reclamation projects and of dairy and poultry products.
These would increase quoted totals by more than 25 percent.
The Bureau had under lease during the calendar year 1944 approximately 964,000 acres, of which 799,000 acres were leased for grazing purposes; 64,000 acres for agricultural use; and 101,000 acres for other special uses.
The above figures include 89,195 acres of patented land which have been acquired by the Bureau in connection with its projects.
Revenues received by the United States for use of land in 1944 totaled $195,805.
The majority of the leased lands are withdrawn in connection with operation of completed projects.
In addition, more than 700,000 acres of reclamation withdrawn land is now administered by the Grazing Service, with transfer of revenues to the Reclamation Fund.
Under an agreement entered into February 28, 1945, between the Bureau and the General Land Office, vacant public lands under reclamation withdrawal may be temporarily transferred to the administration of the General Land Office until needed for reclamation purposes.
At the end of the fiscal year, approximately 44,000 acres of such lands had been so transferred.
Through a spectacular expansion in its generating facilities to meet the war emergency the Bureau of Reclamation has become the largest power producer in the world.
From plants operating on its projects came nearly 14 billion kilowatt-hours of electric energy during the past fiscal year, much of it to war industries for the manufacture of planes and ships, aluminum, magnesium, and other materials and equipment for the fighting forces.
Production of electric energy at Bureau projects has quadrupled since Pearl Harbor.
When the war is over this tremendous capacity for power production will be one of the most important factors in the continued industrial and agricultural expansion of the West.
It will provide jobs, stimulate the establishment of new industry, aid in developing mineral resources and,in general,serve as the foundation for the establishment of a more balanced economy throughout the West.
From its beginning in the power field in 1909 with the 6,000-kilowatt Minidoka project plant in Idaho, the Bureau's installed capacity has grown to 2,439,300 kilowatts.
This growth was required to keep pace with the needs for electrical power in areas served by reclamation projects and played a vital role in the tremendous expansion of war industries in the West.
To meet demands, the installed capacity of Bureau hydroelectric plants was increased since 1941 by nearly a million and a half kilowatts, a gain of nearly 65 percent.
In the fiscal year 1945 the combined output of the plants operating on Bureau projects was approximately 14,000,000,000 kilowatt-hours.
Revenues from the sale of energy were in excess of $20,000,000.
Construction of new plant facilities has been virtually halted since 1942 because of the need for diverting critical materials to other war uses.
During the past year an additional 82,500-kilowatt unit was installed in the plant at Boulder Dam, which has supplied a steady stream of energy to aircraft and shipbuilding facilities, magnesium plants, and other basic industries.
The plant at Boulder is the world's largest, and has a capacity of 1,034,800 kilowatts.
The Shasta Dam power plant in northern California completed its first full year of operation withan output of 739,000,000 kilowatt-hours.
Power from Grand Coulee Dam continued to be the mainstay of booming war industries in the Pacific Northwest.
More than one-third of the aluminum used in airplane construction in the United States was produced from power generated by the Grand Coulee-Bonneville system.
From Grand Coulee also came the large blocks of power for other important war purposes.
During the year the Bureau also completed construction of the 97- mile transmission line to Oroville which made possible the delivery of Shasta power to the connecting lines of the Pacific Gas & Electric Co. and thence into northern California war plants.
The company serves as the marketing agency for this power under a wartime contract.
The availability of Shasta power resulted in saving thousands of barrels of fuel oil that would otherwise have been required had the same energy been generated by steam plants.
The postwar program of the Bureau calls for increasing the capacity of present plants to 4,000,000 kilowatts, principally by adding generating units for which space has been provided in constructed plants.
Additional installations at projects included in the postwar inventory call for generating plants which will give the Bureau of Reclamation a total power capacity of about 9,000,000 kilowatts.
Of this, about a million and a half kilowatts will be in plants strategically located in states of the Missouri Basin to aid in the further development of that great area.
The demands of wartime have served to emphasize what officials of the Bureau of Reclamation have long recognized—the importance of developing the power resources of our western rivers along with the utilization of their waters for irrigation and other purposes.
The availability of such low-cost power is essential on many projects for irrigation pumping, but it is even more important as a stimulant to the development of industry and business to go hand in hand with agricultural expansion in establishing a balanced economy.
Revenues from the sale of such power helps repay to the Federal Treasury a major portion of the cost of constructing many reclamation projects.
Without that source of repayment revenue, projects which are now contributing so much to the Nation's agricultural production and providing homes and jobs for thousands of people could not have been constructed without a much greater net cost.
Under reclamation law, most of the investment which the Government makes in these irrigation projects is repaid over a period of from 40 to 60 years by water users, and the revenue from sale of electric energy to municipalities and individuals.
The mighty contribution which the West has made to war produetion since 1941 would not have been possible without the powerproducing facilities of Bureau projects, and after the war they will play an even more important role in developing the great latent resources of the vast area between the Mississippi and the Pacific.
While pushing its programs to aid in winning the war the Bureau of Reclamation also laid a solid foundation for a program to meet the problems of peace.
This program was presented to the Congress in April in the form of an inventory of 415 irrigation and multiple-purpose projects which the Bureau is prepared to undertake in further developing the resources of 17 Western States and to provide jobs and farms for thousands of returning servicemen and demobilized war workers.
This inventory of projects included more than 100 which have already been authorized by the Congress, 29 of them as part of the Bureau's coordinated program for development of the Missouri Basin.
Construction of these authorized and proposed projects would provide jobs at peak employment for more than 400,000 workers at construction sites and a great many more workers in factories, mines, and transportation systems throughout the country.
The cost of constructing these projects—those authorized and those under study—is estimated at close to 5 billion dollars, based on 1940 costs.
The estimated construction cost to complete projects already authorized by the Congress is $1,337,701,000.
Nearly 200,000 irrigated farms would be made available for settlement by veterans and others upon the completion of these projects.
They would bring water to nearly 11 million acres which have never before been irrigated, and supplemental water to an additional 11 million acres which now have inadequate water supplies.
Thus, a total of 21 million acres would be served in stabilizing the agricultural economy of these 17 Western States and contributing to the welfare of the Nation as a whole.
Another very important contribution which these projects would make in developing the resources of the West to the benefit of the whole country is the tremendous increase in the output of electrical energy which would be made possible by harnessing these western rivers through multiple-purpose projects.
Power plants on Bureau projects now have an installed capacity of 2,439,300 kilowatts, with a total output in 1944 of nearly 14 billion kilowatt-hours.
The postwar program calls for increasing the capacity of present plants to 4,863,000 kilowatts principally by adding generating units for which space was provided in original construction.
Additional installations in the postwar inventory call for the addition of generating units which would give Bureau of Reclamation plants a total capacity of 9,324,000 kilowatts.
The speed with which construction of these projects can be undertaken will depend largely upon the action of the Congress in making the necessary appropriations and upon the availability of manpower and materials.
Work is in progress under war food and war power programs on many of the authorized projects and work on others has been halted or deferred because of the war.
The development program proposed by the Bureau is important both from the standpoint of what it can do toward helping the Nation in meeting some of the immediate reconversion problems, and also because of its promise for long-range development of the agricultural and industrial resources of the West.
It is a program that permits a quiek get-away.
Provided with funds and manpower to complete field investigations and preconstruction work, as well as appropriations for actual construction, the Bureau could put from 150,000 to 200,000 men to work at project sites the first year.
Peak on-site employment could be reached in the second or third year.
Midwest, East, and South.
It would mean jobs for thousands of workers in manufacturing materials and machinery—iron and steel products, cement, electrical equipment and supplies, foundry and machine-shop products, and lumber, from their beginning as raw materials, their transportation to the factory for fabrication, their processing, and again their transportation to the place where they are used.
Thus every State is affected by western construction.
The benefits that would be derived from these projects would not end with the construction of the engineering works but go on for generation after generation to increase agricultural produetion, stimulate industry, increase purchasing power, ereate new opportunities for business, trade and professional people in towns serving project areas.
So not only the West but the entire Nation would be benefited permanently.
For 43 years the Bureau of Reclamation has been working on programs for developing the land and water resources of the West.
The value of those developments has been effectively demonstrated during the war.
The need for continuing and expanding such developments has also been demonstrated.
At present there are about 2½ million more people living in the 11 far Western States than there were before the war.
This is a population increase of 17.8 percent, compared with a national increase in the same time of only seven-tenths of 1 percent.
Many of these new residents of the West will remain in the region.
In addition more than 1,000,000 western boys will be demobilized from the armed forces.
They will want jobs, they will want opportunities to start farming, to practice their trades and professions, to open business establishments.
An increase in the basic irrigated agriculture of this area will therefore be necessary to support and sustain the growth and the continuing industrial expansion of these States.
It is to meet this challenge and to open up a new frontier of opportunity in the West that the Bureau of Reclamation presents its postwar program.
The Branch of Project Planning gave major attention during the year to projects proposed for construction after the war.
Field staffs concentrated on the completion of the comprehensive engineering and economic investigations and reports on 15 major river basins in the West, in addition to sub-basin and project studies.
The objective of these studies is to present a comprehensive and overall plan of development on a basin-wide scale to bind the various projects and units into an orderly and logical program for the most effective utilization of land and water resources.
The first of these basin reports—covering the Missouri River Basin—was presented to the Congress last year (S. Doc. 191).
Further studies of projects and sub-basins in the Missouri Valley are continuing.
Reports on other major western river basins in various stages of completion by the Bureau are: Columbia River Basin, Rogue River Basin, Central Valley, Santa Barbara County, Russian River Basin, Lower Colorado River Basin, Upper Colorado River Basin, Great Salt Lake Basin, Nueces River Basin, Rio Grande Basin, Red River Basin, Pecos River Basin, Guadalupe River Basin, Colorado River (Texas) Basin, and Arkansas River Basin.
In addition to these basin reports and studies of individual projects in the postwar inventory, the Bureau brought to substantial completion during the year its special studies of the two largest Reclamation projects on its postwar development schedule, the Columbia Basin project in south-central Washington and the Central Valley project in California.
Published during the year were 3 of the 28 special reports prepared by the Columbia Basin Joint Investigations Committees—Types of Farming, Rural Recreational Areas, and Insuring Proper Land Use.
Additional studies in the series are scheduled for publication during the coming fiscal year.
Also completed during the year were similar special studies for aid to settlers on the Central Valley project.
The studies embrace a great volume of factual material on all phases of the proposed development of the project and were prepared by the Bureau in cooperation with a great many Federal and State agencies.
Publication of some of the Central Valley studies is also planned for next year.
Construction activities of the Bureau continued during the year on a restricted basis, confined almost entirely to projects under war food and war power programs.
The 37-mile Madera Canal on the Central Valley project was completed late in the fiscal year.
It will provide water for irrigating about 20,000 acres of new land and supplemental water for 80,000 acres in the fertile San Joaquin Valley.
An application to start construction on the 160-mile Friant-Kern Canal was pending before the War Production Board.
Twenty-nine projects were cleared under the war food program.
A total of 144 miles of transmission lines was completed and construction of an additional 308 miles was in progress.
Fifty miles of canals were built and work on other water distribution facilities for war food production was continued.
Construction during the year involved the use of more than 300,000 barrels of cement, and 220,000 cubic yards of concrete were placed.
Construction of Anderson Ranch Dam on the Boise project in Idaho passed the half-way mark.
When completed it will be the highest earthfill dam in the world.
The reservoir created will provide flood control, and store irrigation water for 290,000 acres now receiving an inadequate supply.
On the Deschutes project in Oregon an earth dam is under construction to provide irrigation for approximately 20,000 acres, and construction also was continued on the canals and distribution system for irrigating 32,000 acres on the Yakima Roza project in Washington.
Clearance was granted for the installation of additional equipment for the power plant and for emergency repair work on the spillway bucket at Grand Coulee Dam.
On the Tucumcari project in New Mexico, work was completed on the first section of the Conchas Canal to provide irrigation water for an initial block of 7,000 acres.
Construction also progressed on the Gila project in Arizona and on the Coachella Canal in Southern California.
Other construction included guniting over the dry rock paving in the desilting basins at the headwaters of the All-American canal, preparation of the designs and specifications for the construction of the $17,000,000 San Diego Aqueduct, continued construction on the Salt Lake Aqueduct, flood control work on the Colorado River, and concrete lining work on the 13-mile Alva B. Adams Tunnel under the Continental Divide.
A limited program of construction was also carried on at Green Mountain and Shadow Mountain Dams on the Colorado-Big Thompson project in Colorado, and on the following projects cleared for construction under the war food program: Rapid Valley, S. Dak., Newton and Scofield, Utah, Mirage Flats, Nebr., Mancos, Colo., and Lugert-Altus, Okla.
The Branch of Design and Construction concentrated on the preparation of designs for postwar projects, so that work might begin on a considerable volume of construction whenever war conditions permit.
In planping for this postwar development of land and water resources, preliminary designs and estimates were made for 15 concrete and 10 earth dams, 40 power plants, 9 pumping plants, 2 water supply systems, and for canals and water distribution facilities on 15 projects.
In addition to these, design studies were started on features of numerous other postwar Reclamation projects.
Primarily, construction work on projects authorized by the War Production Board has been for the purpose of food and power pro duction.
The War Production Board authorized work on 21 Bureau projects during the fiscal year, but due to labor and materials shortages, some projects did not progress as planned.
Efforts to conserve critical war materials has resulted in increased construction costs on some project features and at times has necessitated design changes.
Outstanding technical advances included the development of the hollow-jet regulating valve, and the development of the transformer reactance voltage-drop compensator.
The hollow-jet valve will provide more economical installation and maintenance and improved operation for water outlet regulation.
The voltage-drop compensator permits the adjustment of electric potential measuring devices in about one-tenth the time required by previous methods.
During the year an inexpensive integrating machine was developed which will materially facilitate computations for design where differential equations are involved and which has possibilities for application in mathematical studies elsewhere.
During the war, Bureau engineering and laboratory personnel and facilities were called upon to assist the War and Navy Departments, as well as other Government agencies and private corporations concerned with the war program, in solving a wide diversity of numerous technical engineering problems.
The Bureau cooperated with the Bureau of Mines by furnishing power for research, and with the Geological Survey in exploration for strategic minerals, by providing technical assistance and laboratory facilities.
The Bureau cooperated also with the War Department, the Geological Survey, and the Department of Agriculture in the interchange of information and technical data.
The engineering accomplishments of the Bureau of Reclamation are known the world over.
Its engineers have tamed the mightiest rivers in the West and put them to work at transforming barren lands into productive farms and to producing power for industry.
The three biggest concrete dams in the world have been built by the Bureau of Reclamation—Grand Coulee Dam on the Columbia River in Washington, Shasta Dam on the Sacramento River in California, and Boulder Dam on the Colorado River between Arizona and Nevada.
The Bureau has built 15,495 miles of irrigation canals—enough to cross the continent five times.
The storage reservoirs behind its dams have a capacity of 66,558,840 acre-feet.
It has built 347 tunnels with a combined length of 560,271 feet.
Operating on its projects are 31 hydroelectric plants with an installed capacity of 2,439,300 kilowatts, part of the energy produced being marketed over 2,164 miles of transmission lines built by the Bureau.
In the construction of its projects the Bureau has excavated 606,313,120 cubic yards of earth and rock, poured 33,671,861 cubic vards of concrete.
It has built 209,016 canal structures, 5,196 miles of waste water ditches and drains, 13,676 bridges, 23,620 culverts, 6,310 flumes with a combined length of 873,989 feet, and 331 pumping plants.
Operation and maintenance activities on the 52 operating Federal reclamation projects were devoted first and foremost to furnishing the irrigation service needed to maintain record-breaking agricultural crop production.
The stabilization of these projects to protect the Federal investment is important, as are also steps which have been taken to aid in assuring the success of the water users through improved irrigation practices, land-use and related activities, including settlement.
A special effort was made again during the year to provide for the full use of Reclamation withdrawn lands for grazing purposes to support the livestock production in the West.
Plans for the land purchase, development and settlement of the Columbia Basin project were a major goal.
Cooperation with State agricultural colleges and other agencies was advanced.
Field work was completed or in progress on the reclassification of irrigable lands on 16 projects or divisions of projects, involving approximately 309,000 acres.
Progress was made during the year in setting up operation and maintenance organizations in regional offices.
This was in line with the decentralization program of the Bureau to place supervision and contacts closer to operations and to the water users affected, and also to prepare for accelerated operation and maintenance programs that will be needed with the end of the war in connection with project settlement.
The Operation and Maintenance branch was transferred from Denver to Washington during the year.
The work of the branch has been primarily directed at (1) the delegating of direct supervisory responsibility of field operations to regional and project offices, (2) development of programs with emphasis on land-use and"the human side" of reclamation, particularly with respect to aiding veterans in settling on irrigated farms, and (3) the review of repayment contracts to determine the need for adjustment in repayment schedules, based on the ability of water users to meet such payments.
Section 17 (b) of the Reclamation Project Act of 1939 authorized temporary relief from payment of accrued construction charges for each of the years 1939 to 1943, inclusive, in cases where such payments could not be met due to circumstances beyond the control of water users.
During the fiscal year, five water users' organizations submitted applications for relief from payments totaling $209,001.30.
Four of the five requests concerned 1944 construction installments.
No legislation existed for consideration of these requests until passage of Public Law 39 (79th Cong., 1st sess.) on April 24, 1945.
Action taken during the fiscal year to defer construction charge payments granted relief to five water users'organizations, for 1942 and 1943 installments, in the total amount of $208,214.41.
Postponements of payments were recommended due to the critical financial condition of the applicant irrigation distriets as a result of short growing season, grasshopper infestation, hailstorms, low production influenced by labor shortages, and other factors.
At the close of the fiscal year five applications as to 1944 charges, as well as one request for defermeut of 1943 charges, were awaiting final action.
An inventory was prepared early in the year of repayment contracts in force, to be used in the various regions in negotiating amendatory provisions of such contracts.
To date, 10 amendatory contracts have been executed under provisions of the Reclamation Project Act of 1939.
Work was continued on six projects authorized for construction under this program before the war, and on two new projects on which construction was initiated during the year.
Preconstruction activities were under way on four additional projects approved under the war food program.
Projects under construction were: Mirage Flats (Nebraska), Buffalo Rapids No. 2 (Montana), Newton (Utah), Rapid Valley (South Dakota), Mancos (Colorado), Intake (Montana), and the Post Falls unit of the Rathdrum Prairie project (Idaho).
Other Water Conservation and Utilization projects cleared for construction are Missoula Valley (Montana), Dodson Pump Unit, Milk River project (Montana), Bitter Root (Montana), and Balmorhea (Texas).
Construction remained at a standstill on the Eden project (Wyoming) and the Fallon Unit of the Buffalo Rapids project (Montana) because of War Production Board stop orders.
Three relocation centers continued to operate on Bureau projects during the year.
These projects in 1942 became sites for hastily constructed barracks-cities to care for more than 35,000 persons of Japanese ancestry evacuated from the West coast.
The centers are operated by the War Relocation Authority on the Heart Mountain Division of the Shoshone project (Wyoming), Gooding Division of the Minidoka project (Idaho), and the Tule Lake Division of the Klamath project (California-Oregon).
The population at the first two of these centers has been greatly reduced during the past year through the efforts of the War Relocation Authority in providing resettlement opportunities for evacuee families in many parts of the country.
As a result, most of the acreage in projeet lands used by residents of the centers to provide food for their own needs, is being turned back to the Bureau.
The Bureau in turn is leasing this land to private operators for continued production of food and forage erops.
Both the Heart Mountain and Minidoka centers are scheduled to be closed within the next few months.
Part of the irrigation system on each project was developed under the direction of Reclamation engineers, with construction work and farm operations carried on by the evacuees.
On four other Reelamation projects Civilian Public Service crews, under the Selective Service program, have helped to relieve labor shortages in continuing construction and development work.
At the Mancos project (Colorado) an average of 149 Civilian Public Service workers were employed during June.
Construction of Deerfield Dam on the Rapid Valley project (South Dakota) was continued by Civilian Public Service labor, a 150-man camp being maintained.
Approximately 95 Civilian Public Service assignees were employed on the Deschutes (Oregon) projeet.
These men were used for firefighting, operation and maintenance, and clean-up work.
During the irrigation season the Department of Agriculture Camp furnished a few Civilian Public Service assignees for similar work on the Buffalo Rapids project (Montana).
There were not enough workers available, however, to advance construction on the project.
The branch was actively engaged in developing a program for the settlement of veterans and others on public lands on projects for which irrigation facilities are constructed and in helping irrigation districts and local interests to advance settlement on privately owned lands in projects under construction.
Restricted construction of irrigation facilities during the war limited the settlement opportunities that could be made available in 1945-46, but resumption of construction work was expected to increase materially the number of irrigated farms on public and privately owned lands that could be offered.
Preference is provided for veterans under existing law in settlement of publie lands.
Substantial progress was made during the year toward completing the Bureau's program of decentralization and in expanding the activities of seven regional offices set up under that program.
Inaugurated in September 1943 the regionalization of the Bureau is designed to coordinate activities in each of the major watersheds of the West, and to place supervision closer to the field of operations.
Fourteen operating Bureau projects in the Pacific Northwest produced crops vålued at $178,265,000 during the crop year of 1944, and power plants operated by the Bureau delivered almost 6 billion kilowatt-hours of electric energy to war industries.
This region includes the States of Washington and Idaho, all but a small portion of Oregon, part of western Montana, and small areas in Wyoming and Nevada.
The gross value of crop returns on Bureau projects in this area in 1944 exceeded 1943 by $7,890,000 and averaged $99.44 per acre.
In addition to many other food crops, the irrigation farmers of the region raised 40,234,832 bushels of potatoes, an amount sufficient to provide a year's supply for 19 million persons; 838,517 tons of sugar beets, sufficient to provide 8 million persons with a year's supply of sugar; and 1,648,360 tons of alfalfa, which, on being fed to beef and dairy herds, provided the equivalent of an annual supply of milk for 2½/4 million persons plus an annual supply of beef for 2½ million persons.
In the production of power, the four Bureau multiple-purpose projects in the Northwest produced 5,894,969,245 kilowatt-hours of energy during the 1945 fiscal year.
This production to a large extent made possible the huge output of aluminum and other war supplies in the area.
Largest of the power producers was Grand Coulee Dam with an output of 5,716,661,000 kilowatt-hours.
There was a steady growth in this project's contribution to war industries consuming huge blocks of electrical energy, and the total output since operations were started in March 1941 amounted to approximately 15,232,375,000 kilowatthours by the end of the fiscal year.
Although the present installation of the power plant is less than half its ultimate capacity, it continues to hold the unchallenged world's record for producing the largest quantity of hydro power in a single month: 621 million kilowatthours in March 1944.
Construction activities continued on a curtailed basis during the year.
Work on Anderson Ranch Dam on the Boise project passed the half-way mark.
On the Post Falls unit of the Rathdrum Prairie project in Idaho work was going forward on construction of a pumping plant and discharge line.
An earth dam and canals are being built on the Deschutes project in Oregon, and work was resumed under the war food program on canals and distribution system for the Yakima-Roza project in Washington.
The Northwest is mindful of this wartime food and power production record as it regards the Bureau's inventory of new projects for the postwar period and analyzes the significant features of that inventory.
Forty-seven potential developments in the States of Idaho, Oregon, Washington, and western Montana are"inventoried," and many of these would be multiple-purpose in scope.
They would bring under irrigation 1,970,195 acres of new land, provide a supplemental supply to 1,552,855 acres now suffering with shortages, add 1,084,500 kilowatts of installed capacity in existing Bureau power plants, and provide 753,420 kilowatts of new firm power on projects under study.
An increased production of food for military and civilian needs and of electric power for war industries marked operations of Bureau projects in region 2, largest of which is the Central Valley project.
The region includes three-fourths of California and a small area in Oregon.
Construction was completed during the year on the 37-mile long Madera Canal to provide water for irrigating approximately 100,000 acres of land in the fertile San Joaquin Valley.
The power plant at Shasta Dam, completing its first full year of operation, generated 739,000,000 kilowatt-hours of electricity to turn the wheels of California's wartime industry.
While contributing to the war program, the region also moved ahead with its plans for meeting the problems of peace.
Thousands of jobs will be created and hundreds of irrigated farms made available for settlement through further development of the Central Valley project and 36 other projects inclúded in the Bureau's postwar inventory.
The first of these projects on which work will start in the immediate future is the 156-mile Friant-Kern Canal.
The War Production Board approved construction of the initial 5.6-mile section in June.
The canal, when completed, will extend from Millerton Lake, the reservoir created by Friant Dam, to the Kern River near Bakersfield, to provide water for irrigating 358,000 acres of new land in the highly productive San Joaquin Valley and supplemental water for an additional 374,000 acres threatened by shortages.
Millerton Lake, the reservoir created by Friant Dam, reached full capacity and overflowed the spillway of the dam for the first time on June 30.
Storage capacity of the reservoir for irrigation and flood control purposes will be increased by 83,000 acre-feet with the installation of three drum gates and other control facilities on the spillway section of the dam.
Contracts for this installation are scheduled to be let early in the next fiscal year.
The reservoir in 1944 provided water for irrigating 32,500 acres of land for crops and 110,000 acres for pasture land for more than 140,000 head of cattle.
Watermarketing contracts were in process of negotiation with 12 irrigation districts in the San Joaquin Valley as the fiscal year drew to a close.
The Bureau has also initiated negotiations with several municipalities in the Sacramento area for a larger market for power generated at Shasta Dam.
Although the plant operated at only two-fifths of its ultimate capacity during the year because the war deferred installation of full generator capacity, its output represented a saving of 1,400,000 barrels of oil which would have been consumed as fuel by steam-plant production of the same amount of power.
An application was pending before WPB for the return to Shasta of two 75,000- kilowatt generators 'loaned" to the Coulee Dam plant because of the war emergency.
Release of water from Shasta Reservoir helped provide for irrigation needs in the Sacramento Valley, enabled farmers to double the acreage of rice, and helped protect $14,500,000 worth of erops by controlling salt-water intrusion in the delta.
Record crops were grown on the Klamath project in southern Oregon and 16,300 carloads of food were shipped.
Work was continued during the year on plans for postwar developments in the region and on preparation of comprehensive reports of projects and river basins.
The Central Valley Basin report was in final stage of completion, recommending a program which would double the irrigated acreage in Central Valley through construction of 38 reservoirs for storage of 30,000,000 acre-feet of water now largely wasted.
Cost of the program is estimated at $1,800,000,000 based on 1940 prices, and benefits from such development would amount to an estimated $275,000,000 annually.
The report on Santa Barbara County investigations has been completed and is now in Washington for review.
Joint investigations by the Bureau and the Corps of Engineers on the Salinas and Russian River Basins are in progress.
Plans also progressed during the year for developing the recreational facilities of Millerton Lake and Shasta Reservoir, the work to be under the general direction of the National Park Service.
This region is the "powerhouse" without which the record production of war industries in southern California would not have been possible.
From the giant power plant at Boulder Dam alone, came 6 billion kilowatt-hours of electric energy used in turning out planes and ships, in processing magnesium, and in producing other equipment and materials so vital to the war effort.
From the farms irrigated by Bureau projects in this area, which embraces the State of Arizona, southern California, and small portions of Nevada, New Mexico, and Utah, also came great quantities of food for the armed forces and the civilian population.
More than half of the electric power used by war industries in this region was produced at Bureau-operated hydroelectric plants, of which the one at Boulder Dam on the Colorado River is the largest in the world.
An additional 82,500-kilowatt generator was added to the plant during the year, bringing its total capacity to 1,036,000 kilowatts.
Its output of 6 billion kilowatt-hours of energy yielded a revenue of $8,574,300.
Including the power output at two smaller plants, one at Parker Dam below Boulder, the other on the Yuma project in Arizona, a total of 6% billion kilowatt-hours of energy was produced.
Region 3 continued its substantial contribution to the Nation's war food supply.
Crop production, for the calendar year 1944 from 743,018 acres served by Reclamation facilities, was valued at $112,780,- 437 and exceeded by $3,407,259 the record production established by the region's farmers in the previous year.
On the 150,000-acre unit of the Gila project (Arizona), approved for construction, leveling operations were completed on 5,000 acres of public land in the 8,500-acre tract cleared by the War Production Board as a dust control project for the important Yuma Air Base.
Over 1,300 acres are now in alfalfa and the remainder of the public land will be seeded to a sudan grass cover crop during the summer and to alfalfa in the fall of 1945.
On the All-American Canal project (California), construction was progressing rapidly at the end of the year on the Coachella Canal which will bring water to 22,000 acres.
Members of the region 3 staff and other Bureau personnel have also been in charge during the past year of preconstruction surveys and the preparation of designs and specifications for the $17,500,000 aqueduct to provide a water supply for the city of San Diego from the Colorado River.
All possible effort, with curtailed personnel, is being made in the planning of the region's 35 projects in the inventory of projects for postwar construction.
Emphasis is being placed on those projects that can go forward immediately as the Nation converts from war to peace.
The potential program, which would require an expenditure of upwards of $1,000,000,000 would supplement and insure the water supply for some 600,000 acres presently irrigated but without an adequate water supply, as well as furnish water for some 800,000 aeres of lands not now irrigated.
In addition to the irrigation benefits, these multiple-purpose projects would add 1,885,000 kilowatts of hydroelectric capacity to the Region's power pool.
Resumption of work on Davis Dam, halted late in 1942, has been authorized by the War Production Board.
This dam, 65 miles downstream from Boulder Dam, will aid in regulating the flow of the Colorado River for downstream uses and provide means of compliance with ' the pending treaty with Mexico.
Construction work on a large scale can be resumed at short notice on the Gila and All-American Canal projects.
These projects when completed and developed will provide for, roughly, 3,000 new familysize farm units.
Study of the Central Arizona project, a project to divert water from the Colorado River to the highly developed irrigated agricultural area near Phoenix now sorely in need of supplemental water, is receiving priority attention.
The State of Arizona is cooperating in the investigations of this project.
Progress on the many other projects in the inventory will be accelerated as additional personnel and equipment become available.
Region 4 inereased its contribution to the winning of the war while carrying on limited construction activities and speeding up postwar plans for basin-wide development of water resources.
This region includes most of Utah and Nevada, that part of Wyoming and Colorado west of the Continental Divide, and small sections of Idaho, New Mexico, and Arizona.
Food for fighting men and industrial war workers was the major contribution to the war from 18 projects in operation in the region.
Such operation included the storage of water in 13 Bureau reservoirs, with an aggregate capacity of nearly 1,365,000 acre-feet, in addition to the distribution and handling of other water supplies for irrigation.
Approximately 494,000 acres irrigated by these projects in 1944 produced crops valued at $35,000,000, an increase of over 50,000 acres and $500,000 respectively during the year.
The West's big $200,000,000 steel plant at Geneva, Utah, was furnished an increased industrial water supply from the Provo River project.
The city of Ogden, Utah, threatened with a water shortage, continued to receive protection for its municipal supply from Pineview Reservoir, which, also, furnished water to war housing facilities and the Army's Bushnell Hospital in the area.
The armed forces benefited from the services of 33 experienced èngineers on military leave from the region.
Reclamation reservoirs provided recreational opportunities for thousands of people.
Construction continued on the Mancos project, Colorado, and the Newton, Provo River, and Scofield projects, Utah.
Sufficient progress had been made on the enlargement of two canals and a section of the Provo River Channel, Provo River project, to furnish a supplemental water supply of 28,000 acres of highly developed lands.
A 6-mile pipeline section of the 40-mile Salt Lake Aqueduct was constructed, bringing to completion about 20 miles of the conduit that will carry water to Salt Lake City and other municipalities and industries in the area.
Work was advanced on Scofield Dam and highway and railroad relocations.
Work was still suspended by War Production Board stop-order on the 6-mile Duchesne Tunnel of the Provo River project, the Eden project, Wyo., and three small reservoirs of the Ogden River project.
In project planning activities, emphasis was placed on the formulation of general basin-wide plans for full utilization and control of water resources in three river basins.
Preliminary reports outlining comprehensive plans for ultimate development in the Colorado River and Bonneville Basins were prepared and submitted informally for review and comment to the States and local interests concerned.
The Colorado River report, prepared in cooperation with region 3, outlines some 92 projects in the upper basin to provide 1,200,000 acres of new land with a full irrigation supply and 500,000 acres of inadequately irrigated land with a supplemental supply.
Potential hydroelectric power plants are outlined with installed capacities aggregating 1,700,000 kilowatts and annual firm power generation exceeding 9 billion kilowatt-hours.
The Bonneville report describes 13 potential projects, including those that would import water from the Colorado River Basin, to bring a full irrigation supply to 350,000 acres not now irrigated and a supplemental supply to 325,000 acres insufficiently irrigated.
In addition 1.2 billion kilowatt-hours of energy could be produced in hydroelectric plants, and flood control and other benefits provided.
A report was well advanced on the Lahontan Basin, and detailed project investigations were being conducted and plans and estimates were being prepared for several projects in these three basins which are recommended for initial construction in the postwar period.
Maintenance of a high level of agricultural production on operating projects, continued construction on three war-food projects and planning for a program of postwar development marked the activities of region 5 during the current fiscal year.
The 6,534 irrigated farms in the Carlsbad and Rio Grande projects in New Mexico and Texas produced crops last year valued at $23,205,821.
The crops were grown on 174,858 acres, and the cash income averaged $132.10 an acre.
Almost 17,000,000 kilowatt-hours of hydroelectric power, with revenue amounting to $329,447.90, were produced last year at Elephant Butte Dam on the Rio Grande project in New Mexico.
Construction in the region during the year was centered principally on the Altus, Oklahoma, and Tucumcari, New Mexico, projects, and to a minor extent on the Balmorhea and Marshall Ford Dam projects in Texas, and the Fort Sumner project in New Mexico.
Altus Dam and a major portion of the reservoir storage system, including relocation work on highways and the main canal from the dam to the project boundary, were completed.
Water will be delivered to a part of the project in the fiscal year 1946.
Construction of the Tucumcari project was continued and water for the first 7,000-acre unit of project lands is scheduled for delivery early in the next fiscal year.
Plans were also being made to rush construction of a 64-mile transmission line from Las Cruces to Alamogordo, New Mexico, to supply power for the Alamogordo Army Air Field and the United States Army's Ordnance proving grounds at White Sands.
Comprehensive reports on basin-wide investigations of the Rio Grande, Nueces, Guadalupe, and Colorado Rivers were completed, and the tentative drafts submitted to the Commissioner.
Investigations in the Red and Arkansas River Basins were approximately 75 percent completed.
Reports for the Canton and Middle Rio Grande Valley projects were in final stages of preparation, and surveys were initiated on the San Juan-Chama diversion.
A power market survey in the Alamogordo, New Mexico, area was completed, two landuse programs were developed for the projects under construction, and a review was made of the land classification surveys for both projects.
Approximately 600 acres were leveled on the Altus project and several thousand acres were cleared and leveled on the Tucumcari project.
A demonstration farm was initiated on the Altus project.
The war has affected Bureau operations in many ways.
Construction was limited to those projects considered essential under either the war food or war power program and even on such projects was carried on under severe handicaps.
The increased cost of labor and materials on the two projects under construction is estimated at nearly $11,000,000.
The increased cost of project planning surveys, for salaries and wages alone, is estimated in excess of $100,000.
Serious losses, though not always tangible, were sustained on crop lands under the drive of all-out production for war.
Farmers, in many instances, abandoned normal crop rotation plans in order to meet food goals, increased acreages of soil-depleting crops, were unable to carry out usual fertilizer programs because of shortages in materials, equipment, and manpower.
It is estimated that crop production on the two projects under construction would have increased by $7,000,000 had it not been for the war, and this does not include the value of livestock, poultry, and garden truek that would have been produced had the projects been completed and made productive.
Also, more than a million acre-feet of water has spilled over Conchas Dam since December 1941, unused for irrigation because construction of the canal system on the Tucumcari project had to be deferred.
With the end of the war, these projects will be fully developed and many more will be completed as soon as funds, manpower, and materials are obtainable.
Altogether, there are 53 projects included in the Bureau's inventory for postwar construction in region 5, which includes all of Texas and Oklahoma, most of New Mexico, the southern half of Kansas and a small area in south-central Colorado.
Completion of these projects will make 11,500 irrigated farms available for settlement, irrigate 1,269,000 acres of new land, provide additional water for 991,000 acres inadequately irrigated, and make available tremendous quantities of low-cost hydroelectric power for agricultural use and industrial expansion.
National attention was focused during the year on the Great Plains area of the Missouri River Basin as the Bureau of Reclamation went forward with plans for undertaking after the war the largest and most ambitious development program in the 43-year history of the agency.
The Congress gave-its endorsement to that program by adoption of the Flood Control Act of 1944 which approved the coordinated plan of the Bureau and the Corps of Engineers, War Department, to put the Missouri and its tributaries to work in expanding the agricultural and industrial economy of a region embracing onesixth the continental area of the United States.
The act authorized 29 projects for construction by the Bureau and authorized an appropriation of $200,000,000 to each of the agencies for carrying out the initial phases of the program.
The Bureau continued its engineering and economic investigations which have been in progress for the past several years and which culminated last year in the presentation to the Congress of a report (S. Doc. 191, 78th Cong., 2d sess.) setting forth a comprehensive program for resource development in the basin.
It is contemplated that this investigation work and the preparation of detailed plans and specifications will be greatly expanded within the next few months with a view to having several projects ready for starting construction by the beginning of the next fiscal year.
To more effectively coordinate its work, the Bureau in September 1944 established a regional office at Billings, Montana, for the area made up of the States of North and South Dakota, most of Montana, and the northern part of Wyoming.
This office works closely with the region 7 office at Denver, which serves the remainder of the area drained by the Missouri River and its tributaries.
Bureau-operated projects in region 6 continued their record production of food and fiber crops in helping to meet increased war demands.
A total of 342,623 acres were irrigated on the eight operating projects in the region and the crops produced had a gross value of more than $14,000,000.
This is equivalent to more than 30 pereent of the total investment which the government has made in the construction of these projects.
Among the major contributions to the food supply of the Nation were 3,346,000 bushels of cereal grains, 239,000 bushels of hay, flax, pea, and vegetable seeds, 165,000 tons of hay, 1,300,000 bushels of beans, potatoes, and other truck, and 355,000 tons of sugar beets.
The inventory value of all livestock on the farms of the eight projects at the close of 1944 was $17,200,000.
Under the war food program, 14,400 acres have been brought under irrigation on the Buford-Trenton project near Williston, N. Dak., works have been almost completed for 8,000 acres in the Second Division of the Buffalo Rapids project, near Terry, Mont.
Though restricted by War Production Board orders and labor shortages construction work was also in progress on the Deerfield Reservoir near Rapid City, S. Dak., a project to furnish supplemental water for irrigated lands in Rapid Valley and a municipal supply for Rapid City.
Civilian Public Service camps were furnishing labor on both the Rapid Valley and Buffalo Rapids No. 2 projects.
A contract for the construction of works to irrigate 800 acres on the Intake project near Savage, Mont., was awarded and bids had been received for the Big Flat project of 900 acres near Missoula, Mont.
Advertisements for bids on the 1,600-acre Dodson project, near Malta, Mont., were issued but bids had not been opened at the close of the year.
In the power field three operating plants produced a total of 141,783,000 kilowatt-hours, more than 84,000,000 of which were produced at the Fort Peck plant operated by the Corps of Engineers, and marketed through the Bureau of Reclamation.
A 115,000-kilovolt transmission line to carry energy from Fort Peck to Glendive, Mont., was under construction.
At the end of the year there were 43 regional employees in the office at Billings, Mont., and 367 employees in the field working on planning, operation and maintenance, construction and power operation.
With large-scale construction halted or retarded because of the war, major emphasis of the Bureau in this region was placed on continuing high level production of food and electric power and in laying the groundwork for carrying out coordinated plans for Missouri Basin development and completion of trans-mountain diversion projects.
Region 7 was established 3 months after the start of the fiscal year as the newest subdivision in the Bureau's program of decentralization, and includes the State of Nebraska, northern half of Kansas, northeastern Wyoming, and western Colorado.
More than $16,000,000 worth of war-vital crops were produced on the North Platte project (Wyoming-Nebraska), with a full water supply provided for 209,668 acres and a supplemental supply for 96,803 acres.
Expanded war industries in the Rocky Mountain area made increased demands for electric power, and four Bureau-operated plants generated 185,000,000 kilowatt-hours of energy, distributed over some 900 miles of transmission lines to industry, cities, and farms.
Construction efforts were concentrated on the Colorado-Big Thompson transmountain water diversion project in northern Colorado and on the Mirage Flats irrigation project in northwestern Nebraska.
Work proceeded, despitedelays due to manpower and material shortages, on the lining of the 13-mile Alva B. Adams Tunnel beneath the Continental Divide, and on Shadow Mountain Dam near Grand Lake, key features of the Colorado-Big Thompson project.
Completion of the project will provide for the diversion of 310,000 acre-feet of surplus water annually from the western slope of the Rockies, through the Alva B. Adams Tunnel, for supplemental irrigation of 615,000 acres on the eastern slope and the generation of about 600,000,000 kilowatt-hours of electric energy annually.
Delivery of 90,000 acre-feet of water annually is scheduled to start in the spring of 1946.
Full diversion is expected to increase crop values on the eastern slope by approximately 5 million dollars annually.
On the Mirage Flats project in Nebraska, construction of Box Butte Dam on the Niobrara River was about 90 percent complete and work on the irrigation canals and laterals was in an advanced stage.
The dam will store water for irrigating 13,000 acres of new land to be opened for settlement by veterans and others.
Investigations were nearly complete on two other major projects proposed for postwar construction in region 7—the Gunnison-Arkansas transmountain diversion project and the Blue River-South Platte project, both in Colorado.
With Missouri River waters originating in or flowing through all four states in which it functions, region 7 is also taking an active part in the plans and program for coordinated development of the Missouri Basin.
At the end of the 1945 fiscal year the total investment of the Federal Government in projects constructed by the Bureau of Reclamation amounted to $952,893,542, an increase of $31,122,922 over the previous year.
During its 43 years of operation, accretions to the Reclamation fund have totaled $228,106,850 (see table 4).
These have come from the sale of public lands, proceeds from the Oil Leasing Act, from Federal water power licenses, potassium royalties, and rentals and receipts from naval petroleum reserves from 1920 to 1930 under the act of May 9, 1938.
Collections—construction and operation and maintenance repayments, water rentals, power revenues, etc.
Disbursements during that period have totaled $358,689,871, leaving a balance in the fund on June 30, 1945, of $42,680,606.
Repayments of construction charges to the Reclamation fund during the fiscal year 1945 totaled $3,611,000.
Operation and maintenance collections totaled $1,513,000, of which $442,000 accrued to the Reclamation fund.
Receipts from water rentals, power sales, and other sources aggregated $9,462,000.
Legislation of far-reaching significance to Reclamation was enacted by the Congress during the past year.
Most important was the passage of the Flood Control Act of 1944 (58 Stat. 887; Pub. Law 534, 78th Cong.) signed by the President December 22.
1. Approved the coordinated plan of the Bureau of Reclamation and the Corps of Engineers, War Department, for development of the Missouri River Basin as set forth in Senate Documents No. 191 and 247, Seventy-eighth Congress, Second session.
2. Authorized appropriations of $200,000,000 to each of these agencies for partial accomplishment of the works to be undertaken under the general comprehensive plan.
3. Established the principle that 'the use, in connection with the operation and maintenance of such works for navigation herein or hereafter authorized for construction, of waters arising west of the Ninty-seventh meridian shall be subordinate to and shall not adversely affect at any time the beneficial consumptive use, west of the ninety-seventh meridian, of such waters for domestic, irrigation, mining or industrial purposes.
4. Provided that the use of irrigation water stored in reservoirs constructed by the Corps of Engineers, War Department, shall be in accordance with Reclamation Laws.
5. Provided that electric power produced at dams constructed by the Corps of Engineers shall be marketed by the Secretary of the Interior.
6. Provided for review and recommendations by the States and other Federal agencies concerned, of the reports by the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of War proposing and recommending construction of projects under the provisions of the act.
Several of the policies set forth in the Flood Control Act of 1944 were subsequently restated by the Congress in passing the River and Harbor Act of March 2, 1945.
Pub. Law 14, 79th Cong., 1st sess.).
This latter bill failed of enactment by the Seventy-eighth Congress due partly to a controversy which arose over an amendment which would have exempted lands in the Bureau's Central Valley project in California from provisions of the law limiting to 160 acres the area that can be held in single ownership on Federal Reclamation projects.
This amendment and other controversial issues were stricken from the bill as reintroduced, and passed, by the Seventy-ninth Congress.
Water and power users on Reclamation projects benefited by the amendment on April 19, 1945, of the Fact Finders' Act (Pub. Law 35, 79th Cong., 1st sess.).
The Congress by this amendment provided that the cost of administration of the reclamation program, whether incurred by the Commissioner's office in Washington or by regional or branch offices, should not be assessed against water or power users.
Another law passed to benefit farmers on Federal Reclamation projects is the act of April 24, 1945 (Pub. Law 39, 79th Cong., 1st sess.), amending sections 4, 7, and 17 of the Reclamation Project Act of 1939.
This act now extends the time within which amendatory contracts may be negotiated and within which the Secretary of the Interior may grant deferments of construction charges.
It also modifies the operation of the normal and percentage plan by putting a ceiling on the amount that can become due in any year through the operation of the plan.
Finally, this act now permits minor amendments, without further reference to the Congress in amendatory contracts, which have already been authorized.
The Seventy-ninth Congress also passed an act (Pub. Law 34) consenting to the negotiation by Colorado and Kansas of a compact for the division of the waters of the Arkansas River.
Veteran settlement diseussion was focused during this year on a bill (H. R. 520) introduced by Representative John R. Murdock of Arizona.
This bill would "facilitate settlement of returning veterans in projects constructed, operated, and maintained by the Bureau of Reclamation."
Extensive hearings were held before the House Committee on Irrigation and Reclamation and the bill was reported out by unanimous vote of the Committee with recommendation that it be enacted.
Hearings were also held on Senate bill 555, to establish a Missouri Valley Authority, and the Commissioner and other officials of the Bureau made statements on the bill before the Senate Committee on Commerce.
The work of the Bureau of Reclamation in developing western resources has won international recognition, and its engineers have been called upon by many foreign governments for technical assistance in the planning and design of projects in other countries.
John Lucian Savage, chief designing engineer for the Bureau, returned to the United States in March from an extended tour of duty in China and the Middle East as engineering consultant to various foreign governments on their plans for postwar irrigation and power developments.
In his 34 years of service with the Bureau, Mr. Savage has drawn plans for the construction of more than a billion dollars worth of dams, including the three largest concrete dams ever built—Grand Coulee, Shasta, and Boulder.
He went to China at the special request of the Chinese Government, "on loan" from the Bureau to the United States State Department.
While there, he made the preliminary surveys and studies for several largereclamation projects, including the huge Yangtze Gorge project for irrigation and flood control.
He also spent several months in India.
Mr. Savage's engineering achievements have won him many honors and this year he was awarded the John Fritz medal, one of the highest honors of the engineering profession.
He retired as chief designing engineer in May but will continue to serve the Bureau in a consulting capacity.
The work of the Bureau has been recognized in many other ways.
Another member of its staff, Engineer Douglas McHenry, was awarded the Telford Premium by an engineering group in Great Britain.
Design and construction methods used by the Bureau have been made available to many foreign governments through technical papers, by visits of foreign engineers and public officials to Bureau projects and offices and through facilities of the Bureau training program.
During the year, 38 engineers from 15 foreign countries visited the design and construction offices and several of the men remained for training.
Arrangements were made during the year to train foreign engineers under the sponsorship of the Foreign Economic Administration.
Nineteen engineers from China began their training with the Bureau during the summer of 1945.
The Bureau's Concrete Manual has become a recognized text on concrete.
Its distribution is world-wide and two foreign countries have translated it.
The manual on dams, preparation of which was begun during the fiscal year, will be a comprehensive compilation of data on dam investigation, design, construction, and operation.
The Bureau of Reclamation, following through on a decentralization plan inaugurated in September 1943, created a seventh regional office during the fiscal year and further developed and strengthened existing staffs to expedite both war and postwar objectives.
The basic concept for streamlining the Bureau has been the establishment of competent regional organizations in each of the seven major watersheds in the 17 Western States with authority to act swiftly and surely in close collaboration with States, local interests, and other affected Government agencies.
The seven regional offices are as follows: Region 1, Boise, Idaho; region 2, Sacramento, Calif.
The regional directors who are responsible for coordinating all Bureau activities within their regions, report directly to the Commissioner of Reclamation.
They are assisted in technical phases of their work by four technical branches, namely, Project Plapning, Design and Construction, Operation and Maintenance, and Power Utilization, and by administrative facilities in the fields of management, law, finance, public information, supply, personnel, and office services, which are also centrally directed.
The Branch of Operation and Maintenance was transferred from Denver to Washington during the fiscal year.
In addition plans were made to transfer the Branch of Project Planning and the central budget function to Washington early in the fiscal year 1946.
The chart indicates the present organizational arrangement of the Bureau under the decentralization plan.
The number of Reclamation employees increased from 6,513 on June 30, 1944, to 7,033 on June 30, 1945.
Further increases in the Bureau staff, greatly depleted by the war, will be required to accomplish authorized postwar programs.
A total of 1,806 employees of the agency have entered the armed forces of the United States; so far, 30 have given their lives and 4 are missing.
The number of persons employed in the various Bureau activities are: Commissioner's office, 141; Branch office, Denver, 837; region 1, 1,773; region 2, 764; region 3, 1,175; region 4, 302; region 5, 1,009; region 6, 410; and region 7, 622.
Ten new project and other field offices, exclusive of headquarters for project planning work, were established during the year.
The past year has been marked by several changes in the Bureau's top-ranking personnel.
Notable among these was the retirement after 34 years of Bureau service of John L. Savage, chief designing engineer, who has won world renown for his work on Grand Coulee, Shasta, Boulder, and many other dams in this country, in addition to serving as an adviser to foreign governments.
Another important change in the Denver office was the appointment of Walker R. Young, assistant chief engineer since 1940, to succeed S. O. Harper, who retired after 37 years in Reclamation.
Three assistant chief engineers were appointed as follows: Chief of Civil Engineering Division, W. H. Nalder; Chief of the Electrical and Mechanical Division, L. N. McClellan; and Chief of the Construction Division, Ralph Lowry.
E. B. Debler, Director of the Branch of Project Planning, was appointed Director of the newly created region 7 with headquarters in Denver.
John R. Riter, assistant Director of project planning, moved up to the position as Director of that Branch.
Goodrich W. Lineweaver, assistant to the Commissioner, was appointed Director of the reorganized Branch of Operation and Maintenance.
Clifford E. Fix replaced J. Kennard Cheadle as Chief Counsel when the latter resigned to enter private practice.
Barrow Lyons became Chief Information Officer.
HE work of the Division of Power, which is charged with supervising and coordinating the power activities of the Department, continued along lines dictated by the marketing problems resulting from war operations, as well as by concern for postwar conversion and expansion.
The responsibilities of the Division have been greatly enlarged by the enactment of the Omnibus Flood Control and Rivers and Harbors Acts which direct the Secretary of the Interior to transmit and market all excess power generated at reservoir projects constructed by the War Department, in such manner as to encourage the most widespread use of the power at the lowest possible rates to consumers consistent with sound business principles, and to give preference in its sale to public bodies and cooperatives.
In this legislation the Congress reiterated the public power poliey which it has developed during the past 40 years in the Reclamation, the Tennessee Valley Authority, the Rural Electrification, the Bonneville, the Fort Peck, and other acts dealing with power.
Fundamentally that policy directs that the benefits of Federal power developments shall not be monopolized by limited groups, but shall be widely distributed so that the power shall develop the industry and agriculture of the Nation, and lighten the burden of the domestic consumer.
The ultimate installed capacity of the authorized flood control projects is more than 5,775,000 kilowatts, and of the authorized rivers and harbors projects is over 1,425,000 kilowatts, or a total of more than 7,200,000 kilowatts.
The Department of the Interior is now operating and marketing power from the largest aggregate of hydroelectric capacity in the world, including power which is generated at dams operated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
The total investment in power facilities at projects from which the Department markets the power, including parts of dams and reservoirs allocated to power, aggregated nearly $425,000,000 on June 30, 1944, on the basis of tentative power investment figures for those projects where the allocation studies have not been completed.
This figure also ineludes the Grand River Dam project which is owned by the Grand River Dam Authority of the State of Oklahoma but which since September 1, 1943, has been operated by the Department.
The generating plants from which the Department now markets power delivered 18 billion kilowatt-hours of salable energy during the 1945 fiscal year as compared with 17.6 billion kilowatthours the preceding fiscal year.
In 1940 all of the power plants under the jurisdiction of the Department produced 3,672,995,000 kilowatt-hours.
As of June 30, 1945, the total installed capacity of such plants in operation amounts to 3,107,300 kilowatts.
During the 1945 fiscal year the three major power agencies of the Department, the Bonneville Power Administration, the Bureau of Reclamation, and the Southwestern Power Administration generated 17,820,- 000,000 kilowatt hours of which 17,300,000,000 kilowatt-hours were sold for a gross revenue of $45,500,000.
Fortunately, hydroelectric power is not a "nonrecurring" assets.
To be sure, the billions of kilowatt-hours that have gone to war in the past year are not available for nonwar or for future peacetime uses.
But the power facilities and the river resources through which they were developed are long-run assets for the people of the United States to use in their national defense or in the general welfare.
Against the 7,300,000,000 kilowatt-hours that were used for war purposes from the Columbia River projects, for instance, must be measured the untold millions of kilowatt-hours that were not developed during the year at proposed projects on that river system that have been authorized or studied.
Unused resources, throughout the country, represent "frozen" assets that must be made useful by development.
To that end the congressional authorization in the Flood Control and Rivers and Harbors Acts and the comprehensive development program of the Bureau of Reclamation will provide for a' realization of a large portion of our unused hydro energy resources.
But these vast new power resources must be sold and to accomplish this task efficiently studies by the power selling agencies of the Department are now under way in collaboration with other Federal agencies and with State and municipal organization.
The successful efforts to develop and use the tremendous supply of public power for war activities, must, with the coming of VE-day and the anticipation of VJ-day, be matched by achievement of appropriate reconversion programs and load building activities in order to provide for the period of transition from a wartime basis to a peacetime economy without avoidable wastage of this natural resource.
The Division has also been working with the war agencies on the problem of disposition of fuel-operated generating plants that have been built to serve some of our large military establishmènts and war plants.
Acquisition by the Federal power agencies of those plants which will not be needed for defense purposes after the emergency, as a means of supplementing and firming the hydroelectric power which is now generated or will be generated by the proposed-Federal plants, has been under study.
Such coordination of Government facilities will result in better operations in areas of irregular stream flow, and consequently in sounder financial arrangements, lower rates, and greater regional benefits.
In some instances such fueloperated plants can provide needed peaking or standby power which is now being purchased by the Government.
Regional studies.
The Division has continued its participation in studies being condueted by the agencies of the Department in efforts to work out the pattern for the administration and the extension of the multipurpose developments in the various river basins throughout the country, such as the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers, the Columbia River, the Missouri River, the Arkansas River, the Colorado River, and the rivers in the Southeastern section of the United States.
These studies are necessary to determine the best method for making available to the people of the various areas the maximum benefits of the multipurposeę projects at a minimum cost.
These studies include the use of power for war production, the scheduling of construction features, the reconversion of war plants in the areas, the extension of these projects to provide additional postwar opportunities, the allocation of costs, and the power policies to be effectuated.
Rates and rate schedules.
No reductions were made in the various wholesale rates of the Department during the year, but substantial reductions were made by purchasers of low-cost Department power for resale as required under their purchase contracts.
Private power companies making such reductions include the Montana-Dakota Utilities Co., serving eastern Montana and western North Dakota, with a reduction of over $200,000 per annum; the Mountain States Power Co., serving northwestern Wyoming, with a reduction of over $25,000 per annum; The Texas Power & Light Co., serving northern and eastern Texas, with a reduction of approximately $400,000 per annum, which includes a 10 percent reduction to Federal war loads; and the Arkansas Power & Light Co., serving much of the State of Arkansas.
Thirty-seven REA-financed projects are being supplied with power at rates ranging down to about 3 mills a kilowatt-hour.
Owing to the inability to obtain materials because of war-time restrictions, no increase was made within the year in the number of Rural Electrification Administration financed projects served by the power agencies within the Department.
The Division reviewed during the year several major rate studies including the interim rate for the Central Valley project in California and the rate structure of the Bonneville Power Administration in the Pacific Northwest.
In connection with the latter study which is still under consideration are proposed rates for the electrification of the railroads and the generation of steam by the use of secondary electrical energy.
Contracts.
Further efforts to decentralize the administration of power matters, while achieving maximum uniformity, has resulted in the establishment of standard contract provisions for Bureau of Reclamation projects.
Miscellaneous.
The Division participated in the negotiations for the disposal of the Hetch Hetchy power by the city of San Francisco in accordance with the terms of the Raker Act.
The injunction against the sale of this power to the Pacific Gas & Electric Co. has been put into effect as a result of arrangements made by the city to use its power for its own municipal purposes and to sell power directly to two irrigation districts and to industrial war plants in the area.
The Division cooperated in studies and negotiations of the Bureau of Reclamation for the proposed acquisition of power facilities of Salt River Water Users' Association in Arizona and of the Minidoka and Burley power facilities in Idaho in an effort to bring about unified operating systems and to make possible lower rates.
The Division also cooperated in the study of the financial feasibility of proposed power projects of the Bureau of Reclamation prior to authorization and in the handling of the power contracts of the Defense Plant Corporation for Boulder Dam power.
The Division was also able to render service to the Puerto Rico Water Resources Authority in connection with its priorities problems in the construction of the Caonillas Dam and transmission facilities which are necessary in the supplying of power to Army and Navy bases in Puerto Rico.
Assistance was also given to the Territorial Government of the Virgin Islands in connection with the studies of critically needed AC generating and distributing systems for the towns of Charlotte Amalie, St. Thomas, and Christiansted and Fredericksted, St. Croix.
Y June 30, 1945, the power of the Columbia River, harnessed by the two great Federal projects, Bonneville and Grand Coulee Dams, and marketed by the Bonneville Power Administration, had played a major role in the production of several billion dollars worth of ships, planes, light metals, chemicals, and other war supplies.
During the 3½ years since the United States entered the war on December 7, 1941, the Administration has delivered a total of 17.5 billion kilowatt-hours to war industries and military establishments.
Revenues from the sale of this power for war purposes aggregated $43,216,192 to June 30, 1945.
War loads continued to consume a major share of the Administration's total power deliveries during the 1945 fiscal year.
Of 8.5 billion kilowatt-hours sold during that 12-month period, the Pacific Northwest's five aluminum reduction plants and one aluminum rolling mill took 4.6 billion kilowatt-hours.
Although minor cutbacks in Northwest aluminum production occurred early in 1944 and more serious cut-backs threatened, the Nation's continuing high level of aircraft production made it necessary to revise estimates of aluminum requirements, and by the summer of 1945 all of the Northwest plants had been requested to increase production to eapacity.
In fiscal year 1945, as in 1944, the Northwest plants produced more than one-third of the Nation's entire aluminum output.
Aluminum produced with Columbia River power contributed greatly toward the establishment of United States air supremacy in the European and Pacific battle areas.
The 503,144,000 pounds of aluminum produced by Northwest plants in this 12-month period was sufficient to produce 10,000 B-29s or 150,000 fighter planes.
Of even greater importance to final victory in World War II was the contribution made by Bonneville-Grand Coulee power to the development of the atomic bomb.
The location of the Hanford Engineer Works in the Pacific Northwest was.
As a result of these studies, the Bonneville Power Administration was able to provide large quantities of power to the Hanford projeet with the highest possible degree of reliability, a prime requisite to successful production of the atomic bomb.
Other war materials produced during the past year in plants using Bonneville-Grand Coulee power included 181 ships—54 Victory cargo ships, 62 troopships, 63 tankers and 2 aircraft carriers—and large quantities of calcium carbide, ferroalloys, chemicals and explosives.
While the Bonneville Power Administration continued its home front job of delivering power for war, 1,050 employees on military furlough with the nation's armed forces were scattered over fighting fronts throughout the world.
Kilowatt-hour sales of the Bonneville Power Administration for fiscal year 1945 totaled 8,502,000,000 compared with 8,671,000,000 the preceding year.
Despite the slight drop in kilowatt-hours, revenues increased 10 percent from $20,896,000 to $22,990,000 after deduction of a $438,560 reserve for contract and bill adjustments.
This situation arises from the fact that the revenues are power billings which are based upon capacity contracted for, rather than upon energy delivered as regards the bulk of the Administration's service.
For the period from the commencement of operation to June 30, 1945, earnings from power sales have aggregated $63,626,000.
As World War II drew to a close in 1945, the Bonneville Power Administration began to focus attention more sharply on the problem of developing peacetime power markets to utilize surplus power becoming available as Pacific Northwest war plants curtailed operations or closed.
Analysis of the Administration's war loads indicates that a maximum of 600,000 kilowatts, or approximately 50 percent of our total capacity may become available for remarketing.
Confronted with this possibility, the Administration is devoting considerable effort to the formulation of an extensive program of market and system development designed to provide markets for surplus power as quickly as possible, and to assist in retaining the Pacific Northwest's wartime industrial gains.
The marketing program is directed toward the development of new power markets in industries that will directly or indirectly provide jobs for returning service men and displaced war workers.
As a part of this program, the Division of Industrial and Resources Development completed a number of reports during fiscal year 1945, based on continuing studies of Pacific Northwest resources and potential power markets.
A particularly valuable report issued during fiscal 1945 was one entitled"A Preliminary Report on the Plastics Industry as Related to Pacific Northwest Industry."
This report originally had been prepared for limited distribution to technical and industrial interests.
The response from industry, however, was so overwhelming that a new printing was ordered.
A new supplemental report on the same subject is now in course of preparation.
It deals in specifie terms with cellulose-base plastics, for the manufacture of which a great potential exists in the Pacific Northwest.
Economic surveys under the general title “Economic Base for Power Markets" were issued for the following counties: Clatsop County, Oreg.
Similar surveys which were under preparation during the year and are scheduled for early release include Lane, Lincoln, and Benton Counties in Oregon; Flathead, Lake, and Sanders Counties in Montana.
In Washington State, studies were under way for Chelan, Douglas, Okanogan, Clallam-Jefferson, Franklin, Benton, Skagit, Mason, Grays Harbor, Stevens, Ferry, and Pend Oreille Counties.
Reports for use within the Administration included one entitled "A Preliminary Study of Railroad Electrification in the Pacific Northwest."
1) In a region of great hydroelectric abundance, it seems undesirable from the standpoint of national interest to allow a continuously replaceable form of energy to remain unused while remaining irreplaceable reserves of petroleum and coal are further depleted.
2) The development and utilization of railroad motive power is at a critical juncture, with newer forms of prime movers rapidly appearing to claim the place long occupied by the old familiar reciprocating steam locomotive.
3) The Diesel-electrie locomotive, which thus far has been and gives promise of continuing to be the most likely replacement for the steam locomotive, is not a completely satisfactory answer.
Neither phsyically nor economically does the Diesel solve all the problems which are posed by the retirement of the steam locomotive.
So far as yard switching service goes, the Diesel is granted to have proved its case, and not even the most ardent advocates of electrification suggest any deviation from the trend toward their full replacement of steam units in yard and industrial trackage assignments.
4) For main-line purposes, the problems are entirely different.
Here a strong case, and it is believed an ultimately compelling one, can be made for the straight-electric locomotive.
5) Physically, the straight-electric locomotive compares favorably with the Diesel-electric.
Actually, they are both electric locomotives so far as the method by which torque is supplied to driving wheels is concerned.
Where they differ is that one is supplied with electricity generated on the locomotive by a severely limited mechanism of prime mover, generator, etc., which must also carry its own fuel supply as dead weight and which has no overload capacity whatsoever, while the other can be supplied from a trolley system with the almost limitless capacity of hydroelectric central stations.
The Bonneville Power Administration, realizing that there was relatively little likelihood of adding to electrified trackage during the war, has directed its inquiries toward an appraisal of the postwar possibilities.
Action has been sought on a power rate schedule that would be conducive to the consideration of electrification, and some thought has been given to the best and most economically feasible method of bringing service from the Administration's facilities to the railroad's trolley systems.
This has involved some attention to the problem of standardization of railway electrification systems which have in the past involved too many variations to lend themselves either to the most economic manufacture or operation.
Studies will be continued particularly on these two subjects during the ensuing year.
Numerous other technical reports were prepared, including one on the effects of new industrial developments on tax revenues in the Pacific Northwest, and one entitled"A Review Study of the Columbia Basin" for the use of the Bureau of Reclamation.
A third report dealt with shipments through the locks of Bonneville Dam.
An exhaustive report was also made on the zine lead mines of the Pacific Northwest and tributary areas.
In carrying out the Bonneville Power Administration's industrial research and development programs, contacts have been made with leading industrialists and businessmen throughout the country.
Through these contacts valuable information on the Northwest's resources and market potentialities has been made available to industries in all sections of the country, many of which are looking to the Pacific coast as the last industrial frontier.
Bonneville's industrial contact program has been directed to a large extent toward the fields of electronics, electro-process industries and other industries in which low-cost power is an important element.
The region's tremendous hydroelectric power resources coupled with its rich forest, agricultural and mineral resources furnish a sound basis for the belief that the Pacific Northwest corner of the United States will play an important role in the development of new electronic, chemical, and metallurgical industries based on important discoveries made in these fields during the war.
Specific products which Bonneville research indicates can be produced in the Northwest include: phosphorus, manganese bronze, glass containers and glass blocks, sulfuric acid, industrial alcohol, electrolytic iron and other powdered metals, electrolytic zinc, rayon, pigments, dichromate salts for ink, electrolytic manganese, fertilizers, chlorine and acetylene products, tars and phenols, coal and byproduets, limestone, plastie metals, lithium and other rare metals, ferro-alloys, silica sands, battery lead, and litharge.
All of these products have been discussed with industrial representatives, and it is expected that a number of new Northwest plants will be constructed in the near future as a result of these contaets.
Bonneville's industrial contact aetivities have been instrumental in initiating action on a number of plants already under construction or completed, including the Springfield alcohol plant near Eugene, Oreg.
In the promotion of both of these ventures, the Bonneville Power Administration played a pioneering part.
Development of the Salem, Oreg.
Of particular interest are the electric boilers in the plant, an innovation for which Bonneville Power Administration had primary responsibility.
In electrolytic iron, the Administration stimulated the interest of three major companies, one of which is now proceeding with the selection of sites and expects to begin plant construction in the near future.
The Administration is continuing its activities in the field of powdered metallurgy now gaining in practical importance, particularly in the automotive industry.
The Bonneville Power Administration also continued to stimulate interest in electrolytic manganese.
The availability of titanium-bearing sands caused the Administration actively to stimulate research in the utilization of the titanium fractions for the use of pigments.
Much interest is developing in the industrial potentialities of this resource.
An important plant for the manufacture of resinous plastics for the plywood industry has been established by one of the key companies in this field.
Continuous contact and release of the "Preliminary Report on the Plastics Industry" by the Administration had a direct bearing on the establishment of this plant.
Activity and interest in the production of rare metals such as lithium have been followed closely by the Administration and continuous contact with one of the major producers of rare metals indicates the possible establishment of a large plant in this region.
Culminating 8 years of effort on the part of the Administration in the utilization of electric power for the manufacture of glass was the establishment of a sizable glass-producing unit in a Northwest glass plant utilizing the so-called Cornelius electric glass furnace.
The success of the operation will bear definitely on the use of this type of furnace elsewhere in the Pacific Northwest in the coming expansion of glass-producing industries.
Also as part of the interest in chemical industries, renewed activity has taken place in the mining of limestone and silicas.
These two materials are the basis for any chemical industries which might develop in the Pacific Northwest.
The industrial contact work indicated above requires careful advance as well as continuing industrial and market analysis.
In this respect, studies on limestone and silica and on lead and zinc were prosecuted by members of the staff, together with a multitude of short-run studies required for direct industrial contacts.
The Administration continued with collaborative studies on a wood-utilization experimental pilot plant for the production of charcoal.
It also collaborated in basic research work on the utilization of titanium-bearing sands for the production of pigments.
In order to lay a sound basis for market analysis, the Administration began a long-range study of interregional and intraregional freight rates as well as of specific markets for specific power-using industries.
Utilization of local coals for the production of charcoal, phenol, and tars was the subject of much contact work.
Discussions with leaders of industry and with Government officials on a comprehensive study of fertilizer use and potential production in the Pacific Northwest have also been carried on in the past fiscal year.
Also initiated was a longrange study of railroad electrification, with numerous collaborating contacts with the TVA, Bureau of Reclamation, and various railroads and manufacturers of equipment.
An attempt to stimulate interest in the manufacture of line hardware by local manufacturing enterprise was launched during the year, with interesting initial results.
A long-range program in the use of aluminum and its fabrication in the Pacific Northwest was initiated by the staff.
The cooperative relationship of the Administration with the Office of Alien Property Custodian was continued, with many direct contacts made by the Alien Property Custodian representative.
Staff members prepared testimony and participated in hearings before the United States Senate Special Committee to Study and Survey Problems of Small Business.
Particular emphasis was given to problems relating to the disposal of Government facilities in the production of aluminum and in general problems of business and industrial expansion in the Pacific Northwest States.
Another committee with which.
Numerous conferences were held with State officials on matters relating to industrial and resource development and initial conferences were held in the four Pacific Northwest States with staff members of higher educational institutions for the purpose of developing cooperative programs of research in industry and resource utilization.
Much effort was put forth by the Bonneville Power Administration during the fiscal year 1945 in studying problems of industrial and peacetime operation of Government-owned light metal plants in the Pacific Northwest.
Declaring it to be a primary objective of the Bonneville Power Administration to assist in the utilization of Northwest resources for the development of a well-rounded industrial economy to provide maximum employment, Administrator Paul J. Raver, in testifying before the Murray Small Business Committee, maintained that the aluminum industry can and should be a major part of that development.
The following recommendations to be undertaken immediately by Government agencies to assist new operators to take over the Government-owned aluminum plants and operate them successfully were made at that time.
1. In order to prevent immediate shutdown of the major part of the aluminum capacity because of a shortage of war orders, minimum markets above immediate normal needs should be provided by Government stock-piling of aluminum ingot as a national defense measure.
2. The Government should control all surpluses of virgin and socalled secondary metal, releasing them gradually so as not to interfere with an orderly change of price levels.
3. Government should provide new operators with access to high grade, imported bauxite to insure an adequate and reliable source of raw material.
4. Government agencies should coordinate and increase efforts in the direction of assisting private enterprise to appraise both export and domestic use of light metals.
The question of freight rates is basic to the aluminum marketing problem, and the Bonneville Power Administration has started studies of freight rates on electro-industry products.
5. In order to help overcome problems of improper location, fractional capacity operation and reopening of shut-down plants, the Government should provide engineering assistance in appraising production costs, grant flexible terms of lease and assume the costs of plant alterations and, where necessary, finance relocation of improperly located plants or their equipment.
So far as power rates are involved in this problem, the Bonneville Power Administration has pointed out its obligation to pay for the cost of the power projects out of revenues as provided by Congress in the Bonneville Act.
Intensive efforts have been devoted throughout the year to investigation and study of electric house-heating systems, particularly installations in service for a season or more.
It is immediately apparent from public interest shown in this method of home heating that a large potential market for power exists in this field.
As a result of the findings of the Administration's utilization engineers in the field, many of the adverse attitudes heretofore caused by lack of knowledge of energy demands and of the cost of the electric space heating, have been dissipated.
These investigations have included extensive measurements and tests on existing heating installations to determine results and costs of this type of heating.
Although a great deal of data have been accumulated, much work remains to be done in this field, particularly because of continuing new developments in electric heating methods.
In the fields of rural and agricultural utilization, considerable investigation has been made into improved methods of hay drying, fruit dehydration, sprinkler irrigation, scientific dairying,and food preservation by means of electric processes.
As a part of the program for developing use of power in the Pacific Northwest, particularly for farm use and electric house heating, a program of cooperative research with colleges and universities in the Northwest was initiated by the Administration during fiscal year 1945.
Funds utilized for this research program were those provided by the Congress for advanced marketing activities.
Agreements were executed during the fiscal year with Oregon State College, Washington State College, Montana State College, the University of Washington, and Linfield College.
With each, a basic memorandum of understanding has been executed outlining the relationships between the institution and the Bonneville Power Administration and forming the basis for specifie agreements regarding individual research projects.
With Oregon State College, under a basic memorandum dated May 22, 1945, eight separate studies are to be undertaken.
These will include studies on (1) pipe and pipe materials for use with sprinkler irrigation, (2) dairy water heating, (3) home built farm refrigeration units, (4) electric radiant panel heating, (5) reversed cycle heating (6) electric heat storage and its economic aspects, (7) biochemical analysis dealing with preservation of forage crops, and (8) livestock feeding experiments in connection with cured hay.
Five studies will be made by Washington State College under a basic memorandum dated June 12, 1945.
These will include studies on (1) cranberry drying equipment, (2) refrigeration for family use, (3) corrosion charaeteristies of metal pipe used in sprinkler irrigation installations, (4) low-pressure sprinkler investigation, and (5) use of eleetric welders on the farm and their effeet on rural lines.
Under a basic memorandum dated June 23, 1945, the University of Washington will pursue the following studies: (1) Possible improvements or changes in a design of distribution systems resulting in a lower cost of distribution, (2) domestic house-heating installations in and near the city of Seattle, and (3) economies of the heat-pump method for domestic heating.
Montana State College, under a basic memorandum dated June 11, 1945, will make a survey of opportunities for small irrigation pumping plants in western Montana.
Linfield College at MeMinnville, Oreg.
The total maximum obligation for all of the studies to be undertaken will amount to $63,528.
Work was started on certain of these projects during the month of June, and in other projects initial activities will not be undertaken until late in 1945.
The period for completion will generally extend into late 1946 or early 1947 although in a few instances completion by June 30, 1946, was planned.
Approximately $20,000 has been obligated for studies relative to electric heating.
Oregon State College, which has an excellent heating research laboratory, is undertaking to make experimental studies in radiant panel heating, heat storage systems and reversed cycle heating, all with electric energy as the heating medium.
Radiant panel heating is perhaps the newest form of heating developed and promises to have considerable future development both because of the inherent advantages of this type of heat and because it appears to be peculiarly well adapted to conversion of existing dwellings from fuel heat to electric heat.
Many problems in application of radiant panels are yet unsolved, in part relating to the characteristics of panels of different types, the method of application of panels, and the relative efficiency of panel heating.
Electric heat-storage systems have been in existence for many years and were designed originally in order to control the time of occurrence of the electrical heating load so as to prevent this from coinciding with other loads.
With the development of electric heating which will probably occur, it is not likely that this "off-peak" feature will have much practical advantage, but heat-storage systems will enable the maintenance of a constant demand at all times on the electrical system to supply fluctuating heating demands.
This characteristic is of great value to electrical distributors.
It is hoped by the experiments at Oregon State College that it will be possible to determine the most efficient of the various types of heat storage systems now available and to simplify the designs so as to reduce the cost of installation which now is fairly heavy.
The characteristics of reversed cycle heating or the heat pump are now fairly well known, but application of this method of heating under actual operating conditions, as would be experienced in the climate of this area, are relatively unknown.
Experimentation at Oregon State College will uncover the operating problems which are likely to occur and will make possible determination of the technical feasibility of this method of heating.
Since the heat pump returns approximately three times as much energy in heat as is required in electricity for operation, a low-cost and practical development of this equipment would enable very rapid expansion of the electric-heating market.
The University of Washington's studies in the economics of the heat pump will provide the answer to the present questions of using the equipment under conditions as they exist in the area and will also point the way to determining what reductions in costs or changes in technique are necessary to make the heat pump a practical instru ment of heating.
The University of Washington will study the characteristics of existing heating installations in the Seattle area, which include a considerable variety in heating methods, such as radiant panel, heat storage, and radiant-convection.
Analysis of the load characteristics and operating results will help to answer questions which occur in the minds of power distributors and ultimate consumers.
One of the major problems connected with electrical heating is the development of economical methods of distributing electricity to serve the large loads which are imposed by this use.
The University of Washington will analyze the problem of the most efficient distribution methods for this type of load and the results of their studies will help in solving many problems involved.
Sprinkler irrigation is a subject of great interest to farmers in the Northwest and to the Bonneville Power Administration as a marketer of power.
This method of irrigation holds many advantages for the farmers and also uses large quantities of power.
Three research projects are planned to study various phases of sprinkler irrigation.
Washington State College will study the corrosion characteristics of various types of metal pipe used in sprinklerirrigation installations in order to determine relative durability of various types and the soil and water conditions to which each is best adapted.
This college will also analyze various other problems involved in sprinkler-irrigation systems such as the soil and crop conditions necessary, types of sprinkler heads and other problems.
Oregon State College will study pipes and pipe materials for use with sprinkler irrigation under conditions in the State of Oregon to determine which types are best adapted for furthering the efficient use of sprinkler irrigation.
Montana State College will analyze the opportunities for establishment of small irrigation-pumping units in western Montana.
The detailed survey of the area which is planned will reveal the possibilities of developing irrigation projects and the conditions which must be overcome to obtain this development.
Use of electricity on the farm for operation of refrigerating units for preservation of meats, vegetables, and other farm produce promises to be a very large market for electricity in the future.
It is of the utmost importance that farm refrigeration equipment be developed which will perform the job efficiently and will be relatively low in cost.
Both Oregon State and Washington State Colleges have been interested in the development of farm refrigerators for many years, and each is conducting a research project on this subject with funds made available by the Bonneville Power Administration.
The interest of farmers has been much attracted in the past few years by the possibilities of improving the quantity of usable hay harvested by the use of electrically operated blowers for drying hay in the hay mow.
This practice is of particular importance in areas where there is considerable rain during hay harvesting periods.
One angle which has not been sufficiently investigated to obtain reliable data is that of the nutritional qualities of barn-dried hay.
It has been claimed that these are superior but this claim was not based on very thorough scientific research.
Accordingly, Oregon State College proposes to expand its research program in hay drying to include investigations of the biochemical analysis of barn-dried hay in comparison with ordinary hay.
They will also conduct livestock feeding experiments to throw light on the nutritional quality of barn-cured hay.
Washington State College will conduct a study of the use of electric welders on the farm which will indicate the operational characteristies of this equipment and the improvements which should be made to better adapt it to the needs of the farmers and to meet the limitations of electric power lines.
This college will also conduct experiments in the development of electrically powered cranberry dryers which will make possible more efficient practices in the harvesting and marketing of cranberries.
During fiscal year 1945 approximately 86 percent of all energy generated at the Bonneville-Grand Coulee plants was delivered either directly to war industries and military establishments or to other utilities to enable them to serve such loads.
The proportion of total deliveries going to war loads is beginning a downward trend from the 90 percent for the 1942-43 fiscal year and 89 percent for the 1943-44 fiscal year.
The Bonneville Power Administration delivered 8½ billion kilowatthours of electric energy to 80 customers during this last year.
Of this total, 824 million went to publicly owned utilities, 2,057 million to privately owned utilities and 5,632 million to industries and military establishments.
As compared with the previous year, deliveries to other utilities increased 13 percent for publiely owned utilities and 40 percent for privately owned utilities; deliveries to industries and military establishments decreased 13 percent.
The total of all deliveries under power and exchange agreements decreased 1.8 percent from the comparable figure of the year before.
Noncoincidental maximum demands under power contracts for publicly and privately owned utilities are shown in detail by customers in the accompanying table.
Energy deliveries and dates of initial service are also shown by eustomers.
1 No contract demand specified.
Executed in fiscal year 1945.
At the end of the fiscal year the Bonneville Power Administration had signed contracts with 54 publiely owned utilities and cooperatives.
During the fiscal year, a contract with one publicly owned utility had been canceled and another had been added, leaving at the end of the fiscal year the same number of contracts with publicly owned utilities as were in existence at the end of the previous fiscal year.
Of the 54, all but 12 of the publicly owned utilities are now taking power, either under power or exchange contracts.
Deliveries to the 42 publicly owned utilities for the fiscal year amounted to 823,817,368 kilowatt-hours, an increase of 13 percent over the previous fiscal year.
During this fiscal year, 504,384,200 kilowatt-hours were delivered to municipalities which is an increase of 6 percent over the previous fiscal year.
The deliveries to public utility districts amounted to 272,999,252 kilowatt-hours and is an increase of 27 percent over the previous year.
The cooperatives received 46,433,916 kilowatt-hours of energy, an increase of 23 percent over the previous year.
The noncoincidental maximum demand during the year for these publicly owned utilities was 73,219 kilowatts.
The public agencies distributed low-priced Bonneville power under the best American business tradition of delivering it at the lowest possible cost to the ultimate consumers.
For the calendar year 1944, the 38 publicly owned distributors— omitting Centralia, Eugene, Seattle and Tacoma—received a gross income of $4,802,889; and after deducting the cost of power, other operating expenses, depreciation, taxes and interest, had a net income of $761,044.
The net income amounts to approximately 16 percent of the gross revenue and included in the deductions from the revenue are taxes amounting to $203,374.
These 38 public agencies had cash on hand or invested in United States bonds amounting to $3,024,777, which exceeds slightly the accumulated surplus of $3,013,845.
The cash on hand of $3,024,777 is 14½ percent of the total long-term debts of these distributors.
The cash on hand also amounts to 63 percent of the gross annual revenue.
This financial showing by the public distributors leaves no doubt as to the financial soundness of these distributors and the ability to distribute power to the ultimate consumers at the lowest possible cost.
Data for the cities of Centralia, Eugene, Seattle, and Tacoma have been omitted from this tabulation for they have distributed power for many years; Tacoma—for more than 50 years.
These are wellestablished and they received during the past fiscal year only a small part of their energy requirements from the Administration.
No new generators were added to the system during the fiscal year ending June 1945; however, the generating capacity was sufficient so that by careful scheduling of outages, each of the 18 main units at the Bonneville and Grand Coulee plants could be shut down for annual overhaul and maintenance.
Although the total load on the Bonneville-Grand Coulee system was slightly less than that of the previous year due to cutbacks in war production, increased deliveries to the utilities of the Northwest power pool largely offset the decrease in industrial load.
With stream flows in the Northwest below normal during the summer and fall of 1944, the Administration delivered large blocks of power to other utilities in the region to enable them to meet their load requirements without burning critical fuel oil for power production.
By the last week in December, all storage reservoirs west of the Cascade Mountains had been pulled down to their rule curves, or below, and schedules for power from the Administration and other pool utilities were suddenly increased to an all time high.
As a result of these high deliveries to the pool, the Bonneville-Coulee system established a record 60-minute peak generation of 1,427,000 kilowatts on January 4, 1945.
During the hour of this peak, 623,000 kilowatts were delivered to pool members for their own use.
Moderate weather and heavy rains beginning the second week in January and continuing intermittently throughout the winter and spring, relieved the Northwest water shortage and consequently decreased Bonneville Power Administration deliveries to other pool members.
The flow of the Columbia River was below average practically all year, and was below the minimum on record for part of the time.
Nevertheless, the power resources of the Bonneville Power Administration were adequate to meet all demands for energy.
During 1945, as in 1944, the Bonneville and Grand Coulee power plants supplied approximately 50 percent of all electric energy consumed in the five Northwest States of Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Montana, and Utah.
The task of scheduling loads and regulating the frequency of the entire power pool was carried by the Administration throughout the year, with the actual regulation being done at either the Bonneville or Grand Coulee power plants, depending mainly on water conditions.
The following tabulation of energy receipts and deliveries shows the Administration's major contribution to the Northwest power pool during the past fiscal year.
Deliveries to other utilities for their own use increased from 1,810,602,507 kilowatt-hours in fiscal year 1944, to 2,401,859,000 kilowatt-hours or 32.65 percent.
In order to meet the power requirements of other Northwest utilities, several new points of interconnection were established during the year.
The first, a temporary tie with the Portland General Electric Co., made at Bonneville's St. Johns substation on July 9, 1944, to relieve overload conditions, was discontinued on November 15 when the company's two underwater cables across the Willamette River were ripped out by a ship's anchor.
Failure of these cables resulted in serious curtailment of power to a part of the company's system, but fortunately it was possible to bring into service on the same day a new interconnection with the company, tapping the Administration's St. Johns-Oregon City lines near the Linnton district of Portland.
To further increase deliveries of the Administration's power into the Portland area, one Bonneville generator was isolated to feed power directly into the Northwestern Electric Co.'s system through a temporary interconnection with the Bonneville-Alcoa No. 6 line.
This tie was still in service at the end of the fiscal year, pending installation of a permanent interconnection at the Troutdale substation.
A cable failure on the Puget Sound Power & Light Co.'s system between Richmond Beach and President Point occurred on October 25, 1944, and in order to supplement the reduced capacity of the remaining cables and to assure an adequate supply of power on the Olympic peninsula, it was necessary to close the Bonneville Power Administration-Tacoma-Puget Sound Power & Light Co. loop at Bremerton.
Except for normal operating outages, this loop has been closed continually since that date.
During the year, stream flow gages were installed on the Columbia River at Trinidad, Umatilla, and Celilo; and on the Snake River at Clarkston and Five Mile Rapids.
These gages consist of impulse transmitters and telephone connections to the dispatcher's office, enabling the load dispatchers to obtain immediate water flow data from the various points and to make maximum use of the available water.
Although shortage of materials, lack of adequate manpower, changes in design and other factors brought about by war conditions handicapped construction progress during the year, the major projects under construction were held close to original schedules.
The most important construction project of the year—the Covington-Grand Coulee Line No. 2—was completed on October 6, 1944, approximately 1 month ahead of schedule.
Energization of this line eliminated a serious transmission bottleneck in the Seattle area and reduced the load on the Grand Coulee-Covington Line No. 1 to normal or below.
Prior to completion of the second line, Line No. 1 had been carrying up to 251,000 kilowatts, an overload of 41,000 kilowatts, to meet power requirements in the Puget Sound area.
The major construction projects started during the fiscal year were the Columbia substation, a new 230,000-volt substation near Rock Island on the Columbia River, and a 51-mile 230,000-volt steel tower line from Midway substation to the new Columbia substation.
Completion of the Midway-Columbia project will improve stability of the Bonneville-Grand Coulee System and increase the amount of energy that can be transmitted to the Puget Sound and Portland areas.
A total of 149.8 circuit miles of transmission lines of all types was built during the past fiscal year.
Segregated by voltage classifications, this construction ineluded 146.6 circuit miles of 230-kilovolt line, 11.9 circuit miles of 115-kilovolt line.
Six permanent transformer banks, one single-phase transformer and four cooling fan installations, totaling 181,600 kilovolt-amperes; and two spare transformers totaling 25,000 kilovolt-amperes were installed at various substations.
However, only 132,100 kilovoltamperes was energized and placed in service.
The remaining unenergized transformers, totaling 49,500 kilovolt-amperes are available for service to the customers when required.
Three permanent transformer banks and one single-phase transformer totaling 38,712 kilovolt-amperes were removed from service, leaving a net increase of 142,888 kilovolt-amperes of transformer capacity installed and ready for service during the 1945 fiscal year.
Of particular significance in the year's operations was the signing on May 2, 1945, of a labor-management agreement providing for a method of collective bargaining with hourly employees of the Bonneville Power Administration in the trades and crafts unions.
This basic agreement was made applicable to all Bonneville hourly employees in the trades and crafts who are not subject to the Classification Act of 1923.
By the terms of the agreement, conference and consultative machinery and procedures, through the processes of collective bargaining, were set up (1) to provide for joint determination of fair and reasonable rates of pay, hours and working conditions; (2) to insure the making of appointments and promotions on a merit basis; (3) to promote stability of employment and to establish satisfactory tenure; (4) to provide for improvement and betterment programs designed to aid the employees in achieving their acknowledged and recognized objectives; (5) to promote the highest degree of efficiency and responsibility in the performance of the work and the accomplishment of the public purposes of the Bonneville Power Administration; (6) to adjust promptly all disputes, whether related to matters covered by the agreement or otherwise; (7) to promote systematic labor-management cooperation between the Administration and its employees; and (8) to aid the reestablishment in civilian life of returning veterans.
An earlier event of signal importance to smooth peacetime conversion in the Northwest was the completion and approval by the Secretary of the Interior on January 31, 1945, of the Columbia Basin Project Cost Allocation Report which was prepared jointly by the Bonneville Power Administration and the Bureau of Reclamation.
The report was transmitted to Congress on May 8, 1945, and published as House Document No. 172.
According to the report, total estimated cost for the completed Grand Coulee project is $487,030,228.
This includes the total ultimate development of power generating capacity of 1,800,000 kilowatts of power and the completion of irrigation canals and facilities for the irrigation of 1,029,000 acres of arid land in central Washington.
The project will provide a livelihood for about a quarter of a million additional people on farms or in industry and service in the project area and for many others in industry and service elsewhere in the Pacific Northwest.
Repayments from power revenues will include $348,065,228, or 70 percent of the total project cost, from commercial power sales by the Bonneville Power Administration and $50,500,000 for pumping power supplied by the Bureau of Reclamation to irrigate the project.
Of the remaining investment, farmers who irrigate the 1,029,000 acres of new agricultural land in the project will repay $87,465,000, or an average capital cost of $85 per acre for their water.
Under the terms of the report, the Federal Government will be repaid all its reimbursable investment in the Columbia Basin project within 75 yeårs, and during that period the project will be maintained out of power revenues so that it will be in excellent operating condition after the capital cost is repaid.
The report states that existing rates of the Bonneville Power Administration are expected to produce revenues sufficient to return the power investment with interest, and to repay all irrigation and other reimbursable costs of the projects which cannot be repaid otherwise, as well as meeting all estimated obligations in connection with the Bonneville-Grand Coulee transmission system.
Commercial power revenues also will be used to establish a special treasury fund amounting to $70,786,815 over the repayment period.
This money will be available for possible reduction in water and power rates at Grand Coulee, or for assistance to other irrigation and power projects in the Columbia River Basin.
On June 26, 1945, the Federal Power Commission entered an order making a final allocation of the capital costs of the Bonneville Dam project incurred to June 30, 1944, including interest during construction at the rate of 2.5 percent per annum.
The order fixed the total cost at $83,709,430, of which $5,784,055 was incurred for facilities solely for improvement of navigation; $37,681,648 for facilities solely for development of power; and $40,243,726 for facilities having joint value for the production of electric energy and other purposes.
The Commission allocated to power $20,121,800, or 50 percent of the investment in joint purpose facilities.
This sum plus the direct power facilities of $37,681,648 makes a total power investment at Bonneville Dam of $57,803,448 as of June 30, 1944.
Supplemental allocations will be made by the Federal Power Commission to include costs incurred subsequent to June 30, 1944, in completing the Bonneville project.
With actual plant investment and operating cost data now available for both the Grand Coulee and Bonneville projects, the Bonneville Power Administration is having an independent commercial audit made covering cost accounts of the Administration and the two generating projects.
Upon completion of the audit a comprehensive financial report will be prepared covering the operations and financial status of the entire Federal power development on the Columbia River.
Contributions of great value to the development of the Administration's programs were made by the Bonneville Regional Advisory Council during fiscal 1945.
Representative leaders in business, industry, agriculture, education, government, and the press have served either as active members or invited guests at the various meetings of the Council in conferring with the Administrator on matters of moment concerning regional policies and the Bonneville developmental program.
Of particular interest in the activities of the Council was the adoption of a report prepared by an independent committee regarding the question of a coordinated river development program.
Other matters of importance studied and reported upon at Council meetings throughout the year included rural electrification, relation of freight rates to industrial development, electric house heating, power rates for industry and for irrigation, the Administration's advanced marketing program, the transmission construction program and problems involved in developing a coordinated research program for the region.
The Southwestern Power Administration assumed these duties on September 1, 1943, with the present Administrator appointed as Acting Administrator.
The Flood Control Act of December 1944 vested in the Secretary of the Interior the responsibility for distributing and marketing the power output of the multiple-purpose reservoir projects authorized by the Congress for construction by the War Department.
The Southwestern Power Administration has made a general study covering all of the constructed, authorized, and proposed War Department projects on the Arkansas, White, Ouachita, Red, Brazos, Neches, an'd Guadalupe Rivers.
The Grand River Dam project was constructed by the Grand River Dam Authority, an agency of the State of Oklahoma, under a Public Works Administration loan and grant agreement.