The past year has been one of transition from war use to peacetime conservation.
Our needs have gone from war materials to peaceful requirements.
We have been short in many fields.
The over capacity of plant that we had before the war saw us through several critical parts of that war.
Where we were underdeveloped the Government had to invest billions in a hurry.
Now we are moving to a very high level of national income.
We are going to need more plant for many types of production.
We are going to need more national plant for our resource development.
In many western areas progress is being definitely held up at present through lack of reclamation land and water, and through power shortages.
The expanding future is blocked by shortages in national plant as well as other lacks.
There have been a few national emergencies in the basic resource field, which covers land, forests, fish, water, parks, minerals, heat and energy.
Coal strikes crippled production but did not waste our heat and energy resources, although they raised their price, and gave some urgency to alternative supplies which may in many years include atomic energy.
The marginal metal mines presented a conservation problem which has been temporarily taken care of by the stockpiling act which provides for a continuation of wartime aid to them.
The stripper oil wells presented a very similar problem of potential permanent loss of a valuable resource.
The problem has similarly been covered by the Congress.
We do foresee several dangers to the national resource interest.
First, our past neglect to take positive action to put our privately owned forests on a sustained yield basis, plus the enormous wartime demand, threatens an invasion and over-cutting of all our national forests, including that part which is under the Department of the Interior.
We feel that would be compounding the past mistakes.
We propose to fight against over-cutting on the public domain, for sustained yield operation of private forests and for more national and more private forests.
A second danger lies in the threat to neglect and thereafter to parcel out the rest of the public domain to private interests.
We see that threat as an end to opportunity for the many, which has been the basis of our public domain policy and our homestead policy.
Much of our public domain and many of our watersheds cross State lines.
Great erosion control and reseeding jobs need to be done on them if the people are to keep on getting the meat they want to eat.
A strong and continuing policy is needed to prevent overgrazing and land destruction, and it must be an interstate policy.
It must be a policy that is large and broad enough to consider the Nation's future rather than the funds available in any State treasury at any time.
It must be a policy that recognizes the essential thriftlessness of spending billions on dams while we let the watersheds above them be ruined.
A third danger lies in the threats that the benefits of public investment in resource plant will be grabbed by a few people, and that the door of opportunity will be slammed in the faces of the many who now stand in front of it, waiting.
It has been legislative policy for many years to get the electric power benefits from our great dams to the people.
It has not been the policy of the Congress to button them up and turn them over to a few power companies at the dams.
Yet some private utilities have fought, with some success, against the national legislative policy.
We look upon these moves as repealers of the basic principle that public investment should produce the maximum of benefit for the greatest number of people.
We see them as hampering the mineral and industrial developmentof the new regions by preventing industries from getting their energy at the lowest possible cost.
Another part of this same threat is the attempt to close the gates of opportunity resulting from public investment in the face of the veterans seeking land.
The reclamation laws since the days of Theodore Roosevelt have held that water should go to build small family sized farms.
That usually means that only 160 acres under one ownership can be furnished water.
That is enough irrigated land to furnish a solid base for farming success and prosperity.
In community property States such as California it means 320 acres where a man and his wife each own 160 acres.
Yet large land companies and their adherents are trying to tear down that law for their own benefit and to the disadvantage of literally tens of thousands of veterans, farmers' sons, who are asking for an oportunity to buy land that has adequate water.
This is a problem of no small import to the Nation.
We have found that small land ownerships create communities we can be proud of, and large land ownerships, which often make more money per acre, create settlements that are no solid foundation for health, local prosperity, education, or citizenship.
If we are to junk 44 years of major national resource policy, we believe it should be done openly and after full public discussion.
The problems connected with utilizing Government resources and public investment to provide opportunity for free but also competitive enterprise does not stop at the basic resource level.
During the war the Department early saw the need for more aluminum production, encouraged new enterprises to enter the field and helped persuade the war agencies to invest in new aluminum reduction plants, and also in processing plants that could utilize the lower grade American bauxite.
It believed that fuller utilization of this resource was necessary, and that competition would extend the use.
Both convictions have proved to be correct.
The Nation's aluminum plant is now many times that of the prewar period.
The aluminum that went into bombers is now going into housing (taking some of the pressure off our over-cut forests) and many other uses.
A large part of the energy produced at the Bonneville and Coulee Dams is being frozen in this form.
But the problem of retaining the competitive companies in the industry moves from the hands of the Government where it lay during the plant disposal period into the hands of private raw material companies.
Because of this economic control of the basic resources we may see a few raw material companies putting a large new industry out of business, a result that would affect both the forest and power resources.
Such a situation merits thorough investigation by the Congress.
Another major problem is that of coordinated development of our river basins.
The difficulties and programs of each river basin are different from those of other basins.
They must be met separately.
For the Columbia River Basin where there are production and marketing agencies that could be competitive, where a pooling of all revenues is necessary for really full development of the region, the Secretary has come to the conclusion that when the people of the basin are eventually ready to support it, some form of river basin administration that will coordinate, but not supersede all the other agencies, is essential.
The problems of the Missouri are quite different, and he has as yet made no recommendation for their most efficient handling.
The Colorado is still in the stage of dispute and discussion about water rights, and it is hoped that the States both within the upper basin and the lower basin will come to an agreement on the most efficient use of the water.
All of these problems and dangers are matters of vital concern to all our citizens, for we all live on our natural resource base.
They do not carry the impact of rapid change that the cotton South is facing.
There the combination of tractors, mechanical cotton-pickers, flame-cultivators, other farm mechanization, and the change of the pattern to larger farms threatens to force two million farm workers into other occupations within 20 years.
It might be possible for the Bureau of Reclamation to aid that situation somewhat by applying its long experience with drainage and irrigation to the swamplands of the South, and help bring in some useful additional acreage that would cushion the shock a little, and repay its costs to the Government.
We have grouped our problems and the programs to meet them under a few heads, which now follow.
The yearly housekeeping reports of the agencies make up the part II of this annual report.
Our industrial greatness was begun with the use of coal and iron ore in the East.
It continued by sliding coal downhill and ferrying iron ore down the Great Lakes and manganese across the oceans to meet it.
Alloying metals for steel came from the West, and copper from the West helped put electric power into almost every factory.
Our industries chewed up vast quantities of lead and zinc from Missouri, Oklahoma, and Kansas.
But the metal economy was not yet complete.
During the Second World War aluminum went from 14,000 tons monthly to 94,000 tons to put our planes into the air.
Magnesium went from 300 tons to 21,000 tons a month.
The war drain on metals was huge, comparable to the drain on petroleum.
It has become a mystery to most students of the problem how we can go on being the greatest metal-using nation of the world when our reserves of copper, lead, and zinc are all seriously over-depleted and rising in cost, and when our best iron ore, in the Mesabi Range, is subject to exhaustion within another 20 years.
There is even some thought that the barter process of the prewar decade that made gold our most valuable metal import, while the manufactured goods we exported drained our other mineral resources, should be arrested, and a new exchange sought.
The suggestion has been made that our exported goods be paid for in raw materials, including minerals.
The mineral agencies of the Government (Geological Survey and Bureau of Mines) have worked out a series of approaches to the basic problem of assuring some continued national basis for our mineral and metal economy.
The first of these steps is an inventory job on a national scale.
It involves intensive work in discovery and examination of whatever mineral resources we may still have.
The new geophysical methods, where they are applicable to minerals, will also be used.
The war-time use of the airborne magnetometer for finding U-boats underwater is being applied to finding significant mineral deposits under land.
Before the discovery portion of the program can get very far there has to be more basic mapping of the geology of the Nation.
At present less than 10 percent of the country has been mapped on scales adequate for the exploratory guidance now needed.
In this respect, the United States ranks with the less industrialized nations of the world.
In addition to basic mapping, some further work has to be done on the background of badly needed minerals so that we will know where to start looking.
It involves securing data on reserves which mining companies have not yet made available to the Government, partly for fear of taxation by the several States which tax declared reserves in the ground rather than production only.
It will involve drill-testing of many ore bodies.
Above all, it involves putting cost tags on our resources, and making these cost tags take into account all the possible economies that can be obtained from newer mining and processing methods and from lower cost energy.
At present many know that there are vast amounts of phosphate rock in the United States, but no Federal agency has ever attempted to draw a distinction in value to the Nation between rock that would cost $2 a ton to mine and rock that would cost $20 a ton.
The present figures on American mineral reserves are therefore largely meaningless, even for a war economy when price is no object but the expenditure of effort and machinery still is.
This inventory job may cost a billion dollars, and would normally take 20 vears to complete.
It could be speeded up, however.
At any rate, we would know what we have, and what it is worth.
We would know also the degree of our actual dependence on foreign sources, the possibilities for a continued flourishing mining industry in this country, and possibly also the point at which substitutions of one mineral for another and of plastics for specific minerals can be expected to become important factors in our economy.
The billion dollars would underwrite petroleum and coal as well as mineral inventories.
The Geological Survey feels reasonably optimistic that the discovery of important new sources of both metallic and nonmetallic minerals will result from this work.
The depletion problem affects not only the mineral areas but also the metal working areas of the Lake States.
It is the hope of the Interior Department that new processes can be developed to bring into production low-grade domestic ores.
We want to aid in doing that as much as possible, since otherwise large mining sections of this Nation will shut down, and the impact on the States and areas directly concerned will be disastrous locally, and will spread out over the rest of the Nation.
We have no desire to hasten the increase of foreign minerals except in the form of stockpiles for security purposes.
These would be critical and strategic minerals.
At the same time we find it desirable to have sufficient foreign imports to allow our manufacturing industry to produce fully.
We simply want the American mining industry to be kept operating on an economic basis as long as possible.
The St. Lawrence Seaway and the power plant attached to it become important in this depletion picture in the following ways: Whenever, in the future, we are forced to go on an increased import basis, the whole metal fabricating industry of the lake area will unfortunately suffer a slow but profound shock.
That shock will come from the preference that the coastal areas will acquire when foreign minerals are shipped to this country.
Mountain area.
The tendency will be for metal fabricating to move out of the lake area, particularly toward the east coast, to gain the advantage of the lowest costs.
Such a movement would profoundly change the character of economic activity in the lake area.
Such a movement would also put the mineral resources of the Middle West and the Mountain area farther away from their markets than they now are and force a lowering of their already very thin margin of profit to an impossible point.
They simply cannot afford to absorb any more freight costs.
The mineral areas of the Mountain and Middle West, therefore, stand to gain by any effort that will benefit the lake area.
The St. Lawrence Seaway represents a stabilizing factor in the situation.
The Department of the Interior has always favored a widespread mineral development of domestic resources. The mining industry is the basic industry in many of our Western States. I would be reluctant to see developments that would shut off that industry, but this seaway, with a maximum importation of 8,000,000 tons, of which only a small part will probably be used for minerals, will not result in any such shutdown. On the contrary, it will help the Western and Middle Western mining States to the exact extent that it helps keep the metal industry of the lake area just where it is now, close to the domestic sources of minerals."
The third part of the approach to a solution of the Nation's metal mystery is somewhat more audacious.
It is that of adding values to our low-grade minerals by finding an entirely new use for them, much as the value to the Nation of uranium was increased immeasurably when its use shifted from an ingredient in the glass and pottery industries to a source of energy.
It is pointed out that the possiblity of lowering costs enough to warrant converting low-grade American maganese into the equivalent of metallurgical foreign manganese for use as ferromanganese in steel making is to all intents and purposes impossible.
But its conversion into electrolytic manganese, a new metal, with certain desirable properties all its own, is quite possible.
The finding of a new use pattern is the missing part of this approach, and may be the essential requirement for the expansion of some of our nonindustralized regions.
The fourth approach has been taken by the Congress.
It is that of authorizing continued subsidy payments to high-cost mineral producers and stock piling minerals for possible war needs.
The Bureau of Mines provides statistical data and furnishes economic and technical advisers to assist the agencies directly charged with the administration of these programs.
The health and safety of mining personnel is also a major concern of the Bureau of Mines, although it has no authority to regulate mining operations.
Accidents in mining are more frequent than in any other industry except lumbering, and are more severe than in any other with no exception.
First-aid training has helped some.
The dust that accompanies extraction is a health hazard in the metal mines and both a health and safety hazard in the coal mines.
In addition to further education.
This should be supplemented by wetting in some workings.
More and better methods of mechanical ventilation should be adopted.
Blasting should be done after a shift has left the mine or only after thorough wetting or rock dusting of the immediate region.
Fumes should be removed by ventilation before workmen enter the working place.
There should be rigorous and periodical health examinations of miners.
The Bureau notes that the accident rate has been going down and believes that "there is no question that accidents in the mining industry could be reduced at least 50 percent (possibly as much as 75 percent) below what they now are, in which event the financial savings would amount to millions of dollars annually to both workers and operators."
In 1945, 1,034 men were killed in mine accidents.
A 50-percent reduction would leave 517 men alive each year.
A 75-percent reduction would leave 775 men alive each year.
It should be noted that, in another resource field, a flood which has drowned 40 to 60 persons and threatens to do it again every 10 years or so has been found to be ample justification for the investment of hundreds of millions of dollars of public money.
The amount of energy used by a Nation is a good index of its industrial position in the world.
The per capita use is a good indication of its potential standard of living.
The future of the coal and petroleum industries depends to a large extent on the rate at which we increase our national use.
In 1915 we had a national production of 17,100 trillion British thermal units.
By 1929 it was 25,400 trillion, and did not get above that until 1940, when it was 25,600 trillion.
During the war it was shoved up to 32,300 trillion.
In other words it took us about 25 vears to add 8,500 trillion and then in 5 more years we added on another 6.700 trillion, almost four-fifths of the 25-year increase.The war-time addition alone in 1945, if it had all been put into the form of electric energy, would have produced 447 billion kilowatt-hours, the equivalent of a herd of 68 million horses working every minute of the day and night.
To produce this additional heat and energy for the war, the coal industry went up from a 1940 production of 512.7 million tons to 630.9 million, The petroleum industry went up from 1.4 billion barrels to 1.7 billion barrels.
The marketed production of natural gas increased from 2.6 trillion cubic feet to 3.7 trillion.
Hydroelectric capacity was increased from 11,700,000 kilowatts to 14,900,000 kilowatts.
Our energy increase (26.5 percent) between 1940 and 1945 was a little greater than our steel increase of 19 percent from 67 million tons to 79.7 million.
The very considerable war-time increases used up a large part of our best coking coal.
They drew heavily upon our oil reserve and productive capacity.
They used up a valuable part of our natural gas, although many new reserves were discovered.
Meanwhile our current rate of petroleum discovery in new pools is only about one-half of our rate of use.
We are living largely on past discoveries and the hope that there will be more, although we know that the rate of discovery has been going down.
Our proved reserves are estimated at about 21 billion barrels, while in 1945 we used up 1.7 billion barrels, and peacetime expectations are for an even greater demand in the years ahead.
The mineral and conservation agencies of Interior see their first job in this field as that of helping to find more oil, gas, and coking coal, and to obtain better recovery from the resources that have been found.
That is part of their discovery, inventory, and research program.
The work of discovery has become more expensive and difficult.
Geophysical instruments of various types have to be used over wide areas and with rigorous accuracy, and their evidence must be interpreted from a wide and imaginative geological background.
The areas that seemed possibilities, certainly those with outcroppings or obvious favorable surface evidence of favorable structures, have already been examined and drilled.
Among the great remaining hopes are two places, discovery of stratigraphic trap-oil pools far below the surface, and salt domes on the continental shelf under water adjacent to oil-bearing regions, in the Gulf of Mexico, Coast States, and existing fields in California.
There is considerable optimistic opinion among geologists that we may hope to find about as much oil again in the future as we have in the past, in the range of 50 billion barrels, but it may cost much more to find and produce than it has cost up to now.
Exploration in the Western States is particularly important.
As Secretary Krug has stated: "The war brought into sharp focus the strategic importance of oil supplies to operations in the Pacific area. It demonstrated the strategic significance of the fact that only one-fourth of the proved oil reserves of the United States are located in the Western States and that, elsewhere in the Western Hemisphere most of the oil supply is on the Atlantic, rather than on the Pacific side."
There are several other ways to increase our oil reserves in addition to discovering new deposits.
One of these is secondary recovery of oil left in the ground after the original pressure has been exhausted.
We know that there are several billion barrels of oil remaining in our older fields which were not recovered during the primary steps of production.
The study of methods to make that oil more readily recoverable is worthy of our best scientific effort.
At present in addition to water-flooding, the induced pressure of gas or air is utilized, and heat has been tried.
These are engineering operations of considerable magnitude, and the improved recovery may require several years to materialize.
The mineral agencies of the Government believe that they can aid in working out such secondary recoveries on public and private lands, in a way to benefit the whole industry.
The third approach is through a synthetic fuels program which will bring down the costs of producing oil from coal, oil-shale and asphaltic sands, to a place where it would be reasonably competitive with natural petroleum.
Congress has authorized the Bureau of Mines to work in this field and to use several pilot plants.
The five-year program will cost about $30,000,000.
The past experience of German plants is expected to be extremely helpful.
At present large capital expenditures for work on synthetic fuels would be called for by individual companies, and while several private plants are being planned to produce synthetics from natural gas, the threat of a high rate of obsolescence for the early plants, due to advancing technology, may influence others to wait.
In addition to the threat of rapid obsolescence, uncertainty about the future rate of oil discoveries and the stability of oil prices also act as deterrents to private investment in such experimental plants.
If decline in the supply of petroleum is not postponed by a very considerable improvement in our rate of discovery, and we have to go the synthetic route, a considerable geographical dislocation and relocation can be expected to take place, affecting employment, population movements and investments.
If we had to get the equivalent of as much as one billion barrels of oil out of coal, at the rate of 1 ton of oil from every 4 tons of coal, a huge coal production of roughly 572 million tons would have to be added to our present annual production of about 550 million tons.
That production would probably have to come from the areas where strip mining is possible, and costs are lowest.
From coal: $3-$4 per barrel (unrefined).
From oil shale: $2-$2.50 per barrel (unrefined).
In 1946 the Congress decided that the discovery of petroleum on public lands would be increased by revision of the mineral leasing law to set a fixed royalty on oil produced in place of the sliding scale previously existing.
The equivalent of replenishment of our own reserves may be secured in part by importations of oil.
From the conservation viewpoint the extent to which we can produce oil without causing physical waste is a prime factor in measuring our needs for oil from outside sources.
Late in the war period we were forced to overproduce our fields by about 300,000 barrels daily in order to meet military and essential civilian needs.
For a short period we lost the benefits of well-organized production that we had gained through conservation in the late 1930's, when it had become clear that the overproduction in the industry was destroying the resource base as well as ruining the participants in the industry.
Foreign supplies must be geared to the situation of the domestic oil industry as well as to the needs of the rest of the Nation's industries and homes.
The need for such foreign supplies is obviously of a different order of magnitude today when we are using substantially all of our efficient productive capacity from what it was in the pre-war days when we had a reserve capacity of a million barrels daily that we could bring into production at any time.
In this connection it is necessary for us to have reliable, disinterested yearly estimates of our efficient productive capacity.
Another part of the program of the industry and the States and Federal Government should be that of attempting to salvage and get into useful service more of the wasted gas that comes up with the oil.
In 1943, about 684 billion cubic feet of natural gas were flared or otherwise wasted or lost.
This is one-fifth of the total used.
Translated into electric energy this is almost 50 billion kilowatt-hours, or over four times the 1945 production of the whole TVA system.
Our wasted gas alone represents a lost energy about equivalent to the utility power used in the United Kingdom at present.
The problem of collecting that gas (in addition to, and in competition with the natural gas already entering pipe lines) from widely scattered oil fields is one that we have never tried to meet.
It would take from four or five Big Inch plus Little Big Inch pipe lines to carry it when and if it were to be collected.
Or if, instead of being transported, it could be collected at a cost of 5 cents per thousand cubic feet and processed at or near the fields, it could produce over 68 million barrels of gasoline at a total cost of about 5 cents a gallon.
The economic difficulty in the way of any conservation approach is that no incentive exists to produce either the gasoline that would come from the wasted natural gas, or to use the scattered gas from the oil fields, as long as natural gas from gas fields with an assured supply, and high pressure, can be had for a lower price.
This particular resource waste might stagger any nation less rich in resources.
It equals in heat value about 113 million barrels of oil.
It would equal three-quarters of the stripper-well production which qualified for subsidies under the stripper-well premium plan of OPA and of the Defense Supplies Corporation.
This amounted to $56,000,000 in 1945, and three-quarters of it would represent $42,000,000.
A final part of the program lies in the advance in the technology of use so that more service is obtained from each barrel than at present.
Secretary Krug has said: "There should be no holding back in this type of development. Once science has shown the way, the benefits of research in the better utilization of petroleum should be made available. Oil is too valuable to the Nation, too hard to find, and there is not enough of it to permit wasteful practices in its production, handling, and use."
The Bureau of Mines is at present working on greater utilization of the marginal, lower-quality oils, and upon the adaptability of oils from the various producing areas to the manufacture of specific needed products.
It is also working on the possibility of blending fuel from coal and oil shale with natural petroleum.
The oil industry does not expect to be competitive with the coal industry except in the fields of transportation and in residential and office heating, in which it also encounters the competition of the gas industry.
Its preferable output is gasoline, Diesel oil and lubricants, rather than residual fuel oil.
It is counting on adjusting its processes to meet the demand for jet propulsion which now utilizes kerosene, but may call forth a somewhat different product.
Petroleum products are beginning to supply the base for a large chemical industry.
There is some expectation that in the course of time the domestic price will be increased and will allow far more discovery work, will keep the marginal producers in operation and will also get the synthetic production under way for coal and oil shale.
One of the major interests of the industry is whether the synthetic production, which involves securing coal and oil shale as raw materials at very low costs, will be undertaken first by the coal-mining industry, the petroleum industry, or the chemical industry.
The natural gas industry is attempting to expand its outlets into Northern industrial cities.
It is competitive in the heating field with oil and coal.
Its bid for the Big Inch and Little Big Inch pipe lines has not been acted upon in a permanent fashion up to date of writing.
It hopes to transport 400 million cubic feet daily through them, which is the equivalent in heat content of about 7,500,000 tons of coal annually.
The continued expansion of natural gas northward has met with opposition from some producers of manufactured gas, some railroads, some coal operators and the miners.
In some of the producing States also there is considerable discussion as to whether to encourage the export of this valuable and diminishing resource for use in other industrial areas, or to attempt to secure the advantages of the production of gasoline and chemicals from it near its origin.
The President has established within the Department of the Interior an Oil and Gas Division to coordinate Federal duties and policies in these industries.
The greatest part of our national heat and energy still comes from coal.
In 1945 it supplied about 49 percent of it.
In that year 576 million tons of bituminous coal and 55 million tons of anthracite were produced.
The prewar production, in 1940, was respectively 461 million tons and 51 million tons.
Byproduct coke went from 54 million tons to 72 million to help make our war-time steel supply.
The supply (disregarding costs of mining) is still vast.
Anthracite reserves are still 15,730 million tons, of which 60 percent might be mined at a price.
Gross bituminous reserves are estimated at 2,221,000 million tons.
Lignite reserves are 939,500 million tons.
No figures are available to show the estimated reserves that can be mined in the neighborhood of the approximate 1945 cost of $3.03 for deep bituminous coal or $6.21 for anthracite, or in the neighborhood of $2.30 for strip-mining.
The one great shortage is in good coking coal.
The Bureau of Mines expects that coal production will continue to increase slowly in a general way with the new high level of economic activity and the normal population growth.
Between 1950 and 1960 it estimates a bituminous production of between 530 and 580 million tons, not including any call on the industry for coal to produce petroleum products.
The Bureau of Mines has a well-worked out program on coal, which it has been carrying out for many years.
This program includes: (1) Improved mining practices, to reduce costs and loss of life and health; (2) improved coal preparation techniques, to reduce ash content and to make raw coal more valuable to the producer, and to save money in haulage of nonusable products.
A reduction of 1 percent in ash content at the mines would save the freight bill on 6 million tons; (3) improved coal storage, to eliminate fires and make coal safer and cheaper for consumers; (4) studies of marginal coals to make possible their substitution for higher grade coals; (5) studies of coal combustion, including coal in powdered form to allow for more efficient and more economical use; (6) conversion of various types of coal and oil shale into petroleum products at the lowest possible cost; (7) studies of anticorrosion methods and feed-watering conditions to protect boilers using coal with corrosive elements; (8) studies of uses of the fine size of anthracite coal as a substitute for a portion of the low-volatile bituminous coal used in coke-oven charges; and (9) studies of the carbonizing properties of new coals for the benefit of coke-oven operators.
In addition, the Bureau of Mines believes that: (1) Further research is needed in the development of methods of treatment of high-sulfur coals that will either remove the sulfur or convert it into such form in the coke that it will not appear in the pig iron; (2) further research is also needed on the complete gasification of sub-bituminous coals and lignite; and (3) the possibility of using gas produced directly from coal still in the ground by a Russian process justifies some research.
The product might be used for the production of energy or for synthesis of liquid fuels and other organic materials.
The bituminous coal industry had a large over-capacity during the depression years of the 1930's, which forced prices down and produced losses in large sections of it.
For several years plans for minimum price control were developed, and such controls became effective in 1940.
They were administered by the Bituminous Coal Division of the Department.
They lasted through 1941 and then war requirements made maximum rather than minimum price control a national policy.
Distribution of scarce coal became essential, and this was administered by the Solid Fuels Administration of this Department.
The post-war situation has been very favorable to the industry to date, and no strong demand for minimum prices is expected unless a severe depression is encountered.
The new high level of industrial activity in the Nation has narrowed the gap between capacity and requirements considerably, and there is no large overburden of idle capacity hanging over the price situation.
The mineral agencies of the Department are aware that competition between oil and coal can be expected in the near future.
However, they believe that since it would be uneconomic for the petroleum industry to produce fuel oils as such, but only as byproducts of gasoline and then only at a minimum rate, the relative amount of such competition may decrease, and may be of less importance in the industrial fields in the future.
In certain markets it may occasionally be a disruptive influence for the coal industry, but not on a national scale.
Natural gas, however, may affect coal markets considerably until the processes have been developed which make its conversion into gasoline more profitable, or until it appears to be approaching exhaustion.
In case coal is also called on to supply some of the petroleum requirements, losses to natural gas will be made up very rapidly, although possibly by other parts of the coal industry than those suffering the direct impact of natural gas.
In 1920 the Nation had a hydroelectric power production of 15.95 billion kilowatt-hours, in 1940 it was 47.74 billion, and in 1945 it had reached 79.97 billion.
It went down from 36.8 percent of the total national utility production in 1920 to 32.9 percent in 1940, and went up to 36 percent in 1945.
The Department of the Interior and the Tennessee Valley Authority are the major Federal public power producers and marketing agencies.
The latter increased its system power, which includes steam plants, by 7.9 billion kilowatt-hours between fiscal years 1940 and 1945.
Interior increased its system energy, which is all hydro, from 3,306 million to 17,819 million kilowatt-hours in the same period.
This includes energy produced at Boulder Dam, which is not marketed by the Department and energy at Army dams which is not produced by the Department but is marketed by it.
The Interior power agencies are located largely in the Western States.
The Bureau of Reclamation has power plants in many of these States, from which it markets energy.
The Bonneville Power Administration, which markets the energy produced by the Columbia River system, from dams built by Army Engineers and the Bureau of Reclamation, operates in Washington, Oregon, Idaho, and Montana.
The Southwestern Power Administration, with headquarters in Tulsa, Okla., will market energy from the Arkansas-White-Red River systems in parts of Arkansas, Oklahoma, Texas, and parts of Louisiana, Missouri, and Kansas.
In addition, Congress has directed the Secretary of the Interior to market the power from dams built by the Corps of Engineers.
The major dams that have been authorized for construction by the Army Engineers lie in the area stretching in a crescent from Kentucky and Virginia down through the Carolinas, Georgia, and Alabama.
It will also market energy from the huge Davis Dam power plant now being constructed by the Bureau of Reclamation on the Colorado River and from the Mountain Home, Hungry Horse, and other authorized projects of the Bureau.
A rough estimate of the possible growth in the hydro system under the management of Interior can be made for the next 15 years, on the basis of only present authorizations by the Congress.
If the fuel used in place of this hydropower were oil, the saving would have ranged from 8.6 million barrels in 1940 to 39.1 million in 1946, and will be in the neighborhood of 145.2 million barrels in 1960, estimating 380 kilowatt-hours per barrel.
The Government's investment in the power portions of the dams, and in the transmission lines and substations was approximately 428.5 million dollars in 1946.
The waterpower resources of the Nation were among the few that were not depleted by the war; instead their utilization was increased.
They helped to win it and they remain after the war as major assets of the regions and the Nation.
A slight postwar decline in power use was expected, but it now appears that this will be temporary.
In 1946, partly due to the return to Shasta Dam of the generators which had been installed in Coulee during the war, the Pacific Northwest was so short of power that every oil-burning reserve plant was operating, and only a small fraction of the normal reserves was available in case of trouble.
The continued demand for aluminum for peacetime uses, including housing, is largely responsible for this shortage.
When electric appliances are again available it is expected that the demand will increase far above the prewar rate.
The great power programs of the Federal Government are expected to add within 20 years, 3.7 million kilowatts of capacity to the Colorado River area, 7.5 million to the Columbia, 1.8 million to the Missouri, 1.4 million to the Arkansas-White-Red area, 1.7 million to California and 4.7 million to the Southeast, a total of about 20.8 million kilowatts.
This addition represents twice as much hydroelectric capacity as the whole Nation had in 1936.
There are five major problems which have to be considered with a program of this size, and of this potential significance to the Nation.
The first deals with the basic usefulness of low-cost public power in stimulating the regions where the power is located to new industrial growth.
As it happens, almost all of Interior's programs are in areas which need and want a considerable amount of new industry.
That includes the Pacific Northwest, the Missouri, the Southwest, and the Southeast.
To create new industrial developments, particularly in the areas where agriculture and industry are out of balance and population and markets are still small, requires a very low rate for energy.
Not all of the rivers are miracles like the Columbia which has a tremendous volume of water all the year round and maintains a heavy run-off in the summer months.
Many of them are flashy and irregular, producing little firm energy.
To secure their full benefits for the region and to prevent waste of resources in the streams the Department has found it necessary to plan to have steam plants tied in with the hydroplants.
This is true of the Arkansas-White-Red River systems, and of the Sacramento River in California—where most of the river has been dedicated to the use of navigation, salinity repulsion and irrigation, and some of the Shasta Reservoir to flood control storage space—with the result that but little firm water is available to improve the quality and value of the hydroenergy.
Similarly, the rivers of the Southeast must be supplemented by steam plants to produce large quantities of firm power.
While the Congress has appropriated funds for a considerable number of such firming steam plants in the Tennessee Valley, none has been built as yet for the Interior systems.
The second problem, of increasing the value of the energy to the region through steam plants, is intimately connected with the first problem, of getting low-cost power out of the rivers.
The first problem has increased in difficulty because of the rise in price levels.
Dams may now cost from 50 to 80 percent more to construct than they did in 1940.
If such dams were to be constructed as emergency public works projects, in times of depression and of low prices, as Bonneville, Coulee, and most of the Tennessee Valley dams were constructed, there would be no cost problem.
However, most of them have flood control and navigation functions which cannot be postponed indefinitely.
In addition they have power functions, and the growing power demands of the regions call for more sources of power, promptly.
If these additional necessary power plants are built by the utilities because of postponement of hydro projects, the utilities will suffer when the lower-cost hydroplants are finally built, or rather, if they are built before the steam plant capacity has been absorbed.
If on the other hand, the hydroplants are built regardless of cost, because of the need, the benefits of lower cost power for the region are likely to evaporate, in case there is an overall lowering of the price level.
In some cases low-cost upstream storage may improve the situation.
The third problem is that of efficient timing, construction and management of multiple-purpose projects.
It is the job of squeezing every drop of moisture and every ounce of energy out of the rivers.
The concept of use for all purposes is a basic one in our conservation policy.
Untamed rivers have been a savage destructive force.
They have caused large damages to property.
They have taken many lives.
They have washed away precious topsoil.
Every year 600 million tons of topsoil still find their way into the Gulf of Mexico.
In the West flood waters rush past dry land that needs only water to make it prosperous.
Development of a river as a unit means that instead of considering only flood control, or navigation or irrigation or power, an attempt is made to get the greatest amount of all of them that is possible by combination.
In addition, fish life has to be protected by regular run-offs in the spawning season and by fishladders around dams.
In some rivers enough water has to be provided to push down the incoming tides and save land from being permeated by salt water.
In most rivers, water for municipal and mining and industrial uses has to be made available.
There are also pollution problems, and recreation facilities to be considered.
State interests in the water have to be protected.
A series of studies are now being made of major river basins looking towards their proper development in order that each may yield the ultimate benefits of which it is capable.
Reaching the correct answer to the various problems presented is difficult and complex because of the number of Federal agencies and State bodies involved.
The planning for flood control and navigation is under the Corps of Engineers.
The planning for irrigation and part of the power is under the Bureau of Reclamation.
The study of the power markets and the authority to recommend power installations in War Department dams is under the Federal Power Commission.
The Department of the Interior which has the responsibility of marketing the power is not in a position to control the many factors which are involved in its cost.
A recognition of some of these difficulties has brought about a working agreement and the formation of what is known as the Federal Inter-Agency River Basin Committee, consisting of representatives of the Army Engineers, the Department of Agriculture, the Federal Power Commission, and the Department of the Interior.
This has formed the basis for a better coordination of the programs of the affected agencies and closer integration of policies.
It is a very large field and the work is by no means complete.
Much remains to be done before the maximum benefits from fully developed river basins can be realized.
On the Columbia a magnificent combination was made some years ago where Coulee Dam adjoins a million acres of dry land.
Huge quantities of water, about 4 million acre feet, will be pumped up to serve that land, and will flow through costly reservoirs, canals, and ditches.
The original nonunit river development plan was for a low dam for irrigation purposes only.
The irrigators would have had to pay the cost of the dam and of all the irrigation works themselves, or about $630 per acre.
The plan actually adopted was for a high dam which will have a capacity of over 2 million kilowatts of power, and will pay $222 per acre for the irrigators, who will themselves only have to pay an average of $85 per acre.
At the same time the high dam backs up such a large lake of water (9.5 million acre-feet) that it will firm up energy for all the future dams that will be built in the course of time on the river below Coulee.
These, in turn, as they come into being, will be in a position to pay for the storage value to them of the Coulee Reservoir.
Columbia energy may be responsible for another type of direct conservation effort.
At present the total energy utilized for all purposes in the Pacific Northwest is split 12 percent hydroelectric energy, 33 percent oil, 21 percent coal, 34 percent wood.
The increase in hydroproduction saves oil.
Yet wood is one of the most valuable resources of the area.
It has been increasing in price.
Through the development of wood waste for chemicals, instead of using it to produce steam in the pulp mills, industries are being added to the area.
The Bonneville Power Administration, which markets the power of the Columbia River system, consequently plans to conserve this raw material by sending energy to the pulp mills (except in low-water years) at a rate in the neighborhood of 11/2 mills per kilowatt-hour.
In addition to that, it expects in time to offer a relatively low rate for home heating which should also save wood waste.
That home-heating rate in turn will be made possible by, and will make possible, a low-summer rate for sprinkler irrigation which will be of major advantage to vegetable and fruit growers in the area.
A fourth major problem is the relation of new Federal power developments to private utilities operating in the area.
They usually take the position that they should be the sole or major distributors of the energy, and propose to take their lines right up to the Federal dams.
This would tend to restrict the sale of Federal power to these distributors.
On every occasion that the problem has been presented to the Congress in legislative form it has decided that preference in use (not in rates) should go to public bodies such as municipalities and cooperatives, and since these could not economically construct high tension lines to the dam, the public marketing agency should be authorized to build such lines to the market, and also to interconnect various hydroprojects with its own lines in order to get the fullest value out of the combination.
In 1944 in the Flood Control Act of that year, the Congress designated Interior as the marketing agency for all energy at reservoir projects constructed by the Army Engineers, and wrote into this act the preference for public bodies.
The Department of the Interior has taken the position that the various acts of Congress affecting public power lay upon it an obligation to get low-cost energy to the whole region, with preferences to public bodies.
It sees equality of access to the power, as represented by public high-tension lines, as a necessary part of this obligation.
The Department is interested in wholesale and very large individual industrial use, and not in general distribution.
It sees no departmental conflict with the private utilities in the distribution field.
The public power dams and lines are paid off in 50 to 60 years with interest ranging from 2.5 to 3 percent.
The power portions of the structures are then entirely debt free, and in good operating condition.
A fifth problem of importance lies in the relationship which power consumers have to water users.
For the most part, the power brought in on western rivers has been of such a distinct advantage to the power users that they could make a contribution in the form of aid to water users and still have a very considerable power benefit.
The notable example is at Coulee Dam where the power users will pay an extra one-twenty-fifth of a cent per kilowatt-hour and thereby make possible the development of a million acres of land and a number of communities that would not otherwise have been possible.
However, there are few dams as large and economical as Coulee, and the rising price level will make it harder for consumers of higher cost power to contribute as heavily ($228,000,000) as Coulee contributes to irrigation.
A complicating factor in the situation is that while construction costs are being incurred at high price levels, there is no certainty about agricultural prices, and consequently about the ability of the water users to repay a certain portion of the capital costs, and yet the water users have to accept their portion of the obligation before the projects are undertaken.
A forward step in the Flood Control Act of 1944 makes it possible for low-cost units of the Missouri Basin project to help carry the highcost units in a pooling operation.
This gives every irrigating farmer who lives in the arid part of the basin an equal opportunity to gain advantage from the power drops in the river, regardless of the fact that he may happen to live many hundreds of miles away from the steepest, and most valuable power heads.
Similar pooling arrangements for the Colorado and Columbia Basins should be made.
The much discussed relationship of hydroelectric energy to other energy sources, does not yet rise to the heights of a major problem.
In the West where most of the undeveloped water resources are located, the oil saving which they make is obviously desirable from a conservation viewpoint.
They rarely affect coal.
In the Arkansas-Oklahoma area they are on the edge of the low-cost natural gas region.
The dams in that area are mainly flood control and navigation structures and probably would be built even if no power could have been produced as a byproduct and paying partner.
The shortage in capacity means that hydropower might take a part of the future market from natural gas rather than the present market.
A future hydroproduction of 4,808 million kilowatt-hours would require steam capacity consuming 80,590 million cubic feet of gas.
However, since gas has a very low employment rate, the result is not of major importance to the stability of the economic structure.
In the Missouri Basin most of the hydroenergy will have to find new markets for itself.
Some small part of it might replace old coalor oil-burning power plants.
It is too early to estimate accurately, but if this amounted to a fifth of the total, or about 1.2 billion kilowatt-hours, it would represent the equivalent of 780,000 tons of coal annually.
If the whole 6 billion kilowatt-hours on the Missouri were considered as impinging on the future coal market, the effect would be to eliminate 3,900,000 tons of coal.
That is still much less than 1 percent of the national coal production.
In the Southeast the proposed Army dams will not produce exceptionally low cost power.
Costs will range around 5 to 6 mills.
If as much as 4 billion kilowatt-hours are produced, and if all of it is to be considered as affecting future coal markets, a total of 2,600,000 tons of coal would be displaced.
A considerable part of hydro prospects in the Southeast are economically sound only for capacity power.
The only other major hydro possibility in the whole East is the St. Lawrence.
This would produce about 13.2 billion kilowatt-hours for use in both the United States and Canada.
It would be very low-cost energy.
If the whole production of the project were assumed, to cut into future coal markets which would not be the case, it would displace only 8,580,000 tons.
While the whole potential hydro competition for future coal markets, at its most extreme, could be estimated in the neighborhood of 15,500,000 tons, this still represents less than 3 percent of the expected coal production, moreover it should be emphasized that this estimate represents only a few years growth of expected coal production, that it would be only enough coal to produce a small quantity of oil, in case the coal industry is to be drawn on for oil production, and, finally, that increased use of hydroenergy has normally brought with it an increased use of coal for firming hydropower and for the added commercial and domestic use that accompanies industrial growth.
It might also be pointed out that in the 15 to 20 years during which these hydropower installations will be made, the steam electric utility industry, through its improved efficiency of use on any rate comparable with the past rate of 3 percent annually, will itself cut into future coal market expectations by over 30 million tons annually, or about twice as much as all the hydrodevelopments could effect under most extreme estimates.
Another 20 years may see an additional 20 million people among us, and these new people will need millions of new acres of cropland to feed them.
More land as well as better land, or more food imports, are going to be national "musts.
Putting water on the rich soil of arid Western States is one of the best ways to bring needed land into national use.
It puts a solid crop base underneath the cattle, mineral, and lumber economy of the Western States.
It has the additional advantage of bringing in land in the West which is growing in population, and which has generally imported a large part of its food needs.
At present there are about 21 million acres under irrigation.
The Bureau of Reclamation furnishes water to about 5 million of the total, the Office of Indian Affairs administers about 850,000.
The Bureau has another 5 million acres in prospect, the Indians another 750,000 acres.
Early irrigators found that water poured on the dry lands of the west brought forth rich crops.
Thus many pioneer irrigation systems were built hurriedly without the hydrologic studies that are a commonplace in irrigation development today so that in dry years the demand for water far outran the supply.
Nearly 10 million acres, principally on non-Federal systems, are farmed with insufficient irrigation water.
The Bureau plans a major resource rescue operation to bring supplementary water to these lands.
Possibly Congress will allow as much as 5 billion dollars to be invested through the Bureau of Reclamation in the course of the next 15 years.
Of this total, projects which will cost 2.5 billion dollars to complete have already been authorized.
Some of the investment will be in dams which perform flood control, navigation, and siltation functions or which produce power.
The reclamation and power features are paid back into the Treasury over a 50- to 60-year period.
A portion of the power revenues are usually set aside to help the irrigators pay off their obligations.
On the great Columbia Basin project in eastern Washington, where 1,000,000 acres will come into production in what is now a sagebrush desert, power from Coulee Dam will contribute 228 million dollars to the repayment of the capital costs, and the irrigators 87.5 million dollars.
The capacity of the Bureau's hydroplants was increased during the war from 1,160,000 to 2,250,000 kilowatts.
They saved 36.5 million barrels of fuel oil in 1945 alone when 14 billion kilowatts were generated in those plants.
The Coulee and Boulder plants produced enormous amounts of energy that went directly into weapons of war.
Like other agricultural areas, the reclamation lands suffered somewhat during the war from upset of crop balance, reduction of maintenance, shortages of fertilizer, omission of cover crops and heavier production of soil depleting crops.
Many of the areas were stopped in their development by war demands that took the steel and labor they needed for expansion or protection.
Those hundreds of thousands of acres are still suffering from deficient water, or from seepage, alkali deposition or salt intrusion, and will continue to depreciate in value until canals are built and water is delivered.
In spite of war-time troubles the settlers in Bureau projects produced during the war 13.6 million bushels of beans, 124.5 million of grains, 16.6 million of seeds, 373.4 million bushels of vegetables, and also 7.9 million tons of sugar beets, 12.6 million tons of alfalfa, 2.2 million tons of forage crops, 2.5 million tons of fruits and nuts as well as 670.5 million bales of cotton.
The alfalfa and forage crops alone were enough to produce 150 pounds of meat per man for an army of 4 million men for 4 years.
The process of bringing great new resources into being is not without its problems.
One of the major difficulties in securing all the possible benefits from a river basin is that two, three, or even four Federal agencies have been given jobs by the Congress that affect seriously any over-all basin development.
Water put on thirsty land, and power to help pay for the land development and yet be sold at rates low enough to stimulate high industrial and residential use, seem most important to the Department of the Interior.
The Fish and Wildlife Service wants a minimum of damage done to fish and fowl, and compensatory investment where the damage is unavoidable.
The Indians do not want their base lands flooded out by reservoirs without receiving equally good lands elsewhere.
Navigation and flood control are the major interests of the Army Engineers, but they also have plans to build purely power structures.
The Soil Conservation Service is interested in preventing erosion and consequent siltation in the reservoirs.
The Federal Power Commission advises the Army Engineers on power structures and reviews rates on energy production at their dams.
In the Columbia Basin there is a separate power marketing agency, the Bonneville Power Administration; in the Colorado Basin, the city of Los Angeles and the Arizona Power Authority are interested in marketing large portions of the output.
In programs of such magnitude conflicts must inevitably occur.
Major differences between Federal Agencies, between States, between local groups, have developed as expected in all of the major river basins.
Certain of these differences such as those on the Colorado River involve the rights of soverign States and can only be resolved by inter-state treaties.
A compact commission headed by former Commissioner of Reclamation Harry Bashore is at work preparing an inter-State allocation of the waters of the upper basin.
Conflict over construction of Foster Creek Dam on the Columbia was resolved by the Congress.
Fishing interests have sought postponement of Umatilla, a major navigation and power dam, and of five minor navigation dams on the Lower Snake, pending consideration of the possibility of reorienting salmon runs into the lower tributaries of the coastwise rivers.
Studies of pollution, location of other prospective dams on those streams, and completion of biological investigations, are involved in making this choice.
Repayment of irrigation costs in the semihumid Missouri Basin is a major problem.
In the Central Valley of California the basic tenet of Reclamation law that water shall only be furnished to family-sized farms is being vigorously questioned by proponents of the large farm pattern.
These conflicts are not irreconcilable.
Machinery for their solution by democratic processes providing for the participation of various Federal agencies and States in the formulation and development of comprehensive basin plans has been set up under the Flood Control Act of 1944.
Coordination of State and Federal planning is secured through the operations of the Federal Inter-Agency River Basin Committee comprising the Departments of the Interior, Agriculture, and War, the Federal Power Commission, and the Governors of the States affected in each case.
Within the Department of the Interior there exists the Missouri Basin Field Committee and the Water Resources Committee to adjust and evaluate the interests of the agencies involved.
The Columbia Basin Inter-Agency Committee is working at solution of the manifold problems involved in that great valley development.
This technique is an adventure in cooperation.
All the conflicting voices are heard.
All the points of view of every affected interest are reflected in the reports that go to the Congress.
Where the differences are so great that they cannot successfully be compromised, the final decision is rendered by the elected representatives of the people.
It has been operating now for a little more than 2 years, not long enough to demonstrate its full potentialities in river basin development.
Another major problem is that of providing the benefits to each area which can come from relatively low power charges.
Congressional legislative policy has been in favor of public transmission lines to carry energy from dams to municipalities, electrical cooperatives and other public agencies, instead of blocking up the energy at the dams.
However, in the individual cases of the Arkansas Valley and the Central Valley of California funds for these lines have been difficult to secure.
Interconnections with adjoining basins may be possible in time, now that long distance transmission is becoming more feasible.
The problem of stimulating regions industrially through low-cost power is particularly urgent on rivers such as the Arkansas, Red and White, where the flow is irregular and flashy, and considerable reservoir storage has to be left empty for flood control, and on the Sacramento where prior commitments have been made to let down water for navigation, salinity control, irrigation, and fish protection, and little remains in reserve for power alone.
In these areas the Department believes that steam plants are necessary to firm up the hydro energy in order to secure the major advantages of the river to the people of the region.
Part of this problem lies in the fact that our basic irrigation pattern is changing.
We are planning to pump uphill for irrigation use a large part of the Columbia, the Sacramento, the Missouri and possibly the Colorado.
Power now appears in its true role as the working partner of irrigation.
Great blocks of energy are put to work on the Reclamation project pumping water, which could otherwise produce large commercial revenues.
A problem that still lies undiscussed in the background of Federal loans for great multiple purpose reclamation projects is the extent to which such an investment should be used to produce in part certain crops which are in peacetime subsidized in one form or another.
Over the next few decades the water put on land in the West and guided through turbines ought to put a new face on all of our great western river basins, the Arkansas, the Colorado, the Columbia, the Missouri, and many lesser streams.
It will make our farms more liveable and more profitable.
It will hold people in States that have been losing population.
It will feed all of us better.
The job of building great dams itself stirs the imagination of man.
The job of getting the most out of the rivers for the people should do so, too.
One of the main objectives of the Bureau of Reclamation is closeknit interdevelopment of town and country, of small business, small industry, and farms.
This establishes an area in which the greatest possible number of people may enjoy a good livelihood.
This is the primary aim of the acreage restriction of reclamation law, which is occasionally attacked.
Stated in simplest terms, this law limits to 160 acres or less the amount of land held in one ownership that can be supplied with irrigation water from a Bureau of Reclamation project.
Acreage restriction is basic to conservation of land resources.
By preventing consolidation of individual farms into huge holdings with attendant evils of tenancy, sharecropping, and monopolistic control, it furthers stable settlement, conservative treatment of the soil, and maximum utilization of land resources.
Rural and urban areas in the vicinity of reclamation projects receive mutual support.
The townspeople provide a ready market for farm products.
The independent farm owneroperators have greater purchasing power and require local enterprises to supply them more than an equivalent community of tenants or hired hands.
Extension of predevelopment work to all projects opening new land to cultivation is strongly urged.
Successful settlement of irrigated land requires production of salable crops the first year.
This is necessary to enable the settler to pay his living expenses, establish a home, and meet construction and operation and maintenance charges as they become due.
Hasty, inadequate, and improper preparation of the land for irrigation, however, results in irreparable damage to the individual farm and to the project as a whole.
The proper development of raw public land for irrigation frequently calls for heavy equipment that the farmer cannot afford to buy.
The Bureau of Reclamation has been authorized to undertake reimbursable predevelopment of some public land homesteads.
This includes rough clearing and leveling, roughing-in of farm distribution systems, and protection against water and wind erosion.
Work that the settler can satisfactorily perform with ordinary farm equipment is not included in this program.
Orderly, planned development of the land resources and conservation of the limited water supply is facilitated by initial preparation.
The great programs of the Bureau of Reclamation include bringing 5,360,000 acres into cultivation or stability in the Columbia River Basin.
Of this 3,840,000 acres are new land and 1,520,000 acres are land which will receive supplemental water.
The plans for the Missouri look to the transformation.
In the Colorado River Basin, after the States settle their uncertainties concerning water rights, the Bureau of Reclamation stands ready to aid in bringing in 1,533,960 acres of new land and of putting supplemental water on an additional 1,122,270 acres.
In the Central Valley of California, the Bureau's program will furnish water to 550,000 acres of new land and to 1,550,000 acres of land requiring supplemental water.
Much of our red meat eats off the Government.
One beef animal in every five and two sheep in every five get about 4 months of their feeding each year in the public domain, and in spite of the low quality of most of the range, get it for very little.
There are 145,000,000 acres of Federal range lands, and the beef animals pay an average of 20 cents and the sheep 4 cents a season.
The Grazing Service of this Department (which was amalgamated in July 1946 with the General Land Office into the Bureau of Land Management, and cut heavily in staff) administered 60 grazing districts.
In addition to the Federal land it covered 119 million acres of State and private lands.
The total area was 264,000,000 acres.
That is an area greater than Colorado, Wyoming, and Montana combined.
It is largely in the arid part of the West.
Meat consumption has gone up during the war.
With over 120 pounds for each person we took our place alongside the Australians and New Zealanders as the greatest meat eaters in history.
There is going to be continued public demand to keep that rate.
Every million people added to our population wants to eat the equivalent of 150,000 steers, and that means another 12,000,000 acres put into the range-alfalfa-cornfeed lot complex.
Our population may go up by 20 million persons in the next 20 years before it levels off, and the necessary 240,000,000 additional acres for meat are not going to be easy to find.
Already many of our western irrigation projects are becoming winter-feed growing centers for the surrounding dry-land range.
Submarginal eastern and southern land can and will be put into pasture.
However, the great bulk of the needed feed will have to come from improvement of the quality of the western range.
But the public range does not take care of itself.
It can be, and has been overcrowded and overgrazed until it can no longer carry a normal load.
The overgrazing led to erosion.
During the past war years, the range came through in pretty good shape.
It was not ploughed up in important parts as it was during the first World War.
Not much was done to prevent continued erosion, but no new bases for ruin were laid.
The Federal range may now be considered to be not more than 50 percent efficient for its purposes.
The range needs seeding with grasses adapted to each area and climate.
Instead of 10 acres of sagebrush land feeding one cow one month we need planted forage where two acres of grass will do exactly the work of 10 acres of sagebrush.
It needs more waterholes, trails and fences, although already fences have been put up long enough to cross the continent twice, and trails enough to cross it about four times.
Some two million acres borrowed by the military services will have to be rehabilitated.
All the improvement work plus increased security of range led to better terms on cattle loans, and contributed to the stability of the industry.
The basic pattern of public range use in the Western States is individual ownership of lands producing forage for winter use and open public domain range in the grazing districts and national forests for the remainder of the year although several million livestock, mostly sheep, use the semidesert Federal ranges in winter.
There is complete interdependence, except in the Southwest, where much of the range is available all vear round and became part of the individually owned base properties.
The Taylor Grazing Act of 1934 recognized this interdependence, and gave preference in the public range to individuals or companies already owning base lands nearby.
But there was more base property than range, so priorities of use were applied, limited by the amount of livestock which had been run on the range.
Those with base properties but without priority came next.
There has been relatively little land available for the second group.
Newcomers into the livestock industry have to buy their way in through the acquisition of base properties.
The industry is not entirely in a few large hands.
Over three-fourths of the number of grazing permits are in the hands of men with less than 200 animal units, which is about the economic bottom limit for a herd.
They average 55 units.
But the remaining 25 percent of the users graze three-quarters of the units and average 557 units.
The basic legislation does not give preference of any type to the small ranch owner or cattle homesteader.
There is no limit to the amount of range that can be leased to an individual or company which has sufficient base lands even if it acquires these base lands from others.
The United States Forest Service has developed an administrative system on the grazing lands in the national forests which gives some preference to small ranchers, but no great permanent increase in the number of small permit holders has resulted.
This may well be due to the fact that 200 animal units constitute an economic bottom limit, and small holders cannot acquire the additional basic land and consequently the range permits for such a number.
The housekeeping job to be done on the range includes not only seeding and forage increase, water holes, fence and trails, but protection against range fires.
These still burn vast areas.
Usually the reseeding process should follow such fires.
After fires the grass or seeds present usually grow with vigor, but there is seldom sufficient of either, or of the proper kind, to make up the loss.
Rodent control and control of predatory animals are also part of the job.
One of the major public problems at present is the future of about 200 million acres of public domain.
Much of this land can be a valuable national resource if it is well-administered, brought into condition, and kept that way.
The costs of doing that are repaid annually in profits to livestock raisers.
The fees collected for use of the land have been low.
The Department, with years of land-management experience, believes that there is a suitable use and a public interest in all forms of land.
It is convinced that sound and forward-looking national policy demands that these lands be administered as a whole, that they be administered well, and that the Federal Government should have responsibility for what is basically an interstate task.
In addition to 145 million acres of lands in Federal grazing districts and 56 million acres of Indian land, this Department supervise's about 83 million acres of forest, mineral bearing, and other unclassified land in the continental United States, and another 344 million acres in Alaska.
In the main, this is the last remaining part of the "public domain," the land which nobody wanted very much, the land without people.
This remnant on the continent is a tiny fraction of the old public domain of 1.4 billion acres.
It has 20 million acres of forests, but does not include the 170 million acres of national forests which are under the supervision of the United States Forest Service in the Department of Agriculture.
It does include about 14 million acres of national parks and 6 to 7 million acres of wildlife refuges and game ranges.
Much of this remnant of 83 million acres (the size of New Mexico) has never been surveyed in detail.
Much of it has never been classified as to its possible use.
The basic problem here is: What is the best use for it?
Its optimum use for the Nation is not known.
By and large the Government has given parts of it away whenever anybody wanted it, and has also given away the mineral rights to large portions of it.
During the war the military services found about 32 million acres in the United States and Alaska useful for their purposes.
The Department's program is first, to get the best of all this land classified so that areas appropriate for grazing can be used for grazing, either adding potential forest lands to present forests or to sustained yield units, any possible overlooked agricultural land can be segregated out for pioneering soil breakers, and any particularly good recreational opportunities can be more fully appraised.
This land classification job might cost as much as $7,000,000 in the United States.
The same job, which has been started in Alaska, should be speeded up if veterans and other prospective settlers are to be spared the disappointment of seeking to establish homes on lands unsuited for this purpose.
The second part of the Department's program is to get the mineral bearing parts of this land (and of the much larger grazing area) segregated out, and a conservation policy worked out that will put the mineral resources to use as the Nation needs them.
Third, the forest woodlands are to be used to produce their fair share of the lumber and other wood needs of the Nation, but are not to be sacrificed through overcutting.
These Interior lands with about 31 million acres of woodland and 16 million acres of Indian-owned lands produced about one billion board-feet in 1945.
Sustained yield management is to be maintained or established.
Cooperative agreements to cover adjacent or intermingled private forest lands are to be pushed in the interests of a stable and nonmigratory lumber and wood industry.
Forest surveys and inventories are to be continued until all the forest land has been covered.
Restudy of the “in lieu" tax payments to States is to be undertaken.
Fire, disease, and insect protection is to be continued and expanded.
The first parts of this program are revenue producing ($3,400,000 in 1946) and far more than cover the cost of forestry management.
The second part costs money ($1,200,000 in 1946) which produces revenues in future years by preventing losses.
Fourth, this area, along with the wide grazing lands, is to be protected from further erosion where that is economically possible and desirable.
In addition to check dams and other preventive methods, a great amount of reseeding has to be done.
This can be speeded up, and also be done most economically by plane.
We have gone back to the birds.
Seed for trees and grasses is wrapped in pellets of fertilizer with a little poison to prevent its destruction by insects, and dropped where it is needed.
The force of the drop gets the pellet on the surface, where it waits there until rain activates it.
The cost of seeding by this method is about $2 per acre, compared to $4 for seeding with ordinary farm machinery.
Some years will be needed to test the advantage of this pellet method on range lands.
This land, plus the grazing land, plus the Indian lands, totals 282 million acres which are under the Department of the Interior.
They do not include lands in Alaska.
More than 2 acres in 10 (60 million) are in critical erosion condition.
Three other acres out of every ten need treatment to restore them to maximum productivity.
Conservation work has started on 11 million acres and is planned for another 49 million.
But at the rate we are going, we can never expect to catch up with the job.
In 1946, only 1.2 million acres were being treated.
Meanwhile 73 million acres were getting progressively worse.
The cost of treatment is about $1.50 per acre, and an investment of $90,000,000 is needed for the worst 60 million acres and another $110,000,000 for the rest.
This work through decreased siltation, ought to save the value of many of the hundreds of millions of dollars invested, and to be invested, in storage reservoirs and power plants.
The final part of the Department's land program deals with getting the underlving mineral resources into use in a manner that will lead to their aiding the national economy.
The goal is public benefit through individual development.
At present the situation is that anybody can file a mining claim, on public lands, and through a certain amount of work on it, can secure full rights to it.
Under the terms of the mineral leasing act, as amended, the Department is authorized to lease for development lands containing oil, gas, oil shale, coal, potash, sodium, sulphur and phosphate.
The terms and manner of lease vary.
Generally where the lands are not actually known to contain these minerals, the one who applies for a lease first, secures it.
Where the lands are known to contain oil and gas and other minerals, the leases are sold at auction to the highest bidder.
Under this plan thousands of acres are now subject to lease for oil and gas, coal and other minerals, and a substantial revenue is returned to the Government through rovalties and bonuses (where lands are sold to the highest bidder).
The revenues, although deposited in the Federal Treasury, are distributed, 371/2 percent to the States, and 52½2 percent to the reclamation fund and the remainder is retained in the general fund.
In order to permit exploration by governmental agencies or to reserve deposits for future development, the Department, on occasion, has recommended the withdrawal of certain areas.
Because of the intense national interest and security which is involved in the case of radio active materials which are fissionable, the Department has suggested their total reservation in the Government through legislation.
The Department's general policy with regard to withdrawing lands and minerals has undergone revision in procedure, and at the end of the fiscal year was being shaped toward a policy (announced on July 24, 1946, by Department Order No. 2232), calling for careful consideration prior to the withdrawal of public lands, an opportunity for protest by the individuals or public agencies which may be affected, and public hearing in appropriate cases.
A national inventory and cost tagging of the mineral resources on the public domain, referred to in the metals section of this introduction, is, of course, part of the land program.
The Department and the mineral industry have both been perplexed by the effect that the changing conservation technology of both oil and mineral extraction is having on the opening of the remaining public domain.
The tradition is against monopolization of the public domain, and that tradition is expressed in laws limiting, sometimes ineffectively, the amount of public domain that can be put into any one hand.
Yet good modern conservation practice requires that an oil pool be managed as a unit.
Further, the cost of discovering the remaining oil resources is so great, and the geological and geophysical work so complex, that only the larger companies can afford it.
They naturally want to protect any discoveries which they may make by securing large land holdings in the area.
From the conservation viewpoint the operation of small mineral or coal holdings also creates a situation which may not always be in the national interest.
The company or individual which is not well-financed may mine the outcroppings of the coal or mineral deposits and leave the thinner and deeper resources untouched, and perhaps flooded.
Under these circumstances, it is difficult for the smaller operators to convert their legal equality of access to the public domain into actual economic equality.
The management of all the minerals in all the Federal lands should be in the experienced mineral agencies in Interior, rather than in several separate Federal Departments.
Certain changes in the mineral leasing laws should be considered by the Congress.
In Utah and Colorado are large deposits of native bituminous and asphalt-impregnated rock which are now unavailable for exploitation under the mining laws and under the mineral leasing laws.
They should be made available, by grouping them with the oil shale provisions of the leasing laws, and may well supply badly needed petroleum resources.
The limitation on coal leases of 5,120 acres in any one State should be reconsidered by the Congress.
Much of the work on the public domain is under heavy cover, in relatively inaccessible areas, and will inevitably involve high mining costs.
Larger acreage will certainly be needed to induce development, and development may be essential whenever we begin pulling on our coal as a source of liquid oil.
Additional prospecting for potash is needed.
Present regulations which control the acreage available for prospecting should be reviewed so as to make available a larger area for prospecting without necessarily increasing the acreage available for lease.
In the summer of 1946 the Congress increased the acreage which may be held under lease for oil and gas from 7,680 to 15,360 acres.
Lessees were permitted to hold, without acreage charge, options for 100,000 acres in each State for geophysical and geologic exploration.
Unitization of oil and gas areas is to be encouraged.
Rentals are to be maintained to reduce the speculative element, but during production a royalty payment is substituted.
The Department's conviction that metallic minerals on the public domain as well as oil, coal, and potash should be leased rather than be taken over in fee simple has for some years met the opposition of the mining industry.
The mineral and land agencies of the Department believe that the public domain is public property and that the national mineral situation is serious enough to demand that some supervision be exercised over the timing of mineral production.
They also believe that some rovalty should be paid into the public treasury on wealth located on and produced from the public domain.
The industry generally believes that the hazards of prospecting and costs of extraction are already sufficiently high, and that the addition of payments on production is one straw too many, and holds back development.
Some plan that would allow a basic net income after all costs and taxes and would provide for graduated royalties thereafter, might make the leasing proposal for minerals more acceptable to those small operators who would settle for a reasonable income instead of a killing.
These five parts make up a sound program for this part of the land.
Most of them call for some national investment in order to secure later revenue or to prevent present and later damage, or both.
They are based on the experience that the days of getting something for nothing out of the public domain are over.
Fires and erosion have to be prevented if we are going to have trees, sage, and water without floods.
A sound rehabilitation program for all the Interior lands in the continental United States, including those without people, would run in the neighborhood of $300,000,000.
For 30 years it has been the job of the National Park Service to provide for enjoyment of the national parks and monuments and, while doing so, to safeguard "the scenery, the natural and historic objects and the wildlife therein" for the enjoyment of future generations.
The estate it manages contains some 20,500,000 acres of land and water.
Before the war, in the travel year 1941, the National Park System had a record attendance of more than 21,000,000, and that record is certain to be surpassed in this first postwar year.
Extension of the practice of paid vacations for industrial workers may be expected to add steadily to the number of those who enjoy that part of our natural and historic heritage that is being maintained for them and for future generations.
It is not always easy to defend the park system from invasion by those who wish to profit from the resources it contains.
As the remaining merchantable forests dwindle outside, the loggers cast about for excuses to open up the forests in the parks and convert them into saw logs.
The stockmen rest envious eyes on the forage of the parks and monuments, while the grazing that survives in them from the days before they were established approaches—but very slowly—the goal of ultimate elimination.
The Department and the Park Service alike are concerned over the possibility of unnecessary and unjustified encroachment upon and damage to park areas by some of the many Federal water control projects now in the planning stages.
Within many of our parks there are numerous tracts of privately owned land and it is these private lands, or lands which belong to the States, which offer one of the most serious impediments, not only to adequate conservation measures, but to sound administration and development.
The past year has been replete with instances of the menace inherent in such mixed ownership.
A proposed sale of Southern Pacific Railway lands in Joshua Tree National Monument would have resulted in disaster to one of the finest portions of the monument; and it is to the credit of the railroad's board of directors that their lands have been withdrawn from sale so that exchanges, or other means of acquiring them, may be undertaken.
One hundred thousand feet of beautiful pine timber was cut on private lands in Glacier National Park; and there is the constant threat of the sale of a large block of State-owned timber in the same park, though the State authorities are sincerely anxious to work out some means of assuring its preservation.
A request for $350,000 to be expended on the purchase of some of the most needed of these non-Federal lands was made to the Bureau of the Budget and was approved by the President, but neither the House of Representatives nor the Senate approved it.
Opposition to further Federal land acquisition, with the consequent loss of taxes to local units of government, was the principal reason.
It demonstrated again the need of legislation that would permit the apportionment of a part of the earnings of the National Park System to the States for distribution to the counties in which the areas are situated.
The necessity of a continuing program, on an adequate scale, of acquiring these inholdings is beyond dispute.
The longer it is delayed, the more expensive it will be and the more valuable resources will be irrevocably lost.
A cardinal principle in the National Park Service's planning for public use and enjoyment is that developments in the parks and monuments shall be limited to those needed to accommodate the public and to permit visitors to obtain the fullest measure of enjoyment of those features that give distinction to the areas.
A corollary is that these developments shall intrude as little as possible upon the natural scene, particularly if it be one of extraordinary quality.
Admittedly, certain developments now to be found in the park system violate these principles; most of them date back in their beginnings to the period before the creation of the Service.
However, they represent an investment still valuable in meeting the requirements of the public; consequently, their ultimate elimination, and replacement in more suitable locations, is bound to be a slow process, though the objective is one to be kept constantly in mind.
Just as it is not always easy to defend the parks against invasion, so it is not always simple to make them serve adequately the purposes for which they were etablished.
During the war, equipment and facilities, for Government and concessioner alike, deteriorated due to lack of funds and manpower.
With the resumption of peace-time operations, eating, sleeping and other facilities have been overcrowded.
With only a few exceptions, these facilities are provided by concessioners who operate under contract with the Government and, for the system as a whole, they are far from sufficient.
Additional hotels, lodges, cabins and eating places must be provided to care for all but the extreme peak loads, and of kinds that will enable those of moderate means to enjoy their great possessions, though it will doubtless require the devotion of more space to such developments.
The alternative is a degree of crowding of existing facilities, already frequent in several of the major parks, that seriously impairs their capacity to provide enjoyment.
Convinced that it would make possible an improvement in service to the public, it is the approved departmental policy to work toward Government ownership of all facilities in the parks, and the operation of them for use by visitors through contracts with nonprofit distributing corporations or with private enterprises for periods of reasonable length, with careful regulation and periodic review of these contracts to determine that they are in the interest of the Government and the public, and are fair to the concessioners.
It should be obvious that the concessions exist for the benefit of the parks, and not the parks for the benefit of the concessions.
By this is meant that the provision of accommodations, eating places, transportation and other public services is a means to an end.
The concessioners are in the parks for the sole purpose of providing service to the public and not because the parks are fruitful places in which to do business.
The services are limited to those which the visitor has a right to expect in a national park.
The concessioners, under their contracts, are serving the people no less than the ranger forces, the naturalists, or anyone else, in fulfilling the purposes of the national parks.
The policies of development and management are the outgrowth of years of experience in protecting the park areas and making them permently available for human enjoyment in unspoiled condition.
All these, it is believed, have proved their soundness, and are generally accepted by the people who visit the parks as being in the public interest.
Not change in these policies, but provision of the means of making them more fully effective, is what is needed to make the parks more useful to the public.
The National Park Service well knows that to change the basic policies governing the national parks might provide within them a few more recreational areas.
However, such changes would lead to undue and unnecessary impairment of natural conditions in areas that were created to preserve outstanding remnants of North America's primeval wilderness for the enjoyment and inspiration of ourselves and future generations.
These would increasingly become centers for kinds of outdoor activity that are already being provided for elsewhere, or that can more appropriately be provided on lands of lesser caliber.
Another phase of park management that presents a difficult problem is that of winter use.
Mount Rainier, Olympic, Rocky Mountain, Glacier, Yellowstone, Sequoia, Yosemite, Lassen Volcanic, and others put on a wholly different appearance, and one certainly no less beautiful, with the coming of winter's snows.
If it is possible to do so without an expense out of proportion to the advantages to be gained, the public should be encouraged to visit and enjoy them in winter and to take advantage of the opportunities they offer for healthful enjoyment of the out of doors at a time of year when too many people spend too much time indoors.
However, during the winter months schools and colleges are in session and relatively few persons take their vacations then; consequently winter visitation tends to take the form of week-end peak loads, with comparatively few visitors during 5 days of the week.
It is easy to see what difficulties in the operation of public accommodations these facts involve.
Added to this is the heavy expense of keeping open the roads which lead to such places as Paradise Valley in Mount Rainier National Park.
Last winter most such roads had to remain closed because the Service simply did not have the funds to open them.
At Mount Rainier, a special supplementary appropriation made it possible, though under extremely difficult conditions, to open the road to Paradise.
At Yosemite, regular funds were barely sufficient for keeping open the road to the Badger Pass ski area.
How far the Government should go in subsidy of this important type of park use, is one of the problems worthy of much more study and analysis.
Imposing though attendance figures for the national park system may be, only a tiny fraction of the more than 140,000,000 Americans who own the parks have the time and the means of really knowing their parks well at first hand, or ever will.
Yet they exist for the enjoyment of the people.
Even those Americans whose opportunities for first-hand enjoyment of these extraordinary properties is limited, have reason to take pride in the fact that they possess them.
But if they are to provide the fullest possible measure of enjoyment, they must be taken to those who cannot get to them.
An obligation rests upon the Federal Government to take advantage of the exciting and effective techniques of color photography which have been developed during the past decade and to see to it that there are ample opportunities for every school child and every adult, if only through effective visual presentation, to enjoy the beauty of the parks and to grasp the significance of the historic and prehistoric places and objects that are safeguarded in the park system, through effective visual presentation.
That task is a challenge.
In its accomplishment, there are opportunities for many persons and many organizations to participate, and they should be made aware that they exist.But it is primarily a responsibility of the Government itself, which should be recognized and given the comparatively small financial support which is required if it is to be met in a satisfactory manner.
Perhaps the greatest untapped fishery resource in the world, and one which could be made available to American enterprise if it were fully explored, is the fish supply of the Central Pacific and particularly the tunas which, pound for pound, are the most valuable of sea fishes.
The tuna fishery of the Pacific coast from Washington on the north to the Galapagos Islands on the south has grown since 1915 into one of the great sea fisheries.
In the Western Pacific the Japanese tuna industry has shown comparable development.
Japan's attempt to explore and utilize the tuna resources of the mandated areas was effectively stopped by the war.
The extent of these resources in the Central Pacific has never been measured.
Hence their development presents a virgin field.
The plans for the rehabilitation of the fishing industry in the Philippines, including the exploration and assessment of offshore fishery resources, form an important link in this program.
If pending legislation in Congress for cooperative fishery investigations and development in the Territory of Hawaii is enacted, this crossroads of the Pacific will provide an additional field base and will serve as another link in the developing research program.
The final step will be the organization and conduct of tuna investigations in the eastern temperate Pacific and in the equatorial regions coordinating these initial efforts.
With the realization of these plans, which include the fuller utilization of the fishery resources fringing the Gulf of Alaska and in the Bering Sea, the food resources of the Nation will be expanded materially.
For the next 2 years, at least, efforts will be made to increase the salmon stocks in Alaskan waters by surveying the coastal spawning streams and by removing in several hundreds of them, obstacles or complete barriers to fish migration which prevent full utilization of otherwise suitable spawning areas.
Such barriers to migration as log jams, low falls, and other obstructions will be removed and, where economically feasible, fishways will be constructed, thus opening up miles of additional spawning area.
If the available spawning grounds can be increased by 10 percent and the salmon stocks increase proportionately, the expenditure of a few hundred thousand dollars now will add more than 5 million dollars to the commercial fisheries of the Territory.
Meanwhile, more scientific data are necessary by which to improve the accuracy of determining optimum catches and escapements, and to formulate regulations for achieving a proper balance between catch and escapement.
Of the counting weirs that are necessary in about 40 representative spawning streams in Alaska, funds are available for installing only 7.
Our law enforcement facilities must also be expanded in accomplishing a more effective management program.
Fast patrol boats and planes are badly needed to cover 10,000 miles of Alaska coast line.
The fishing industry was more or less dislocated by war-time conditions.
Owing to shortages of labor, equipment and materials, and to depressed catches of some species, the production of canned fishery products decreased from 1941 to 1945.
It has still not reached pre-war levels, and is insufficient to meet domestic demand.
At the same time, under the stimulus of high prices and the relative scarcity of other protein foods, the production of fresh and frozen fish increased, and the frozen fishery industry expanded considerably.
During the war period, the demand for these products was almost unlimited.
But this demand was transitory, for the war's end released to the public competing products like meat and imported frozen fish; so that by the summer of 1946, holdings of frozen fish in cold storage warehouses were higher than they had ever been in any previous summer.
Meanwhile, the production of fish meal and oil was depressed during the war in favor of canned goods, and as a result, supplies are far below current agricultural needs.
More serious than any of these effects, however, was a general decline in the quality of fishery products in many places where the demand was keen enough to result in relaxation of standards.
The consequence of this is that imported fish is frequently superior to that produced domestically and can compete successfully with it.
These problems of the fishery industries are very much the concern of the Fish and Wildlife Service, for the full and proper use of a resource is an important phase of the conservation of it.
We believe that solution of the industry's problems and readjustment to a peacetime economy can be most quickly achieved by raising the standards of quality and by increasing the efficiency and economy of operation.
This is fundamental to enlarging the market.
Consequently the Fish and Wildlife Service will continue and intensify its research into methods of improving fishery products and developing new ones.
For the first time in 1946 it has the educational facilities for demonstrating to members of the industry—fishermen, processors, and dealers—methods of getting the most and the best out of their raw materials.
It will make readily available the most advanced methods of fishing, processing, shipping and distribution.
As the products improve, another program of the Fish and Wildlife Service is directed toward enlarging the market for them.
This is being accomplished by educating the public to appreciate the nutrient value and edibility of their fishery resources.
Among the various influences which have been brought to bear on fish and wildlife resources during recent years, none is so far reaching as the water utilization program.
This involves projects on rivers to provide irrigation, navigation, hydroelectric power, flood control or other benefits.
It also involves the construction of dams, locks, levees, and other structures which disturb to some degree the status of fish and wildlife in and around the project areas.
Because some of these will occupy the habitats of some of our most important native food and game animals, the Fish and Wildlife Service has established a staff of scientists who work with the Bureau of Reclamation and the Corps of Engineers to obviate or minimize damage to these resources, or to take full advantage of any facilities that might serve to increase them.
This job is not a simple one.
The river bottomlands are generally the areas most prolific of wildlife.
They are frequented by migratory waterfowl and many kinds of upland game, especially during the winter season.
If adequate measures were not taken in advance, a series of reservoirs in a valley could destroy the entire supply of winter cover on which deer and certain game birds depend, and thus eliminate the animals themselves.
Certain projects proposed in the comprehensive plan for the development of the Missouri River Basin will have a deleterious effect on important waterfowl nesting refuges in Montana and the Dakotas.
These areas will have to be duplicated as nearly as possible with areas of equal value, improvements, and water facilities for wildlife needs.
Meanwhile, the Fish and Wildlife Service is working to develop methods of utilizing the structures that are being built.
Reservoirs are viewed from the standpoint of their future use for the production of sport and commercial fish, as State or Federal migratory waterfowl refuges, and as public shooting grounds.
We are working to increase fish and wildlife habitats through practical modification in the structure and operation of reservoirs.
Thus projects can often be changed from the debit to the credit side of the evaluation ledger, from the standpoint of animal resources.
It is not enough to insure maximum production of fish and game by incorporating sound biological considerations in the development plans.
These resources must be managed after construction and impoundment.
Only this combination—suitable habitat and good husbandry—will produce and sustain fish and game crops on the land and water areas affected by the national river development program.
The size of the waterfowl crop depends on many factors, of which the length of the shooting season and the bag limit are only two.
The many vicissitudes of nature are of great importance.
In 1945 and again in 1946, droughts dried up vast areas of the Canadian prairie provinces and reduced or destroyed the breeding value of about 45,000 square miles of key territory.
In addition rains and a spring blizzard in New Brunswick and Nova Scotia destroyed many ducks.
As a result of these factors, fewer wildfowl were produced in 1945 than hunters shot the following season; and the total wildfowl supply declined to about 64 percent of what it had been in 1944.
The future supply of waterfowl depends on the kind of management we give it.
While barren years like the last two will eventually be offset by fertile ones, the number of hunters will continue to increase.
This is an important factor in the problem of managing the waterfowl resources, and will put a premium on our having an accurate estimate of the size of the harvest.
It will also put a premium on the coverage by our law enforcement officers.
To accomplish this estimate and coverage, we must have a corps of at least 150 well-trained and fully equipped United States game management agents, who will work in close cooperation with conservation officers of the various States.
For migratory waterfowl, we apply two principal and essential conservation techniques: First, we limit the number of birds that hunters may harvest each year; second, we maintain a nation-wide system of refuges, which have been strategically located to give the birds rest, food, and shelter during their long seasonal voyages, and protection on their breeding grounds.
The value of this system continues to grow each year as the acreage of water has become stabilized to assure a steady optimum production of aquatic food and plants needed for nesting.
The continued orderly development of the refuge system is an essential feature of our design for waterfowl restoration and maintenance.
What is true of waterfowl is true, on the whole, of other game birds.
For example, the ring-necked pheasant has suffered a serious decline in abundance over much of its range, and especially in the Midwest.
This is the consequence of a series of several years of weather unfavorable to nesting and brooding.
For the same reason, the bobwhite quail population has been sharply reduced in parts of the northern limits of its range; and the ruffed grouse too is at a low ebb of abundance.
The status of big game is generally favorable.
The diversion of hunters to military duty or to wartime industrial occupations, the reduction in the supply of sporting arms and ammunition, and restrictions on travel, all helped to conserve and even restore game.
But war conditions were not everywhere without ill effects on game.
Hunting pressure tended to be intensified and concentrated near large centers of population, war industries, and military establishments.
Some game ranges which were included in maneuver areas and artillery or aerial bombing ranges suffered severe damage.
In such areas, the recovery of the vegetative cover to their prewar carrying capacities, and the restoration of the wildlife populations will be the work of several years.
Numerous areas acquired by the military services as temporary bases are, or will be subject to disposition.
Many could be developed into excellent wildlife refuges or management areas.
Hopes for prompt renewal of more effective predator and rodent control work after the war were dispelled by delays in reconversion, which hampered acquisitionof badly needed equipment.
A little progress was made, however, by increased use of recently developed control methods.
Several of these, including the famous rodenticide, Compound 1080, are still in the trial stage, but will probably be released for carefully controlled operational use in the near future.
The basic Indian problem confronting the Government is that of a low-income group operating on a small resource base, under a peculiar combination of independence, dependence, and separation.
In many ways this basic problem and the many others growing out of it are similar to those of the peoples living in underdeveloped areas throughout the world.
These peoples do not want the low standards of health and education that go with agricultural poverty.
They want a better land base, better techniques of resource development, more industrialization—everything that will give them a chance to participate in the economic progress of the world; or, for the Indians, an opportunity to share in the rising standard of living of the Nation as a whole.
During the last decade, the Indians have made considerable progress toward the goals of self-government and economic independence.
As a nucleus they had only the meager land base left to them after almost half a century of the allotment policy, under which the Government had allowed and encouraged the allotment of tribal lands to individuals and the subsequent alienation of some 80,000,000 acres of Indian land.
Lost in this manner was much of the better land which they had retained under various treaties with the United States.
Beginning with the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934, the national policy changed to one of protecting the remaining tribal resources, replenishing the resources base on which to build economic independence, and reestablishing the authority of tribal councils.
The new policy has been implemented through purchase of additional lands, through better management of agricultural, range, and forest lands, and through the establishment of various industrial enterprises to utilize tribal resources, such as timber and minerals.
Coincident with these economic phases of the program were the equally important programs in the fields of health, education, and tribal self-government.
For little progress could have been made by a people in poor health with a high rate of illiteracy.
While there is ample evidence on all reservations today of the strides which have been made in the economic, health, and education fields, there is almost equally plentiful evidence of the need for the continuation and, indeed, the expansion of the various programs, if the Indian is to assume his rightful place in the Nation.
The most urgent aspects of the problem and the steps being taken by the Indians and the Indian Service to alleviate the situation are briefly summarized in the following paragraphs.
Underlying many of the Indians' problems is a generally low health level which shows up clearly in the high rate of infant mortality.
While only 2 in every 50 babies in the Nation as a whole die in the first year of life, 2 or 3 in every 10 Indian babies are thus doomed.
The correlation between low income and poor health is aggravated in the case of the Indian population by its historic lack of resistance to tuberculosis.
Although the fight against this disease among Indians is never relaxed and a high rate of protection has been achieved during the past 10 years through persistent experimentation with antituberculosis vaccine (BCG) the incidence of the disease itself is still five times higher among the Indians than among the people of the United States as a whole.
In Alaska where the Indian tuberculosis rate is even higher than that in the United States, the Indian Service has recently acquired the Sitka Naval Base which will be converted into a 200-bed tuberculosis sanitarium and a boarding school for 600 pupils.
Many other diseases, particularly those of the digestive tract, also take a high toll of life.
The incidence of trachoma, however, formerly a prevalent disease among the Indians, has been greatly reduced, largely through the use of sulfanilamide, the effectiveness of which as a remedy for this disease was discovered by the Indian Service medical staff.
The Indian Service health program has been seriously handicapped during the war years by a shortage of doctors and nurses to staff the 76 hospitals and sanitaria and the field medical positions.
Even after large-scale demobilization by the armed forces, many doctors and nurses have failed to return to the Indian Service because only limited tenure could be obtained.
Establishment of civil-service registers in these fields and permanent appointments made therefrom should help to alleviate the shortage in trained personnel.
The Indian Service is confronted with many problems of education— both in the narrow sense of school rooms for children and in the broader sense of helping the tribe to make the optimum adjustment to its particular circumstances.
The shortage of physical facilities is most acute on the Navajo Reservation, where there are schoolrooms for only 6,000 children, or for only 30 percent of the 20,000 children of school age.
On that reservation the problem includes finding the proper compromise between day schools, which are best from the educational viewpoint, and boarding schools, which are more practical because of the long distances children must travel to school and the lack of all-weather roads.
More than ever before, however, the Navajo Indians themselves are pressing for more education and are cooperating with the Indian Service in attacking the problem.
They have not only consented to, but encouraged.
Although expanding its facilities in areas like the Navajo where no alternative school services can be secured, the Indian Service follows the definite policy of utilizing State schools wherever feasible, paying tuition for the children under various types of contracts.
Additional contracts are constantly being arranged.
Under education in the broader sense, many of the Indians are faced with the necessity of adjusting their economic, social, and spiritual ways to the fast tempo of modern American life.
The transition from the nomadic hunting economy which died suddenly when the buffalo had been killed off and from the primitive subsistence agriculture which was disrupted when non-Indians put up fences and took most of the good land, has not been completed.
One result of this situation is that many individuals have not learned how to utilize to best advantage the returns which they have earned in their new society.
Thus there are tribes where the average family income compares favorably with that in a similar non-Indian community but where the Indian housing and health standards are definitely inferior to those of the non-Indian.
It is, therefore, the task of the Indian Service to help the Indians acquire the knowledge, skills, and motivation which they need in completing the difficult adjustments in their living and thinking habits.
There is today a considerable movement of Indians to and from the reservations.
During the war many went into the armed forces.
Many others found employment opportunities in war work outside the reservations.
The contrast between the high reward for such wage work and the return which they had received on the reservation was great.
Although some Indians have remained away from their homes, a majority have returned either because their war jobs were terminated or because they preferred reservation life.
Some returned home for a brief period and then departed again to seek further wage work.
The present picture, indeed, is far from clear, and constitutes a real problem for the Indian Service in its attempt to promote Indian welfare in general.
For while the Service encourages off-reservation employment under good conditions as a partial antidote to the inadequate resource base of many tribes, it also foresees the danger of industrial or rural slums where adequate housing and health standards are not maintained.
It is consequently the policy of the Indian Service to work closely with State and local organizations in preventing the growth of such slums.
In this connection it is recognized that off-reservation employment opportunities will vary with the economic state of the Nation, with an inevitable movement toward such employment when jobs are plentiful and wages high.
It is nevertheless hoped that the number of permanent migratory laborers can be held to a minimum.
Indians who settle either on or off the reservation should obtain greater financial security as well as better education and medical facilities for their families.
One possible remedy for the inadequate resource base possessed by many of the tribes would be the continuation of the land acquisition program, This course of action is, in fact, being carried out by the Indian Service, although, for reasons stated below, on a much smaller scale than during the years preceding World War II.
The basic obstacle to large-scale land purchase by or for the Indians is the ever-increasing demand for land of all kinds by the expanding population of the Nation.
This is reflected by the increase in the price of land during the war years.
In the 17 States where most of the Indians are located, the price of farm lands went up by 54 percent and the price of range lands by 75 to 300 percent between 1940 and 1945.
Ânother obstacle to a land acquisition program is the opposition to Indian purchases as indicated by the limitation in the present appropriation act which prohibits the use of either tribal or Federal funds for the purchase of lands outside reservations in several Western States.
There is equally strong competition for every drop of irrigation water which is needed to grow crops in most parts of the West.
Consequently, there are instances where the Indians own large acreages of irrigable land which cannot be fully utilized, at least under current water policies, because of an insufficient supply of water.
An important task of the Indian Service is the protection of Indian water rights in several key areas including the Colorado River Basin.
Although present land areas are definitely inadequate for some of the tribes, there are many reservations where the program should be better utilization of the existing acreage rather than the acquisition of more land.
Here the Indian Service must continue to help the Indians improve their agricultural and stock raising technique.
This problem is related to that of general adjustment mentioned above.
One method of improving land utilization is the consolidation into economically usable units of small plots of land which are the result of divided inheritance.
One hopeful example of such consolidation is the program on the Rosebud Reservation in South Dakota where more than 20,000 acres of small scattered parcels of land were exchanged by the individual owners for shares in the Tribal Land Enterprise, which manages 60,000 acres and pays dividends on its shares.
Another possible method of compensating for the inadequate resource base is the diversification of the economy of some of the Indians.
Industrialization, for example, would lessen the present overload on certain reservations.
A study is now being made of the Navajo Reservation to determine what industrial possibilities exist for Indian production of raw materials, semifinished and finished goods.
The Navajo sawmill now ships all its product off the reservation as timber, although it is quite possible that the Indians could profitably convert at least a portion of it into wood products such as sash and doors.
Indians employed in such work would no longer depend upon the overtaxed agricultural and stock raising resources of the reservation.
Similar possibilities are being investigated on many reservations not only in the industrial field but also in mining, arts and crafts, and tourism.
It is the belief of those in the Indian Service responsible for helping the Indians plan for the future that the maximum benefits will be gained in the immediate future through a combination of improving the utilization of their present lands, acquiring additional lands where available, and diversifying their economy wherever possible.
Wherever plans or programs affecting Indians are formulated, there is always to be considered the net annual increase in the Indian population of the country.
The group which now numbers approximately 400,000 is increasing at a rate of 1.2 percent annually, compared to a national rate of 0.74 percent.
This increase has been made in spite of the high infant mortality rate and disease rates mentioned previously.
An important aspect of Indian Service work in Alaska is the clarification of the status of Native land in the Territory.
There are a few Native reservations similar to Indian Reservations in the United States, but most of the natives live in villages where title to the land has never been formalized.
During the last half century the natives have been gradually forced out of some fishing and hunting areas which they and their ancestors have used since time immemorial.
The settlement of the land status will be advantageous to both the natives and nonnatives of the Territory.
A major problem facing the Indian Service today is that of public relations in the broadest sense.
In order that the Indians may be accepted as American citizens, in fact as they were by law in 1924, there must be a much wider knowledge of the facts on the part of the American public.
Indians will not be fully accepted while so many people are under the false impression that Indians are forced to live on reservations.
There will likewise be no equality for Indians when they are barred from stores and restaurants in communities near their homes and when they are not hired on the same basis of non-Indians.
The States of Arizona and New Mexico still bar Indians from voting, although it is hoped that cases now before the courts will remedy this unfortunate situation in the near future.
In order to deal more effectively with the complex problems outlined above as well as many others, the Indian Service has made several significant changes in its methods of administration.
Basically these changes are designed to simplify Indian Service procedures, many of which had become extremely complicated since the Bureau was established in 1824.
Many questions of local interest only were required by law to be referred to Washington for an answer.
As a remedy for this situation, the Secretary of the Interior, under authority of the act of August 8, 1946, has delegated to the Commissioner, and the Commissioner, in turn, to lesser officials various powers and duties originally assigned by Congress to the Secretary of the Interior.
A second step toward simplification was the establishment of five district offices in Minneapolis, Minn.
Billings, Mont.
Portland, Oreg.
Phoenix, Ariz.
To the directors of these offices has been delegated the authority to make many of the decisions which would formerly have been referred to the central office.
Another event of great importance was the enactment by Congress of the Indian Claims Commission Act, in the summer of 1946.
The Commission of three members, created by this act, will hear, during the next 5 years, all claims of Indian tribes against the United States.
Within 10 years from the date of passage of the act, the Commission will pass upon the validity of each claim and make recommendations to Congress as to its settlement.
The creation of this Commission constitutes a major step toward the solution of the complex problem of Indian claims which has for many years clouded the relationship between the Government and numerous Indian tribes.
The Department of the Interior is interested in several problem areas.
These include such differing localities as Alaska, where a small population and large prospective resources have not yet created an expanding economy, and Puerto Rico, where a very large population is living on a very low level under a peculiarly one-sided agricultural economy.
They include areas of devastation, such as the Rio Grande Valley, and rich areas such as the sugar and pineapple lands of Hawaii where there is some danger that high fertility may be lost under the impact of mechanization.
The underdeveloped areas resemble some problem areas of the mainland, such as that part of the Missouri Basin which has been losing population.
Parts of the Southwest and of Hawaii still require an industrial balance for the agricultural bull wheel of their economy.
In all of these areas the Department has the same type of concern for resource development and a higher standard of living that the Department of State and the United Nations have for the underdeveloped nations beyond our borders.
The Interior Department's interest is more direct, because these areas are part of the United States.
Alaska's development carries with it many of the hopes of the whole Pacific Northwest.
Puerto Rico's development, for better or worse, exemplifies to all the Carribbean countries and many other Latin-American countries the net product of the American economic and political system.
Our influence in those countries, including their supply of raw materials to us and their purchase of our products, is affected by their judgment of our conduct in Puerto Rico.
Alaska is a self-governing territory, with a Governor appointed by the President.
Its present population is approximately 90,000, including some 33,000 Native Indians, Aleuts, and Eskimos.
Its industrial development has been confined to mining (largely gold), some lumbering and a large fishing and canning industry.
Gold mining was almost completely curtailed during the war, while lumbering was considerably expanded.
There are good prospects for all of these industries.
The potential pulp and paper industry needs hydroelectric power to get started on the large coastal forests.
The potential power sites that would best serve this industry and also the Alaskan communities are reasonably well known.
The fishing industry can expect to increase as it goes into the taking of crabs and various ground-feeding fish that have so far been neglected.
The mining industry is giving increased attention to the less valuable but industrially more important minerals, such as mercury, chromite, antimony, and limestone, as well as the local demand for coal.
The possibility of a large tourist business has excited the interest of many Alaskans.
The road system is not wide flung but is being expanded.
Ship rates for passengers and freight transportation to Alaska, as well as rail and air rates within the Territory are high.
Because of the limited passenger facilities on the coastwise steamships serving the Territory, the wonderful scenery and recreational opportunities of Alaska are not bringing the number of vacationists that were attracted before the war.
There is no other way for tourists to reach Alaska.
The establishment of scheduled air services and the construction of the Alaska Highway will open new routes of travel capable of transporting a far larger volume of vacationists than the steamship lines were ever equipped to handle.
The urgent present need is for lodges, hotels, and recreational centers to be developed within Alaska to accommodate the great number of tourists who will take advantage of Alaska's vacation attractions as soon as they can find accommodations.
Steamship facilities, too, need to be expanded and improved in order to provide space for cruise passengers and to build the Alaska tourist industry to the limit of its possibilities.
The prospect for a large influx of settlers now appears to wait on an increase in industrial opportunities, lower living costs, opening up of public lands which were withdrawn for one purpose or another during the war, and materials for housing.The agricultural opportunities seem to be dependent on a great deal of preliminary land clearing or drainage work.
The disputed attempt of the 1930's to establish an agricultural settlement, the Matanuska Valley Farm Colony, proved to be justified by the war.
Shipping space for farm products was saved.
The Matanuska farmers made large profits.
The settlement is now on a going financial basis.
The Division of Territories and Island Possessions in the Department deals with Alaskan problems.
It believes that programs for Alaska should be developed cooperatively by the Federal and territorial Governments.
Its opinion is that if there were a national economic emergency that required public investment, several hundred million dollars could be spent profitably on public works which would develop the Territory's resources.
Puerto Rico presents the complex of a steadily increasing population with a decreasing standard of living, based essentially on the production of a major crop, sugar, for sale to the United States.
Its present population is 2,100,000, 23 times that of all Alaska, and by 1960 another 600,000 persons may be added.
The available land for cultivation is limited to a million acres, or about one-half acre per person now.
This will be about one-third acre in 1960.
It compares with 4 acres of arable land per person in the continental United States.
Puerto Rico's main crop, sugar for sale on the mainland, is, of course, subject to the fluctuation of sugar prices and quotas.
It is also subject to the cataclysmic potentialities of synthetic sugar substitutes.
The result is that the Puerto Ricans import $37,000,000 worth of food.
The manufacturing opportunities have as yet been so little developed that the island imports $160,000,000 of other merchandise and commodities annually.
Development of Puerto Rican industries has been attempted in recent years.
Cement, glass, boxboard, clay products, and shoe manufacturing plants have been established, but only 14 percent of the working population is employed in industry at present.
Its income, while low, is still considerably higher than the income of the farming population.
The average family income at present is about $350 a year, which is still lower than that of any one of the United States.
The economic future of the island is linked with its political future.
Tariffs, subsidies, credit aids, freight rates, are all tied up together with its political position.
While the Governor and certain other officials of the executive and judicial branches of the insular government are appointed by the President, the legislative branch, consisting of a House and a Senate, is popularly elected.
The Division of Territories and Island Possessions believes that development programs must come principally from the island government.
The Insular Government of Puerto Rico is aware of its needs and has developed an outstanding long range planning program as a guide to raising the substandard conditions in health and school facilities, sanitation and water supply, roads, etc.
This plan shows that $344,000,000 should be expended to bring conditions up to a minimum decent standard.
Of this amount, the insular government plans to provide about $55,000,000 during the next 6 years.
It is estimated that at least 8,000 new houses should be provided annually to take care of its population increase, and over 300,000 houses that are now substandard should be replaced at the rate of 15,000 per year for the next 20 years to eliminate the serious urban and rural slum conditions now existing.
The Virgin Islands, although much smaller, having a population of about 25,000, present similar economic and social conditions to those of Puerto Rico.
Here, too, a lack of natural resources is a limiting factor to industrial expansion, and agricultural development is precarious.
It appears likely, however, to some students, that the tourist trade can be developed to a point where the existing deplorable conditions can be raised to a decent standard.
From the resource viewpoint, Hawaii has done far better than Alaska or Puerto Rico.
However, less than one-tenth of the total land area is reasonably suitable for agricultural use, and about one-third is usable pasturage.
The ownership of the land is highly concentrated.
Increased mechanization in connection with the harvesting of sugar cane which was resorted to by the plantations as a result of labor shortages and increased wage rates, has accelerated the depletion of soil fertility.
Removal of the topsoil by “grab loading" and erosion seems to be an inevitable result of the replacement of hand planting and hand harvesting by the use of heavy equipment.
The pasture lands also suffered from wartime overgrazing.
The war also brought with it new insect pests that are an additional menace to plants and fruit trees.
The water situation became acute both in the cities and in some of the rural areas.
In Honolulu water consumption doubled between 1940 and 1945.
Legislation making all ground waters public property is being considered.
Reclamation projects are being studied, with a view to bringing additional lands into cultivation, especially for the growing of fruits and vegetables.
The Department of Agriculture and the Territory are undertaking a project to protect cropland by cover crops and erosion controls and to plant appropriate grasses on the ranges.
Studies of offshore fishing possibilities are being strongly urged by the Territory.
The increasing population in Hawaii presses heavily on the land, creating housing and land redistribution problems of some magnitude.