OLUTION of domestic and world problems depends largely on the capacity of the United States to produce at the present high levels required for the needs of an increasing United States population and for the reconstruction of western Europe.
The ruthless urgency of war demonstrated that America's productive capacity is well nigh limitless, given the will, the direction, and the continued incentive of its people.
The peace is not merely surcease from war and its needs are no less urgent—it must represent the full flowering of man's desire and ability to enjoy the full and secure life implied in“Democracy.
Free people have a demonstrated capacity to consume and to make full, beneficial use of the fruits of technology.
This capacity must be matched by wisdom in the production and use of natural resources.
The Nation's capacity for growing and making things—its huge industrial plants and its vast agricultural resources can meet the demands of our people for all the things they require and provide a considerable measure of foreign aid.
As this country's reconverted production capacity for peacetime needs is fast outstripping war production levels, the aim is not to readjust our sights to prewar levels, but to keep up with 1947 demands for goods and services and to anticipate decades in advance the requirements of an expanding population for a maximum employment economy with a population of 147,500,000 people in 1950, of 155,000,000 in 1960, and perhaps 165,000,- 000 in 1990.
The Nation must not gage its future merely by looking at its past.
Nor can it ignore the magnitude of its past contributions contributions that assist in a progressive lifting of standards of living and hence an increasing stability for the people of other free nations as well as for its own citizens.
The infancy of our postwar period makes us realize that the requirements of people under a vigorous, free, and modern technology are far greater than ever before conceived.
The capacity of the human race for the comforts of life and for its pleasures is the capacity to demand and accept the produets of modern technology as rapidly as those are made possible.
The demands for housing, for clothing, for food products, for refrigerators and radios, for automobiles and for farm machinery, for entertainment, and for recreation are on a spiralling upward scale.
The spirit of true free enterprise in a democratic system is, therefore, best expressed in the capacity to produce better things, more efficiently and abundantly, and to distribute them at prices which make mass consumption possible.
That has been America's great contribution to the well-being of the world.
Rapid and unrestricted technological advances in providing comforts and necessities of living must and can be maintained in a free economy.
Monopolistic controls of such advances strike at the heart of such an economy, and ultimately serve to disrupt and stifle normal expansion.
The principle of willful obsolescence as a method to inerease production, sales volume, and hence profits must yield to better quality and longer life of manufactured products.
This provides new opportunities for the profitable expenditure of the consumer dollar in an expanding horizon.
The ability to produce better things requires an unshackled technology, directed to increasing the useful life of the production unit, and of the useful life of the item produced.
Future goals cannot be achieved in small portions of progress, measured by the restrictive ability of the least able.
America's common denominator of progress has never been the least which could be comfortably achieved.
All-out production must be efficient if it is to be lasting.
Full capacity to produce must embody full ability to utilize human and natural resources without waste.
In this urgent combination our past demonstrates a sad profligacy in the use of the available resources.
Our soil has been ripped apart and forests have been torn from it on a "cut out and get out" basis.
Most mineral resources have been extracted with thought to the greatest profit and not the greatest use.
But we are learning.
Our extraction processes are now far less wasteful than those of 20 years ago.
We are beginning to realize that full production—at levels greater than before— requires the wise and full use of our resources.
Without the basic material to manufacture and produce, production capacity—capital, management, and labor—is meaningless.
Conservation means full and wise use—by the application of modern extractive and manufacturing techniques to render value of every shred or drop of what the earth provides—by substituting the inexhaustible for the exhaustible wherever technology can permit it— by avoiding the use of the precious rare for commonplace applications.
Conservation requires inventory.
Without knowing the extent and state of our resources, the Nation cannot intelligently and effectively produce on a sustained basis.
Productive capacity scheduled on a dwindling resource will become wasted capacity, and the disruption created ultimately may dislocate the entire national economy.
Technological programs of substitution must be geared to the imminence of change in the quantity and quality of basic resources.
Programs of imports must be intelligently scheduled to provide a continuous, smooth flow of materials for which our domestic supplies may become strained.
But without knowing how much we have, and where our resources are, no real plan or program can be ndertaken by either industry or Government.
Conservation means efficient management in the general public interest.
It stems from the foresight derived of inventory and the need for full and wise use of what is available.
It demands synchronization of private and public effort in the discovery of new material sources, of new technologies in the use of materials and in the development of new productive capacity.
It does not mean the application of arbitrarily restrictive practices by either Government or industry-it does mean the formulation of joint and collaborative programs of resources development as well as conservation so as to render greatest use of what we have and to insure the abolition of past wanton exploitation.
The Nation planned well for war production; there is no reason why it cannot do so for peace in a system of competitive enterprise.
Conservation requires the expenditure of publie funds for the securing of inventory, for exploratory and development programs where private capital cannot assume a long-term burden, and for the execution of large-scale, long-range resources-development publie works.
It must be recognized freely and frankly that a major portion of conservation activities requires both expenditures and the passage of time beyond the normal financial ability of private enterprise.
Although great strides are being made in the husbanding of our resources, we have a long way to go to repair past damage and to move ahead beyond a deficit level.
Our soils must be subjected to an ever increasing application of soil and moisture conservation practices.
We must rapidly substitute new soil areas for old, tired, and worn ones and we must revitalize and reuse improperly farmed acres.
We must sustain the fertility of existing good acres and reestablish that of poor acres by the expanding use of proper farm practices and the application of fertilizer.
Our remaining forests must be eropped on a sustained-yield basis, and devastated forested areas must be reforested.
Range lands must be husbanded and properly cared for if we are to supply ourselves with protein-rich meat.
The sharp and dangerous deficiencies in our known commercial reserves of industrial minerals call for ingenuity in exploration, in mining practices, and ore treatment.
The substitution of more plentiful materials for those that are scarce and the elimination of wasteful and inefficient uses must be integrated with any over-all program of conservation.
The government has demonstrated the wisdom of public expenditures for resource development and conservation activities.
Without the great public works projects, the war would have been prolonged interminably.
These huge river control and development projects by making possible the irrigation of otherwise unproduetive lands, provided millions of tons of needed food.
Billions of kilowatt-hours generated as a byproduct from these projects made it possible to manufacture the aluminum and magnesium, ferro-alloys, and important chemicals required by the war machine.
Important as these direct contributions were, however, they are but a small indicative portion of the long-term economic gains they have provided.
The availability of hydroelectrie power within less than a decade from the inception of the Federal power system in the Pacific Northwest made possible the establishment of electroprocess industries having a total plant investment value of $160,000,000.
The tax revenues from these industries have already exceeded the $280,000,000 investment in power facilities by the Federal Government and the annual value of their product is averaging $140,000,000.
As a measure of what the Federal development of irrigation lands can mean to the national economy, one project alone in the Yakima Valley of Washington has produced $76,000,000 of crops in 1946 and has made it possible to furnish gainful employment for a population of 100,000, where prior to the development, only sagebrush and jackrabbits were found.
This project represents an investment of $39,653,360 of which $10,540,895 now has been repaid including $3,449,114 on the Tieton division completely returned on February 14, 1947.
The Federal Government's multiple-purpose water and land development projects in the West currently pay off the original investment of public funds and pay their way.
Many project expenditures have been repaid in full; most of them are reimbursing the Treasury at a rate greater than expected or required by law.
These new lands and new reservoirs of abundant electrical energy provided in the development of the western country are symbols of America's capacity to produce and are in complete accord with the United States' pioneer tradition of domestic expansion.
It would be an error of tragic consequence to the future of the Nation, however, if Federal expenditures for conservation of natural resources were to be gaged only on a strict, current dollars-and-cents repayment basis.
Much of the drastically needed investment for sound programs of conservation will not be returned in kind.
Such expenditures represent premium payments for the insurance of America's future, and the well-being of unborn generations.
A few dollars spent today for geological surveys may mean the discovery of vital ore, vital perhaps not today but a decade hence.
A few dollars spent today in the planning of multiple-purpose projects will probably save countless thousands in their construction years hence.
The examples can be multipled dramatically to sustain the thesis that adequate expenditures must be made in economic health and security.
Although conservation is a collaborative undertaking between Government, industry, and agriculture, Government must assume and expand its leadership.
National security demands that our natural resources be appraised, utilized, and husbanded in a manner most conducive to long range economic stability and the national defense.
Since conservation assures continued production, Government must accept an increasing responsibility in the planning and functioning of conservation activities.
A major portion of the concern of the Federal Government in the resource foundations for continued production—land, water, minerals, and energy—is implemented in the functions of the Department of the Interior.
In some fields the Department's activities represent the sum total of the Federal Government's diligence in conservation and resources development, such as in minerals.
In other fields other departments of Government share the work in varying degrees.
There are important corollary fields in which the Department of the Interior has primary responsibility, including the maintenance of the value of national parks, our fish and wildlife resources, the administration of the affairs and lands of the Indians, and the administrative development and protection of the public domain, exclusive of the national forests.
The Department of the Interior has frequently been considered a department of the West.
Although its activities are truly national in scope and application, a large portion is primarily of direct effect in the vast areas of our western country and Alaska, since a major portion of the Nation's untapped and underdeveloped resources are there.
The importance of the western country-and hence of the Department's functions and responsibilities for its full development—is becoming more and more apparent.
War years brought a tremendous influx of population to the West, and particularly to the Pacific Coast States.
This movement is continuing.
Furthermore, and due in large measure to the assistance of the Federal Government, the West's economy is expanding.
Its industries have multiplied at a fabulous rate and its agriculture is an increasingly larger proportion of the Nation's total production.
However, there are clear indications that population growth is at present outstripping the development of opportunities for gainful employment and that unless programs of resources development, conservation, and capital investment are continued vigorously at an accelerated rate, the situation will become critical.
It does not require unusual perspicacity to conclude that western development must be given every encouragement.
This annual report of the Secretary of the Interior relates its stewardship of these resource foundations, of the progress and the problems of its past year.
The keynote is somber but with expressed optimism as to possibilities for remedy and ultimate solution.
Today there is no question that our principal resources need husbanding, revitalizing, better management, more multiple-purpose development.
Yet, to sustain the productive obligations—not merely in terms of a few short years of heroic effort but in terms of generations the endeavor of Government and collaborating industry and agriculture must be sharply increased merely to keep the national resources and their use in true balance.
The depredations of wind, water, and man are now responsible, in the continental United States, for the loss of 500,000 acres of topsoil each year.
This is equivalent to the acres needed to support some 175,000 people with food and clothing at accepted standards of living.
This is good, fertile, and priceless topsoil which has washed away down the rivers to the sea, forever lost.
The effect of this loss is not merely numerical.
This stripping robs many times that number of acres of their productivity, reduces some to sheer wastelands, and increases the burdens of production on others to a point of diminishing returns.
Today, it is estimated that about 429,000,000 acres of good crop-lands are required to maintain an adequate agriculture.
The area of land not now used for crops but which can be made usable at low cost is relatively small.
A population increase of 10,000,000, expected in 1960, would absorb the production for which this reserve provides.
Even our net reserve is not stable, but is reduced each year by the loss of topsoil, the leaching of soil nutrients, and the decrease of productivity from marginal acreage.
Furthermore, much of the reserve is in land not available for immediate cropping.
Part of it requires reclamation; by drainage, by the careful subjugation of infertile and rough lands, by clearing, or by irrigation.
The question is whether present program levels of soil conservation, of the retirement of worn-out acres and their gradual rehabilitation, of supplemental and new irrigation can match the depredations of erosion and overuse and the increased demands of new population.
The answer is: "No, not vet."
The answer could be permanently "No." should the national effort of land conservation and development falter.
The air traveler of the future will either gaze upon a vista of desolation or one of geometrical patterns of soil-conservation furrows and irrigation and drainage canals.
One will mean the decline of our great American civilization; the other will spell continued progress and national well-being.
The Department's responsibilities in land management and water utilization—as exercised by its Bureau of Reclamation and its Bureau of Land Management—have been successfully discharged in the past.
The current effort is by no means comparable to the minimum task ahead.
For example, the Bureau of Reclamation proposed to open to entry some 71,000 acres of public land during the fiscal year 1948.
This is land which has been carefully prepared for irrigation, for which adequate water supplies will be available from extensive systems of reservoirs and canals.
The puny nature of this achievement is revealed when compared to the equivalent loss resulting from the erosion of 500,000 acres of topsoil per year.
In the range lands of the West, where a large portion of the livestock requirements of the United States is obtained, about 230,000,000 acres are administered by the Department.
Fully half of these need some restorative attention, and perhaps as much as a fifth already are in critical condition.
Remedial treatment has only been at the rate of a little over 1,000,000 acres per year.
The Department's Bureau of Land Management has under way a conservation program on some 11,000,000 acres, with another 49,000,000 scheduled for the immediate future.
This type of program must be accelerated far beyond its present rate if the feeding livestock population on this range land is to be maintained at minimum levels demanded by the meat, leather, and wool requirements of the Nation.
The western range lands administered by the Department should graze one cow or five sheep per hundred acres, but the requisite acreage for production feeding will be inadequate if erosion and overgrazing are permitted to reduce the range capacity any further.
With increase of population in the western country, the problem will be one of inereasing range capacity rather than increasing the size of the range.
These examples highlight a critical situation.
It can be alleviated by intensification of soil conservation, reseeding, fertilizer production and application, managing of the present range grass, and rapid increase in the number and extent of multiple-purpose river basin development projects.
In the latter respect, the various elements of basin development are so completely interdependent that unrelated development of one set of resources, of one area, or of a single economic phase may retard or irreparably damage others of equal importance elsewhere.
For instance, the development of a comparatively simple irrigation project must consider the effect of channel alterations on fish runs, the comparative value of the lands to be inundated under the supplying reservoir, the basin requirements for specific crops and livestock feeds, the need for hydroelectric power to be produced as a byproduct of water control, and many other items of considerable importance.
Irrigated agriculture must mesh with dry-land farming.
The economic justification for undertaking major development in the first place must have prominent relationship to probable industrial and commercial expansion.
The great river basins of the West—the Colorado, the Columbia, the Missouri, the Central Valley of California, the Rio Grande, the Arkansas—still contain a potential development which will go far toward meeting land requirements.
They also provide an economic base for the balanced industrial and agrieultural development of the West.
The prehistoric peoples who managed many centuries ago to exist in the forbidding Colorado River Basin by means of simple irrigation diversion had enormous resources within physical reach and almost none at their command.
With minimal development of the soil and water resource, they were unable to tap the larger potentialities of the valley.
After them the Spaniards and the American pioneers failed equally to see the basin as a whole.
After a generation of development climaxed by construction of Hoover Dam by the Bureau of Reclamation, half of the water of the Colorado River is still wasting to the sea.
Hundreds of thousands of acres of irrigable lands of proven fertility produce nothing but a seanty yield of grass for grazing.
A vast, unrealized hydroelectric potential posts up a measurable productive loss in terms of tangible wealth.
Mineral and chemical industry progress is barely noticeable.
Yet the ground work has been done.
Many billion kilowatt-hours of electricity have been produced by the river.
With power from Hoover Dam it was possible, under stress of war, to build and operate in the basin the world's largest magnesium plant.
The competition between prospective lessors for a power contract illustrates the nature of basin problems.
Piecemeal development of the Colorado Basin has left it unbalanced and lopsided.
The requirements of the basin itself have rarely been as persuasive as other needs and demands.
Much of the existing first-stage construction was made possible because the city of Los.Angeles and southern California generally had to have additional power and water.
While the ores and phosphates of the Colorado Basin for the most part lie undisturbed in the earth, and its industrial-business-agricultural expansion waits in the uncertain future, lack of developed power from the river hampers the development of industry within the basin.
Few people live in the vast, almost empty reaches of this lonely basin although it comprises about one-twelfth of the continental land area of the United States.
Few industries turn a wheel.
Cities, even towns, are scarce and most of them depend on the irrigated hinterland.
While World War II veterans vainly seek irrigated farmsteads, more than 1,500,000 acres of irrigable land await development in the Colorado Basin.
The more than 18,000 farms that can be carved from this sage-covered waste can be confidently expected to return a gross income of almost three-quarters of a billion dollars a year.
The mineral resources of the Colorado Basin include metals which are in short supply through war depletion; precious metals; liquid, gaseous, and solid fuels; and great beds of thinly covered phosphate rock.
Copper, molybdenum, vanadium, gold, and silver constitute the most important metals.
Fuel potentialities comprise natural gas, oil, and about one-fourth of the Nation's bituminous and subbituminous coal reserves.
The phosphate rock at the Utah-Wyoming-Colorado corner together with those of Montana and Idaho forms a foundation for a mammoth western fertilizer industry to provide a much needed reserve from which superphosphate may be drawn to renew debilitated land in the entire Nation.
Plentiful, low-cost hydroelectric power, resulting from the requisite harnessing of the Colorado and its tributaries for a capacity of 3,500,- 000 future kilowatts will allow use of these latent industrial resources and help toward a balanced economy for the entire basin.
Such integrated development is forecast in the comprehensive report prepared by the Bureau of Reclamation which will be submitted to the Congress early in 1948.
This report is a prospectus for national investment in the Colorado Basin.
The first stage of the basin development is complete or under construction.
It represents a Federal investment of about $275,000,000 upon which handsome returns have been received.
A sound second stage that should follow the first to reinforce and multiply its benefits might call for an investment in the neighborhood of a billion dollars or more.
Such a second stage would be a step toward full utilization of the water of the Colorado Basin, but would not exhaust it or close the door to revisions in the over-all plans to meet unforeseeable conditions in the century that may elapse before it is complete.
The Colorado Basin is a market for Federal investment because it is too big for private business or a single State.
The benefits—transcending State and regional lines—are of such importance to the national economy and security that they must be achieved.
Whereas the Colorado basin is in relatively primitive stages of development, the Missouri Basin presents contrasting aspects.
A constant leakage of human resources from the Missouri Basin since the onset of the great droughts of the '30's has served to accentuate the unstable condition of the Great Plains economy.
The droughts upset a region already far off balance.
There was no integration of town and hinterland, of dry land with irrigated land—there was, indeed, little irrigated land in the entire basin.
Relief expenditures totaling more than a billion and a half dollars—exceeding the estimated cost of the comprehensive plan at present prices—were doled out in the area during the drought.
There was no satisfactory adjustment of business, agriculture, and industry, each to the other, to the land and water resource, or to the vagaries and peculiarities of the erratic, subhumid climate.
About 10 years of high-level construction would set the pattern for reconciliation of the most discordant factors in the Missouri Basin.
Five years of continued construction will allow an increase in population of 600,000, bring into crop production some 5,000,000 acres of dry lands, protect millions of acres from periodic devastation by flood, and set up the basic framework of the integral power structure.
The Missouri Basin resource development prospectus is an inviting one, with a heavy balance on the credit side more than amply justifying the multibillion dollar Federal investment sought by the valley.
First things must come first in the basin.
Before the finer, more complex, adjustments can be attempted, the major dams, irrigation, power, and water supply features must be completed.
They are the nuclei upon which the comprehensive valley development will form.
Agricultural stability cannot exist until irrigated and dry-land use is integrated.
That is a basic and primary adjustment upon which preliminary work is already going forward, and which must be made rapidly once the irrigation systems go into operation.
The problems it poses are challenging, and will require the utmost cooperation for their resolution.
For example, land speculation in the past, probably more than any other single factor, operated to destroy the value of the human assets and seriously to imperil the irrigation investment.
Inadequate controls left many settlers prey to the speculator.
The latter—not the irrigation farmer—reaped the harvest from Federal irrigation.
The settler was sold almost valueless dry land at fantastic prices that often exceeded its ultimate worth with all improvements and the irrigation system in.
It is not surprising that often the first, the second, or the third group of settlers failed.
From the first the reclamation laws asserted an inviolable policy of providing a maximum number of farming opportunities for the greatest possible number of citizens.
The Congress made clear, and has reaffirmed in numerous restatements in the 45 years since, its intention to restrict the use of Federal funds for irrigation development to the family farm.
The law specifically excludes irrigation expenditures for the benefit of a handful of large landholders or corporations.
Land speculation has operated to defeat both purposes of the law.
And the Federal Government, as another result, was left with a weakened security for its investment.
Bankrupt settlers cannot repay project construction costs.
New problems concerning the repayment of construction costs confront the Bureau of Reclamation and the water users as a general result of the large cost increases since the war, hydrologic conditions in the Missouri Basin, and the requirements of comprehensive valley development.
On projects where construction was begun before or during the war and not completed, it has generally been necessary to reopen repayment contract negotiations to develop amendatory contracts reflecting the cost increases.
In some instances where the annual construction obligation was at or near the top limit of the water users' repayment ability, authority to extend the payments over an extended period exceeding 40 years has been granted by the Congress.
The higher labor, material, and equipment costs seriously affect the feasibility of projects so that many which are otherwise desirable cannot be constructed now.
The terrific flash floods encountered in the Missouri Basin add materially to construction costs and complicate engineering design.
Spillways with sufficient capacity to pass the flood flows without damage to the dams are large and expensive, comprising a major portion of the costs of the structures.
In the case of Heart Butte Dam of the Heart River unit of the Missouri Basin project, the spillway structure was redesigned in an effort to scale down construction costs to an amount within the repayment ability of the water users.
Comprehensive valley planning must meet different tests and a greater variety of needs than single project development.
Fully to utilize the water resources of a valley such as the Columbia in the Northwest requires numerous structures devoted to different purposes, but integrated on a large scale in a manner similar to the closely knit functions of a single multiple-purpose dam.
In the Columbia Basin are numerous power sites without any possible irirgation features, and potential irrigation projects with no power features.
There are also flood control and navigation facilities with large power features.
So it is proposed to pool the power revenues of the entire basin to enable development of the irrigation projects that lack power potential.
There are, of course, areas within the limits of river basins which are not arable because of topography, the nature of the soil and its cover, and other physical reasons.
Yet, these vast areas, usually at high altitude or of mountainous character have existing and potential contributions to the Nation's requirements for timber, livestock, and recreation.
Most of these lands are in the public domain.
In the truest sense, they are the people's land.
Covered in many sections with valuable timber, these lands contain other major values—minerals, scenic beauties, and watersheds of incalculable importance.
Their protection and their management is urgent, for their depredation by either natural eauses, such as wind and water erosion, or by misuse sueh as overcutting of timber and overgrazing, has serious impact on the well-being of the peoples of the river basins—the people of the Nation.
There remain in continental United States today 413,000,000 acres of public domain.
National forest lands, which are administered by the Department of Agriculture, comprise 138,000,000 acres of this.
Most of the balance is administered by the Department of the Interior including 170,000,000 acres of unreserved land (including 132,000,000 acres in grazing districts), 55,000,000 in Indian reservations, and 12,000,000 in national parks and monuments.
The remaining areas of 38,000,000 acres are in reclamation, military, and other reservations.
For many years the open public range land in the West was a freefor-all public grazing common.
The damage which has resulted from this practice prior to regulation came from lack of distribution of use as livestock concentrated around permanent watering facilities and from overgrazing through excessive numbers of stock and too-long or unseasonable use of the range.
The result over large areas has been depletion or eradication of palatable and nutritious vegetation and in places its replacement by unpalatable and less nutritious species, together with accelerated erosion of rich topsoil.
The important consequences of such practice have been a gradual reduction in the capacity of the range to carry stock, and a proportionate increase in the cost of raising cattle.
The end result has been more expensive meat for the consumer, less gain for the stockman, and reduction in over-all production capacity of the Nation.
During the year, demands that the public domain with grazing and other public lands be sold to private holders increased.
While the campaign centers on the grazing lands, it may involve other public lands.
This campaign has been gaining momentum since the early days of the war.
It has been stimulated in large part by the high prices for livestock, by a widespread reaction against the strict wartime Government controls, and by a reaction against purchases by the Government of privately owned land for military purposes.
Proposals to transfer western public grazing lands to private ownership take two directions—the direct sale of these lands to stockmen, and transfer of the lands to Western States, which presumably would sell them to stockmen.
Agitation for Federal control of the western range began many years ago.
Authority for control of the ranges in the forest reserves was provided for by Congress in 1897, and effective control was established by the Forest Service in 1905.
It was not until 1928 that effective action was taken.
A special act of Congress authorized the Secretary of the Interior to enter into an agreement with the State of Montana and private landowners in specified townships for the purpose of enabling stockmen to lease Federal, State, and private lands and put them under control as a grazing district.
A general bill for creation of grazing districts passed the House in the Seventy-second Congress.
The Taylor Act was passed by the Seventy-third Congress and approved by the President on June 28, 1934.
This act directs the Secretary of the Interior to make provision for the protection, administration, regulation, and improvement of grazing districts; to make rules to insure achievement of objectives; to regulate their occupaney and use, and to provide for the orderly use, management, and development of the range.
Sixty grazing districts embracing 255,000,000 acres, of which 141,000,000 are Federal lands, have been established in 10 Western States.
They are grazed by some 9,000,000 head of livestock—cattle, horses, sheep, and goats—belonging to 21,000 stockmen.
Conservation of range resources in grazing districts is accomplished through proper grazing use, protection against range fires, and damage by rodents and insects, and operations to prevent soil erosion and moisture losses.
Orderly use is obtained through a system of issuing 10- year grazing permits.
The Forest Service has administered a similar system of grazing permits on some 80,000,000 acres of grazing land in national forests for more than 40 years.
Some range users now seek to effect the sale of the publie grazing lands at an average price of 42 cents an acre, a sum which appears to take no account of the Federal Government's original investment in these lands, plus the many millions of dollars which have been spent in the interest of all of the people on their rehabilitation and improvement to repair the damages originally inflicted by stockmen.
An extremely important reason for opposing this proposal of the stockmen lies in the fact that every irrigation farmer in the West has a direct interest in preserving the land cover against erosion.
The public grazing lands together with the forested lands higher on the mountain slopes lie almost wholly within the drainage basins in which are located virtually all of the 21,000,000 acres of irrigated farmland.
Production from the irrigated lands depends altogether upon the water which runs off the grazing and forest lands.
The manner in which such lands are handled detracts from or enhances the value of the irrigated lands in amounts which might easily exceed the total value of the grazing lands.
If the grazing lands are properly handled, the flow of water into the streams which form the sources of irrigation water is stabilized and may contain a relatively small quantity of silt.
The need for water storage is decreased and the life of costly storage reservoirs is greatly increased.
It is proposed that many billions of dollars be invested in irrigation and power projects in our Western States.
In fact, the future development and prosperity of these States depends largely upon these water resource developments.
If, however, unrestrieted grazing practices be permitted to flourish on the western range, many of the proposed reservoirs will be threatened with rapid siltation, thus endangering a large part of the resource development program, the future of which depends upon conservation of water resources.
Sometimes those who ask that the public domain be turned over to the States forget that these States, in which the public domain is mostly to be found, already have obtained large benefits.
Too few of the States have effective conservation programs for the land they received.
More than 70,000,000 acres have been granted to the 11 Western States in aid of education and various other purposes.
A large portion of the States' receipts from the public lands comes from the proceeds realized by the Department of the Interior from the mineral leasing acts, of which 371½2 percent go to State treasuries.
Since the passage of the first mineral leasing act in 1920, State receipts from this source have aggregated $63,000,000.
More than $97,000,000 of mineral leasing receipts have been allocated to the Reclamation fund, all of which is spent for the benefit of Western States.
At the outset of the fiscal year divergent views in Congress over the need for an increase in fees charged for grazing on the public land forced a virtual abandonment of the program originally contemplated under the Taylor Grazing Act.
One body of Congress maintained that the cost of administration of the structure, which included 60 Federal grazing districts, should be met from the collection of grazing fees and that the rate charged should be increased for that purpose; the other body was opposed to any increase in fees at that time.
The net result was such a drastie reduction in the appropriations for the 1947 fiscal year as to cut the available working force from 205 to 60 persons, thus placing the whole range administration schedule on a skeleton basis for the vear.
Individual stockmen and their local organizations, alarmed at the threat to orderly range administration, voluntarily contributed more than $200,000 to reopen offices and continue the work in some districts.
Definite steps toward a solution of this dilemma were taken by the Department in May 1947, when an increase of 3 cents per head per month for cattle and horses, and three-fifths of a cent for sheep and goats was put into effect.
This new rate of 8 cents for cattle and horses, and 1% cents for sheep and goats was one of the outstanding recommendations contained in a special report on grazing land administration prepared by Rex L. Nicholson of San Francisco.
At the same time, a special study was made by the Bureau of Agricultural Economics to determine the proportion of range administration cost which should be evaluated as representing direct benefit to the stockmen and that regarded as in the general public interest.
That study, recently completed, shows that the stockmen's share on the basis of 1945 and 1946 expenditures is 70 percent and the general publie's share 30 percent of the total cost of range management.
Federal legislation enacted in the closing days of the Eightieth Congress provided for a redistribution of amounts received from the grazing fees so as to increase the Government's share in relation to the amounts appropriated for administrative purposes.
Detailed arrangements have been made to put this beneficial legislation into actual praetice during the 1948 fiscal year.
As a result it is contemplated that a full complement of district offices can be provided for during the coming year.
As part of its management funetions over the public domain, the Department of the Interior administers more than 400,000,000 acres of forest and range land in the States and in Alaska which are in need of fire protection.
In its fire-protection activities, the Department adheres to the "minimum cost-plus-loss" principle which in effect provides that expenditures for protection may be justified up to the point where additional expenditures are not balanced by a reduction in losses.
This is the point at which the rate of expenditure is the most economical.
Generally, expenditures for fire protection on lands administered by the Department of the Interior, with perhaps the exception of those on the land administered by the National Park Service, always have been lower than would be justified by the "minimum cost-plus-loss" formula.
During the fiscal year 1947, funds available to the Department for fire prevention, presuppression, and suppression totaled only $1,330,000, or about 3 mills per acre for the entire 400,000,000 acres requiring protection from fire.
As actually allocated between the lands requiring protection in the continental United States and Alaska, 6 mills per acre were provided in the States and 0.8 mill per acre in Alaska.
These rates are obviously inadequate to provide needed fire protection for the lands under the Department's jurisdiction.
The effectiveness of the fire-control program of the Bureau of Land Management suffered two severe set-backs during the year: first through a major reduction in funds for grazing district administration and protection, and second, through a material curtailment of cooperation previously afforded in Alaska by the United States Army.
The effect of the cut in funds for grazing districts will not be reflected in fire loss records until the calendar year 1947 is reported, but the 1946 record does reflect strikingly the loss of Army cooperation in fighting fires in Alaska.
On all the lands administered by the Department, there were 2,559 fires during the calendar year 1946, as contrasted with 2,435 fires during the calendar year 1945.
The 1946 loss was more than doubled, however, with 1,857,000 acres burned over in 1946 as against only 845,000 acres burned over in 1945.
The major portion of the 1946 loss was in Alaska where 1,437,000 acres of public domain land were burned.
In 1947 a fire, covering 350,000 acres on the Kenai Peninsula, raged uncontrolled for months destroying valuable timber and big game and wildlife.
It is probable that had sufficient funds been available at the outset of the fire, sufficient fire crews could have been employed and the blaze confined to small proportions.
The National Park Service was dedicated to the preservation of outstanding scenie, scientific, and historic values of the Nation.
It has unalterably opposed the frequent attempts made to enter into those precincts set aside by congressional law for the enjoyment of generations of the American public.
It has been staunchly supported for the public is keenly aware of the pleasures it can obtain from the unspoiled areas of national parks, monuments, and forest lands.
Although the fullest possible protection of the natural and historic resources entrusted to it is a basic principle of management laid upon the National Park Service by law, public use, and enjoyment of these resources is, of course, the primary justification for setting aside these reservations.
The resources in park areas are preserved because of a conviction that only in that manner can they provide human beings with the greatest satisfaction now and in the future.
The sheer weight of the numbers who come to many of the most popular areas, and the fact that the Service's field forces continue to be insufficient for proper protection against the careless and the vandalistic, accentuate a replanning problem which has existed for many years.
The essence of it is to provide for the publie enjoyment of these places with reasonable convenience and comfort but without impairing their continuing capacity to provide such enjoyment.
In some cases, it must envisage the gradual removal from present sites of existing facilities and their restablishment elsewhere, where intensive use will be less damaging to natural features of high value or where there is more adequate space in which to meet existing and expected demand.
These changes must be gradual because, first, service to the public cannot be seriously interrupted and, second, the investment, even in badly placed or unsatisfactory facilities, cannot be written off with a stroke of the pen.
Added to this is the fact that the public, long used to certain accommodations, needs time to adjust itself to changes of location.
A general principle which has long guided the National Park Service in its planning has been that of devoting to intensive use no more space than was genuinely necessary and of providing for it at only a limited number of locations.
In many of the parks, the tremendous amount of camping during the past 2 years has subjected the available campgrounds to a degree of over use that calls for remedy as soon as it can be provided.
Not only is more camping space badly needed; other campgrounds need to be developed so that those now in use may be given a rest, and the natural vegetation given an opportunity to recuperate.
In some instances, replanning will involve the placing of restrictions on the visitor's freedom of action and movement so that fragile resources may be used without being destroyed.
Such restrictions are now being applied in certain places where the necessity has become plainly apparent.
At Mesa Verde, for example, the visitor may see Cliff Palace close at hand, but he is no longer permitted to wander freely through these remarkable ruins.
Experience has shown that this practice was causing a steady and serious deterioration in the ancient structures.
At Yellowstone, it is necessary to prescribe certain routes among the thermal formations, both to limit wear and tear on them and to curb vandalism.
At Montezuma Castle National Monument, in New Mexico, serious consideration is being given to restricting access to the lofty cliff-dwelling to those who are engaged in serious study of such prehistoric remains.
As is the case in many areas administered by the Service, original construction was not calculated for heavy public visitation.
In such a structure as the home of Franklin D. Roosevelt it is possible to shore up heavily used stairways and to strengthen the building in other ways without the public being aware of it or without any material change in its appearance; but such procedures are not adaptable to prehistoric masonry, except to a very limited extent.
Use, of one kind or another, is intended for all areas in the national park system; without it, there can be no justification for them.
But when its kind and extent is such as to cause steady deterioration or destruction of the very features on which monument or other special status is based, the Service has no alternative but to apply limitations upon public freedom of movement and action, however much it may regret the necessity of doing so.
Future generations have rights to enjoyment which we are compelled, both by law and common sense, to respect.
By proper management, vast areas of land and water—both fresh and salt—can be made to yield other crops essential to the national well-being.
The use of our wildlife resources for food, furs, and recreation has always been a part of our national life.
However, the phenomenal increase in the rate of this use, combined with a diminishing favorable climate for wildlife existence, threatens survival of the resource.
Natural biological resources are an important part of the expanding economy of our country and of the world.
The capital value in the United States of these resources—including all the wild or undomesticated mammals, birds, and fishes—has been estimated at more than $14,000,000,000.
The utilization of these resourees has far-reaching effects on the national economy.
Probably as much as $4,000,000,000 worth of goods and services are sold each year in the United States to hunters, fishermen, and others who derive recreation from wildlife.
In terms of direct commercial value, the fisheries alone are valued at about $7,000,000,000 on the basis of their present earnings.
While the living resources, in contrast to coal, petroleum, or metals, are renewable, they cannot withstand such mounting pressure if we pursue the traditional course of neglect.
The demands of the present and predictable demands of the future can be met only by so managing the wildlife populations that the natural increase is greater than the annual withdrawal.
This can be done only by national sponsorship of a realistic and positive program of wildlife conservation on a scale not hitherto attempted.
The difficulties of the situation are increased by the fact that the mounting demand for large populations of fishes, game birds, and animals exists in the midst of a national economy characterized by forces which tend to destroy or render sterile and unproductive the habitats upon which wildlife depends for its existence.
The control of industrial and urbanizing forces, the clear recognition of the needs of wildlife, and the aggressive preservation of at least minimum areas of suitable land, water, and marsh are indispensable to the retention of our wildlife populations.
Drainage of marsh lands, too often practiced indiscriminately and without plan, must assume a heavy responsibility for the decline of the waterfowl.
It has destroved most of the former nesting areas in the United States and rendered useless vast acreages of southern wintering grounds.
The oil fields of the Gulf States, now being extended eastward, have damaged extensive aquatic habitats.
Thousands of freshwater duck marshes have been injured by salt water brought in via the Intra-coastal Waterway, and other wildlife habitats have been ruined by the diversion of whole rivers into new channels.
The character of many river bottoms, normally among the best wildlife habitats, has been changed by canalization.
In an effort to provide intelligent solutions for some of these difficulties, the Fish and Wildlife Service is actively pursuing its studies of river-basin problems.
A strengthening of legal authority for these studies was given during the past year by the enactment of Publie Law No. 732, providing that utilization of the resourees of a river shall inelude the fullest possible development of its resources of fish and other wildlife.
One of the most encouraging of recent events is the broadening of activity in the field of wildlife restoration projects under the Pittman-Robertson Act.
These projects, subject to Federal approval, are carried out by the States and are jointly financed—75 percent by Federal and 25 percent by State funds.
The Federal contributions are derived from an 11 percent excise tax on sporting arms and ammunition.
From the funds thus accumulated, the Congress has annually appropriated sums ranging from $1,000,000 to $2,750,000 for apportionment among the States.
In 1947, however, Congress specified that all money derived from this tax during the fiscal year 1947 should be made available for Pittman-Robertson projects in the fiscal year 1948.
Because of the great increase in hunters and hunting during the year, and because many items of equipment became available for the first time since the war, receipts from this tax in 1947 have been estimated at approximately $9,000,000.
The largest previous receipts were about $5,500,000 in 1941, but the largest amount previously appropriated for wildlife projeets was $2,750,000 in 1942.
Carefully planned use of the additional funds now available could bring about much better conditions for wildlife.
The conservation of the commercial fishery resources, however, is primarily a problem of managed utilization rather than of habitat improvement.
These resources are for the most part marine, inhabiting a world where man has little control over physical conditions.
If we were formerly inclined to minimize the direct economic utility of our wildlife resources, World War II taught us the error of this view.
In the fisheries we have not only an element of national wealth, but a source of food and industrial materials whose strategic importance was then sharply emphasized.
Needing twice as much fish for food as our industry was able to produce, faced with the necessity of suddenly developing industries to produce agar, vitamin A oils, and other fishery products we had been accustomed to import, we received an object lesson in the importance of developing all the potential wealth of our aquatic resources.
The average yield of our commercial fisheries is now 4,200,000,000 pounds a year.
This is considerably below their biological potential which scientists estimate at about 6,500,000,000 pounds.
This maximum vield could be realized by such means as developing fisheries in areas hitherto little exploited, by discovering new uses for known resources that are now underutilized, by expanding markets in the interior of the country, and by applying to the management of our aquatic resources the principles developed through biological research.
Although more than 90 percent of our annual fish catch is taken from the oceans, fishery research in the United States has for many years been confined largely to laboratories on land.
Every other country with important fisheries has had from one to a score or more of fishery research vessels.
The United States, ranking second in the volume of world fishery produetion, has not made the small investment necessary to send even one vessel to sea for the investigations needed to understand the forces that control replenishment of the fish populations.
Toward the end of the fiscal year 1947, however, funds were provided by Congress for the operation of a research ship in the North Atlantic.
With this vessel a small beginning can be made in filling in the gaps in our understanding of the basic science of the marine fisheries.
Considering the magnitude of our fisheries and the immense area they cover, not one but half a dozen or more such vessels are needed.
Fishery science in Alaska, where the Department of the Interior, through the Fish and Wildlife Service, manages the fisheries directly, has paid substantial dividends, of which one or two examples may be given here.
The Alaska herring fishery, under a "catch quota" system of management based on biological studies, recovered from an extremely precarious state a decade ago to yield, last year, a catch worth $2,000,000.
Scientifically directed improvement of salmon streams in southeastern Alaska is being undertaken to increase the usable spawning areas, from which we may expect additions to the annual runs worth several million dollars.
Such methods can be developed and applied to other fisheries, resulting in more stabilized yields.
Before the United States can get the most out of its fishery resources, it must not only insure their continued productivity by scientifie research, but also bring about better methods of processing, distributing, and marketing.
Experiences of recent years have demonstrated how important fish can be as buffers in our national situation during periods of meat shortages.
Yet consumption of fish in different sections of the country is extremely variable, largely because our present methods of processing and distribution are not adjusted to the distances between producing centers and the interior markets.
In this field, research of the most practical sort is needed.
Not only in the United States, but in the world as a whole, the importance of conserving and managing the natural biological resources is now receiving more adequate recognition.
Underdeveloped and underutilized biological resources in areas where great shortages of food supplies and other products derived from the resources exist, afford opportunities for greater utilization and development.
Other areas where the natural biological resources have been depleted or wasted through lack of scientific management, challenge the conservationist to restore them.
Realization of these facts has brought about an international unity of effort in conservation such as exists in few other fields.
One of the basic needs for the planning and execution of an adequate management program is full information on land, on its topography and the location and extent of water sources.
This foundation must be provided through a continuous collection of facts to bring these data up to date and to complete the record where necessary.
At present, less than 25 percent of the Nation is covered by topographic maps adequate for present-day requirements.
Half of the Nation is entirely without topographie maps.
This means that, in the continental United States alone, almost 2,300,000 square miles must be mapped, and some 500,000 square miles, covered in the past, must be remapped.
Adding to this total the requirements for Alaska alone, makes the task ahead a staggering one.
Without these maps, geological exploration and resource roads, canals, dams, and other large installations—can only reflect approximate resolutions of important.
The Geological Survey has outlined a 20-year program for the reasonable completion of topographic mapping.
Intensive aerial photography and surveying make it possible for the job to be done.
At the end of that time, if sufficient funds are provided without interruptions, the talents of the road builders, the irrigators, the flood-control and soil-conservation engineers, and many others will finally possess a tool of which they have been long deprived.
Urgent requests from the War Department, the Public Roads Administration, the Inter-Ageney Committee on River Basins, other Federal and State agencies, together with many interested organizations, form a backlog which cannot be disregarded.
If national topographic mapping has been lacking, water measurement is far worse.
For the 53 years during which the Geological Survey has had primary responsibility in water measurement, the amount expended for that purpose has barely totaled $25,000,000.
And yet, it is upon those measurements that depend not only the very existence of millions of people but the programs of resource conservation and development which insure their survival.
The occurrence of water—in streams and in lakes—is subject to many vagaries.
Precipitation in the form of rain or snow is gathered together from the mountain tops, the hillsides, the fields, and the swamps.
The amount which finally returns to the ocean, where the everlasting hydrologic evcle begins again, and that amount which seeps into the soil, are the amounts which determine the extent of our crops, the limits to which we can supply water for domestic and industrial purposes, the magnitude of the hydroelectric power which we can generate.
Thus it is that we must know, with precision, how much water flows in our streams, how much collects in lakes and reservoirs, how much seeps into the ground to be accumulated in the water-table.
Without a fair understanding of the peculiarities of our natural water systems, it is palpably difficult for us to utilize water for beneficial uses and to control it in the prevention of disaster.
The necessity for continuing water investigations arises from the fluctuations in available water supplies resulting from variations in precipitation and other climatic factors.
This essential natural resource is not fixed in amount, quality, availability, or utility.
Because it is mobile and changing, observations of its fluetuations must be continued to insure its wise and full use in the public interest.
It is difficult to measure the value of information of this type, but it is conservative to say that the derived benefits are many times greater than the cost of procurement.
In negative terms, the costs of not having that information for the proper planning of reservoirs, of flood-control works, of municipal water systems, and the like are immeasurable.
Inasmuch as continuity of water records are imperative so as to determine constancy of supply, occurrence of shortages and floods, programs should reflect long-range scheduling and a consequent appropriation of funds year after year.
Minerals form the base of our industrial economy.
The demands of modern technology have inereased the number of essential minerals—essential for the maintenance and expansion of industry—to the point where practically all known mineral substances have some estimable value.
The national consumption of such minerals may range from the hundred million tons to perhaps only a few hundred pounds.
Yet, the interdependence of substances derived from minerals is so great that a deficiency of a few hundred pounds may delineate the future of the Nation.
The vagaries of mineral occurrence, which follow no concept of nationalistic pride, make no nation self-sufficient in its essential mineral supplies—and the United States is no exception.
Coal, salt, sulfur, iron ore, molybdenum, potash, phosphate rock, sand, and gravel appear to be present in adequate amounts, at least for several decades, although supplies of high-grade iron ore and first rank coking coal are limited.
Tin, niekel, quartz crystals, industrial diamonds, and platinum metals are in scant supply, and from what we know now of our geology it appears unlikely that adequate amounts ever will be discovered.
So lavish has been our use of copper, lead, and zinc that developed reserves are insufficient to meet our current needs, without intensified exploration and discovery of new sources, and we shall continue to depend on imports to supplement our own production.
Tungsten, vanadium, manganese, chromium, mercury, asbestos, and a considerable list of other less-well-known minerals have been in short supply for several years.
The industrial importance of this group grew tremendously during the war, and indications are that demands for them will continue at a high level.
Some of these we probably shall be able to supply in large amounts—a few perhaps adequately.
The faet that we are now exploiting or have exhausted the easily discovered mineral deposits in this country, mainly those which show surface evidence of their existence, does not mean that there are no more minerals underground.
Modern geological reseach methods are pointing the way to unpredictable new stores of minerals.
Furthermore, technology can be developed to utilize some reserves of mineral ores here tofore not thought commercially valuable.
Thus, the attack on the problem of mineral self-sufficiency is a twopronged one: intensive exploration and intensive utilization research.
To bulwark this offensive, there must be added the importation and stock-piling materials in which we find ourselves currently lacking, or in which the future holds little promise of adequate domestic supplies.
Fortunately, mineral deposits follow natural laws of occurrence; geologic processes in the remote past determined their location, size, and richness.
Hence, they can be discovered best by tracing the geologic story backward.
Systematic geologic mapping can eliminate much useless prospecting and thereby concentrate search on relatively small, promising areas.
The exploratory surveys necessary to block out the most promising areas must ultimately cover the entire United States.
Such work, intended to fit into the long-term project, is in progress in most of the 48 States, but the task is formidable because of its size and the lack of adequate and comprehensive preliminary geologic mapping.
When favorable areas are determined, however, the search can be focused still more sharply through more detailed geologic studies, aided by two highly specialized techniques—geophysical and geochemical surveys.
Geophysical surveys, long employed in petroleum exploration, are becoming increasingly important.
Sensitive magnetic and electrical instruments, some of which operate on the principle of the air-borne submarine detector developed during the war, measure minute deviations in the magnetic field of the earth, or record small differences in the electrical capacities of the rocks; either of these may indicate the presence of buried ore bodies.
Geophysical surveys therefore, are an economical way of probing below the surface.
The equipment owned by the Geological Survey is in constant use in both the United States and Alaska, and the results thus far obtained indicate that such work could be expanded profitably fourfold.
The relatively new field of geochemical prospecting is now being explored by the Geological Survey.
It already has been demonstrated that the soil, water, and plants above and around ore bodies contain minute quantities of related metallic elements.
Where such pointers are found there remains only the problem of finding the center of the concentration, below which, somewhere, an ore body may lie.
Research to develop sensitive analytical techniques for rapid use in the field is being pressed.
Practical exploratory procedure depends upon the outcome of this research.
Comparatively few realize that through this Government all the people of the United States are in the coal, oil, gas, potash, sodium phosphate, and oil-shale business, and derive from these industries an annual income in rents, royalties, and bonuses that now exceeds $15,000,000 and is steadily increasing.
The total reserves of the various mineral fuels, fertilizer constituents, and chemical compounds of industrial value that are subject to the Federal mineral-leasing laws in the public-land States are as yet undetermined.
From the evidence accumulated to date, however, they are estimated to be of such magnitude and wide distribution in the area west of the one-hundredth meridian, as to remove any fear of the exhaustion of many important minerals for several generations, if intelligently administered.
Each branch of the Geological Survey is contributing annually to the growing fund of quantitative data concerning these resourees and the varying factors that govern the feasibility of their developments; all stand ready to share the findings and conelusions with others who may contemplate exploration for and development of the minerals that are now subject to the Federal mineral-leasing laws.
Study of the factual records of the Department of the Interior relating to the accomplishments in administration of the mineralleasing laws discloses that the development of mineral resources under those laws has paid large cash dividends in royalties to the United States Treásury, to the States and to the Reclamation fund, in addition to affecting marked conservation of our national supplies.
Even greater conservation accomplishments can be attained, provided the Nation is willing to contribute a more substantial annual investment for the protection and utilization of its mineral resources on Federal and Indian lands.
One of the greatest needs of the Nation today is the discovery of new oil fields, in order to remove the pressure upon presently producing areas, which could be more economically developed if the pressure for their product were not so great.
To this end the Survey is bending considerable effort to expand systematic investigations in many parts of the country, to focus attention on areas attractive for exploration, and to provide a sound ground work of regional geologic information by which the search for new pools can be guided.
As a means of conserving or replacing petroleum, more and more critical consideration is being given by industry and by Government agencies to the feasibility of converting coal to liquid and gaseous fuels.
Fundamental surveys and studies of the grade, thickness, reserves, and accessibility of the several classes and kinds of coal are thus more urgently needed than ever before.
During the current fiscal year, only a slight expansion of our modest program of coal investigations will be possible.
Although aimed primarily at finding new sources of oil, gas, metals, and industrial minerals, the investigations of the Geological Survey have been of greater practical value than is generally realized in assisting in the development of already known mineral resources, in determining quantity and quality of essential water supplies, in solving mine-water problems, in selecting dam sites, planning highway routes, retarding landslides, and facilitating soil surveys.
Along with this work, purely scientific programs that offer the chance of formulating new solutions to old problems and of opening new horizons are followed.
A typical scientifie problem is the program of volcano research, designed for the eventual purpose of predieting eruptions through an understanding of voleanic phenomena.
Such fields of investigations, though occupying only a small part of the program of the Geological Survey, are typical of the type of pure research which has done most to develop the science of geology.
Although geological work is an absolute essential to the ultimate delineation and utilization of mineral resources, it provides primarily an indication of location and occurrence.
Mining exploration is therefore required to determine the extent and quality of the occurrence, and to chart the possibilities of and methods required for utilization.
One of the major jobs undertaken by the Bureau of Mines in recent years has been exploration work on strategic and critical minerals.
During the war it was demonstrated that, in the case of certain scarce minerals, production does not always materialize in times of stress even though the location of low-grade deposits is known and cost is a secondary consideration.
Dangerous delays, and sometimes insurmountable obstacles are encountered if proper ground work has not been laid.
In the case of deposits of low-grade or complex ore of minerals that may be needed in time of emergency, it is essential to have methods of mining and treating the ore worked out well in advance.
The lag between the time of preliminary investigation of a deposit and the beginning of actual production, even in the case of immediately commercial deposits, often runs into years.
This lag cannot be sufficiently telescoped in time of emergeney to make up for lack of painstaking development work.
The broad objectives of the program are to improve the country's internal position regarding strategic and critical minerals.
However, it is not considered to be the function of the Bureau of Mines to perform work in development that would otherwise be done by private enterprise.
During the eight fiscal years from July 1939 until July 1947, more than 9,000 engineering examinations were made, about 1,000 development projects were conducted, many miles of trenches were dug, hundreds of thousands of feet of holes were drilled, tens of thousands of samples were analyzed, and hundreds of beneficiation tests were performed by the Bureau of Mines.
As a result of this work, millions of tons of ore of valuable metals and minerals of both commercial and marginal grades were developed.
A considerable fraction of this ore was mined by the industry and used in the war; the remainder is known to be available when or if it is needed.
If we are to be prepared for a national emergency, we must have a virile and thriving mining industry, and in addition we must stock pile quantities of strategic and critical metals and minerals to tide us over the period of gearing our industries to emergency levels.
If we are to be able to speed up our production of metals and minerals to emergency levels, we must have, in addition to stock piles, an adequate supply of known domestic deposits of every strategic mineral it is possible to find.
If there are none to find in some commodities, we must know in advance so that additional stock piles or substitutions may be provided.
In the postwar period the maintenance of high levels of industrial activity in the face of shortages in mineral supply, the increasing dependence on foreign sources for minerals, and the great importance of the United States in international affairs, emphasize the necessity of adequate up-to-date information on mineral developments throughout the world.
Improvements in statistical methods developed as a result of war experience and well-established statistical and economic services on bituminous coal should be retained for the benefit of all industry and the Government in possible future crises when such information is esesntial in dealing effectively with mineral shortages.
Collection of basic facts as to the uses of strategic and critical minerals and the quantities on hand in industry that can be counted on as a strategic stock pile are of great value.
Expansion of the fact-finding program abroad in cooperation with the Department of State and the Central Intelligence Group is also needed.
These data are required in connection with market analysis for stock pile procurement, national defense planning, and planning the development of domestic marginal and unused mineral resources.
Two developments are forcing the United States to consider intensively the problem of using its metal resources more efficiently.
A number of high-grade ores once found abundantly in this country are rapidly becoming exhausted, and, at the same time, specifications for finished products made from these metals are becoming more exacting in order to meet new conditions under which they are used.
Such conditions are operating under much higher temperatures, heavier loads, high electrical and corrosion resistance, and greater mechanical stress.
We have learned how to make many metals more resistant to such conditions through the use of alloys and heat treatment, and are developing new metals.
In participating in the effort to meet this challenge to our mineral and industrial supremacy, the Bureau of Mines is charged with a heavy responsibility.
Over 100 projects dealing with mineral products are under investigation by the Bureau, most of which have a direct bearing on the utilization of domestic raw materials vital to full employment and continued prosperity.
This Nation still possesses immense known resources of mediumand low-grade ores of certain minerals.
While it is the work of the Geological Survey to add to these reserves, the Bureau of Mines is largely concerned with the economic utilization of such deposits, largely through improvements in methods of beneficiating lowergrade raw materials, better metallurgical practice, the development of new processes and the recovery of marketable byproducts.
In work of this kind, it is not always enough to establish fundamental principles and laboratory technique.
New and improved processes must sometimes be demonstrated on a pilot plant scale and each step systematically developed.
Where there is no apparent promise of early reward to industry to warrant private business investing funds, and especially where national security is the primary object, Government must undertake pilot plant operations and demonstrate the practicability of new and improved processes.
Such investigations not only are of paramount importance to our national security, but are an important contribution toward stabilization of our peacetime economy.
Sudden cessation or drastic curtailment of such work would mean sacrificing a vast stock pile of accumulated knowledge and money already spent on pilot plants that are either operating or in the course of construction.
In spite of the limited funds available for metallurgical research, the Department's accomplishments have been notable.
Stronger and more durable steel alloys have been produced meeting rigid specifications; high-grade sponge iron has been manufactured from various types of ore by several different methods, and this product has proved a technically satisfactory substitute for scrap iron in open-hearth steel furnaces, although its adoption by industry will depend upon comparative costs of other methods.
Basic investigations are being conducted to establish the conditions under which sulfur can be best eliminated from metal products and the knowledge thus gained should make for better metallurgical practice.
New structural metals have been added to supplement those long in use which are now in dwindling supply.
Electrolytic manganese, chromium, and cobalt are being produced from domestic raw materials.
Titanium and zirconium, two metals having unique and valuable properties, are being manufactured on a substantial scale by processes worked out in the Department's laboratories and pilot plants.
Large samples of these metals are being distributed to industry to establish the uses for which they are best adapted.
The demand is far greater than the supply, better industrial acceptance and lowercost production methods can be obtained with intensification of the present work.
The production of pure alumina from low-grade bauxite and clay both by alkaline and acid processes has proved technically feasible and while the cost so far is appreciably higher than that of producing alumina from high-grade bauxite, these processes may well prove invaluable in time of emergency.
Utilization of domestic deposits of magnesia-bearing minerals, such as magnesite, dolomite, and olivine for the manufacture of metallic magnesium, continued to receive the Department's attention, and methods of producing this metal and its alloys progressed in spite of curtailed funds.
The separation of both aluminum and magnesium from light-metal scrap is recognized as an important problem both from the standpoint of conservation and economy.
The Department's work during the past year has pointed the way to a better utilization of the large tonnages of such metallic wastes.
The recovery of rare metals as byproducts of other industries is another problem investigated by the Department in 1946.
New and important uses have developed for such metals as thallium and gallium, and a survey of possible sources as well as methods of recovery are being made.
Department investigations also disclosed the presence of appreciable quantities of vanadium in the phosphate-bearing strata of the Western States.
From the standpoint of tonnage, the vanadium in these deposits represents the greatest known reserve in the world, and research work now being conducted indicates strongly that this critical metal can be recovered as a byproduct in the manufacture of phosphorus by the electric furnace process.
In the field of nonmetallics, the Bureau of Mines has also made much progress.
Lightweight products for concrete aggregate and insulation purposes have been produced from perlite, a volcanic rock of which the Nation possesses enormous quantities, and it has been shown that strong, light cellular building material can be obtained from many clays by mixing and heating them with small percentages of sulfur.
Research on the liquefaction of helium in commercial quantities was carried out for the purpose of transporting helium in the liquid form to reduce transportation costs.
Studies were made of heliumshielded are welding to improve the method for welding magnesium, aluminum, and stainless steel.
This work will promote the so-called light metal era.
The feasibility of welding titanium by the heliumshielded arc method was demonstrated.
The Bureau of Mines work in research and utilization of helium could be greatly increased with resulting benefits in improved methods of helium-shielded are welding.
The welding of titanium with the helium-shielded are should be undertaken with a full program, as this metal recently has been made available through the development of a new production process by the Bureau's Metallurgical Branch.
The use of helium in welding zirconium should also be studied.
The Bureau should study the use of helium for degassing special steels used in the fabrication of gas turbines and jet engines for the purpose of improving the metal to increase the working temperature of the parts, and thus raise the efficiency of this form of power and locomotion that is being developed for power plants and aircraft.
As soon as sufficient quantities of liquid helium are available, research should be conducted to determine the physical properties of substances exhibiting superconductivity at liquid helium temperatures.
No research on the medical use of helium has been carried out by the Bureau, but 16 possible respiratory applications have been suggested and should be investigated.
The men who work in the Nation's mines are directly responsible for mineral production, and therefore their health, safety, and well being is absolutely essential to maintenance of production.
Mining is hazardous work in spite of technological progress in the industry.
Since most of the problems are similar for various areas of the Nation, joint national attention is logical and desirable.
Conservation of life was recognized as one of the objectives of the Bureau of Mines when it was established in 1910.
Coal mine disasters resulting in loss of both life and resources provided the primary impetus for organizing the Health and Safety Branch of the Bureau.
Prevention largely by discovering the causes of mine disasters, devising means of avoiding them, and education of the industry has been the general method by which results have been achieved.
From 1906 to 1910, just before the Bureau of Mines got into action, 84 major disasters occurred in the coal mines of the United States, as compared with 26 from 1942 to 1946, the last 5 calendar years.
This was a reduction of almost 70 percent.
For the same periods fatalities in major disasters were reduced from an average of 477 a year to an average of 92 a year, a reduction of 81 percent.
If the rate for 1906–10 had continued to the first of January 1947, the number of fatalities in our coal mines would have been almost 38,000 greater than they actually were.
With experimental data collected in its laboratories the Bureau has been able to render invaluable service that has helped to minimize explosion disasters.
Files recording Bureau assistance, indicate that property savings have reached hundreds of millions of dollars.
In recent years there has been a sharp increase in industries employing hazardous and explosive materials.
As the Bureau is the only eivilian Government ageney that has the facilities and experienced personnel for testing such materials, it is evident that until expenditures for such studies at an increased tempo are made possible, a potential hazard exists in countless industries, as well as in every populated area where explosive gases are handled and stored—hazards that are foreseeable and correctible.
At present, the large backlog of work of this nature in the Bureau of Mines is evidence of the degree to which outside agencies look to the Government for solutions of their safety problems.
The awfulness of the Texas City disaster reminds one of the need for early action.
If more funds could be expended on the projects, much greater progress could be achieved in exploring the basic causes of the ignition of gas, vapors, dusts, and explosives, and of the means of preventing propagation of explosions, in studying ways of suppression of coal dust during the mining operations, in investigating the relative effectiveness of new rock-dusting materials proposed for use in coal mines, in developing effective fire-fighting techniques for incipient mine fires, which have resulted in many severe disasters, and in extending, correlating, and publishing the great fund of information gathered on explosion hazards of hundreds of industrial gases, vapors, and dusts.
Modern civilization measures its material progress in terms of energy consumption—there is no better index of economic stability and growth.
It has become clearly evident that, as new sources of energy are harnessed, they do not necessarily displace previous and commonly accepted sources.
In fact, the increasing total consumption of energy in the world requires a compounding of all economie energy supplies.
On a per capita basis, the United States continues to be both a fabulous producer and consumer of coal, petroleum, natural gas, and hydroelectric energy.
All national trends are sharply upward for every kind of energy utilization with no indications in sight of any slackening of energy consumption in the home, on the farm, and in industry.
These totalized demands are sufficiently great to cause severe strain on the Nation's present capacity to produce energy, which although greatly expanded during the War, is being fully utilized without providing allowance for reserves.
The curves of production and consumption are coincident, and in some respects deficiencies are clearly in the making, if not already evident.
Nationally, reserves of coal and hydroelectric power have enormous potentials which assure abundant energy for generations.
In petroleum, total demand is now outrunning available supply.
The tremendous demands for oil and gas necessitate accelerated effort for the discovery of new fields toward production of liquid fuel from coal and oil shales.
If the United States is to maintain its preeminent position in the world and is to be of material aid in world reconstruction, its over-all energy plant must be expanded rapidly.
With the exception of petroleum, the resource base—coal, oil shales, swiftly flowing rivers— is sufficient for many hundreds of years ahead.
The immediate task is primarily one of providing capital investment on a sufficiently large and rapid scale to tap these resources on an efficient basis.
Petroleum presents the gravest problem encountered during the past calendar year—the first full postwar year.
All records were broken for producing, refining, and distributing erude oil and petroleum products.
More petroleum was produced, refined, and consumed in the United States during this period than during any preceding year—not excepting the war years—and demand for oil in the United States alone was greater than that of the entire world before the start of World War II.
For the first time in modern peacetime petroleum history, the American petroleum industry found itself unable to meet in full the demand for its products.
The ability of the American petroleum industry to supply petroleum products in vast quantities, of ever-improving quality, and at prices within the reach of all, has been of decisive importance in the growth of American economic, industrial, and military strength.
The present situation, therefore, demands careful attention.
The causes of this abnormal situation—inadequate supply despite record production—are twofold: The unprecedented increase in oil consumption and the critical shortage of steel which has prevented adequate and timely expansion of petroleum operations and facilities.
There exists a staggering backlog of need for exploratory and development wells, gathering and trunk pipe lines, refinery expansion and construction, and distribution facilities of all kinds.
The basic processing plant is substantially the same as prewar.
During the war, the normal growth of this plant almost entirely ceased.
The utilization of steel and other searce materials, and of labor, was permitted only for activities which contributed directly to the maintenance of essential war activities.
Generally speaking, the permitted expansion in oil industry facilities, such as those for the production of aviation gasolines, synethetic rubber components, and the like, although of decisive importance to victory, had little relation to the Nation's peacetime needs.
Such war-born facilities as the "Big Inch" pipe line and the expanded barge lines, which now form a part of the industry's transportation system, fall far short of needed expansion of prewar facilities.
A free flow of steel is therefore basic to success in closing the gap which now exists between demand and the ability of the industry to supply petroleum products when and where they are required.
There is no certainty, however, that adequate steel supplies alone will solve the petroleum problem.
Since 1938, new oil discoveries in the United States have not sufficed to meet the growing demand and to build up a reserve of excess productive capacity comparable to that with which we entered the war.
Peaks and valleys have always characterized the record of oil discoveries in the United States, with alternating attitudes of optimism and pessimism as to our oil future.
Certain disturbing factors of recent years merit close attention.
More and deeper wildcat wells have been drilled, more geophysical crews have been emploved, and more oil fields have been found, but there has been a sharp falling off in the average size of new fields discovered.
This has the double effect of failing to maintain the ratio of supply to demand and of increasing the unit cost of finding oil.
Another factor of significance has been the increasing proportion of gas discoveries instead of oil discoveries resulting from the drilling of deep wells, especially in the Gulf coast area.
Thus the Nation is faced with the critical question of its ability to continue to find and produce enough crude oil in the United States to meet the steadily rising rate of demand.
But, as a consequence of the high demand during and since the war, the Nation has now no reserve productive capacity of any significance.
This fact is the most important difference between the prewar and postwar petroleum situations, both as to our general economy and our security.
Forceful exploration and conservation are essential to provide as large a reserve capacity as it is possible to build, but it seems unlikely, at this time, that we shall soon again match the prewar figure of reserve capacity.
The safeguarding of the petroleum future of the country requires, therefore, that while emphasizing exploration and conservation we look beyond them to other measures.
One promising possibility is secondary recovery, which depends on continued advancement in techniques of recovering the vast quantities of oil known to remain in fields whose primary energy drives have been exhausted.
The study of methods to make that oil more readily recoverable demands the best scientifie efforts of both Government and industry.
The synthetic fuels program now well started in the pilot plant stage, but with a long way yet to go, is another potentially great contributor to oil security.
We must continue to increase our knowledge and experience in the development of methods of producing synthetic fuels.
Already, the production of liquid hydrocarbons from natural gas appears to be economically feasible, and great plants employing this process are planned or under construction.
Significant moves have been made by industry in connection with such researeh and development.
The Government is also conducting research and investigation in the production of oil from oil shale and the production of similar products from coal.
The present effort is by no means of sufficient magnitude, however, even though notable progress is being made.
The Bureau of Mines has been charged by the Congress with the responsibility for work on the production of synthetic liquid fuels from coal and oil shale.
During the past year, this work has been intensified.
One of the authorized demonstration plants is already in operation at Rifle, Colo., producing up to 50 barrels of oil a day from oil shale.
Another demonstration plant to produce 200 barrels of gasoline a day from coal by hydrogenation is scheduled for completion at Louisiana, Mo., by June 30, 1948.
In contrast with the rising costs of finding and producing natural petroleum, radical improvements in the synthetic processes promise marked reductions from previously estimated costs.
For example, Bureau of Mines engineers have plans for an improved coal-hydrogenation plant with a calculated efficiency of 55 percent, as compared to 29 percent for a typical German plant.
This improvement indicates a tremendous reduction in the quantity of coal required.
However, proving of these advanced designs, and other new developments from the laboratories, undoubtedly will require additional funds and an extension of the time beyond the 5 years originally authorized.
One important draw-back is the fact that production of large quantities of synthetic gasoline and oil from coal will require considerably more manpower than is needed to produce and refine petroleum.
Emphasis is, therefore, being placed on designing plants that require minimum labor.
The importance of this program was recognized by the Independent Petroleum Association of America in its proposed national oil policy and by special petroleum committees of both the Senate and House in their final reports.
Its importance in national defense has brought full cooperation of the armed forces in the Bureau's program.
In looking ahead, we must also take into consideration oil from foreign sources.
Imports should not be so limited as to force operation of our domestic fields at levels which exceed the maximum efficient rate of operation and thereby cause physical waste.
If this were to be the sole criterion, however, there would obviously be much less likelihood of attaining a reserve productive capacity.
Moreover, imports should not be of such magnitude or character as to threaten the economic strength of the domestic oil industry.
The most prolific reserves would be useless if combined with an industry incapable of rapidly converting it to the needed products and delivering them to the points of demand.
Our present and prospective supply of crude petroleum, even when viewed with a full measure of optimism, does not afford such abundance as to warrant waste in production or use, if we are to protect adequately our oil and gas future.
Vigorous exploration alone will not give us protection.
An increasingly better job must be done in extracting oil and gas from underground reservoirs.
The development of techniques and the successful operation of pilot plants will give us a satisfactory start toward the solution of the problem of petroleum security through synthetics, but it does not, by any means, provide a complete answer to our petroleum problems.
All indications are that large capital expenditures will be necessary and that a high rate of obsolescence for pioneer plants will coincide with advancing technology.
The present difficult supply situation emphasizes anew the necessity for protecting our safety and our economie welfare by bringing to bear upon our petroleum problems the combined brains of the Government and the industry.
The machinery devised last year to this end has already proved its great and continuing value.
Increasingly, the novel and complex petroleum problems of other Government agencies are being brought to the Interior Department's Oil and Gas Division.
Increasingly, the Division, directly and through the National Petroleum Council, is enlisting the aid of the industry and of other Government agencies in solving these problems.
For decades many agencies of the Federal Government have been concerned with oil and gas matters, each with its own specialized interest in some restricted aspect of the vast and diversified economic organization that supplies our petroleum products, but none were charged with knowing the effect of its actions on other parts of the organization or on the publie's over-all and paramount petroleum interests.
Now, for the first time in our peacetime history, the Federal Government has an effective, functioning unit charged with knowing the public's interest in all parts of the organization, and with gaging the effect of each proposed governmental action on the organization as a whole and on its capacity and will to serve the public interest.
Now also, for the first time in our peacetime history, the Government has a permanent, advisory group representative of the entire petroleum industry, the National Petroleum Council, to furnish it information and to advise at its call.
The data furnished to the Government by committees of the council during the past year could not otherwise have been obtained by the Government except at an expenditure many times the cost of the Oil and Gas Division.
The knowledge and judgment made available to the Government through the council's quarterly meetings and the services rendered by the council in the solution of special problems could not have been had otherwise at any price.
Although the Nation possesses billions of tons of coal ranging from high-ranking types to the lignitic, there is no justification for waste.
Certain types of coal, particularly those required for the production of coke, are essential to the manufacture of steel and many other extremely important industrial products.
These are increasingly in short supply, and their conservation through improved utilization is of great national importance.
Depletion of high-grade coking coal reserves has progressed so far that many blast furnace and coke plant operators have been obliged to seek new sources of coking coal, and to use coals that by prewar standards were unfit for metallurgical coke use.
One coal-washing study has shown the limitations of present techniques to improve a large reserve of high-sulfur coal comprising almost one-half of the estimated recoverable reserves of Pittsburgh-bed coal.
Some of this coal.can be made suitable for metallurgical use by washing, but the study indicates the need for more extensive research on preparation methods which will convert large reserves of low-grade coals into materials suitable for metallurgical use.
Surveys at commercial coal preparation plants have been initiated to provide fundamental data on present preparation methods, and to indicate improved techniques that may result in better products, reduced operating costs, and reduction of the discharge of usable coal with the refuse.
This study has shown that approximately 1,000,000 tons of coal could be saved each year at large mines operating in the Pittsburgh bed in western Pennsylvania by installation of salvage plants to recover waste now lost.
This loss of $5,000,000 to $6,000,000 worth of coal in one area alone is several times the Bureau of Mines' appropriations for research work on coal.
Research on combustion of fuels is directed toward substitution of lower-grade fuels for steam and power plant use to conserve highgrade coking coals for metallurgical use, and on improved combustion efficiency to provide heat and power at minimum cost from all types of equipment from the domestic furnace to the large utility power boiler.
Basic research in this field by the Bureau of Mines has resulted in saving more than $10,000,000 annually in Federal plants alone, and vastly greater savings in private industry.
Studies on the drying, gasifying, and combustion of the low-rank lignites and subbituminous coals are developing information on more efficient methods of utilizing these fuels which comprise about 42 percent of our known energy reserves, but only about 3 percent of present production.
Removal of 10 to 20 percent of moisture from these fuels results in proportionate reduction of freight rates for a given energy value shipped.
Boiler efficiencies are greater with the dried fuels.
In man's ever-increasing search to cut down the expenditure of human energy in the struggle for survival, the possibilities of utilizing coal's energy directly from coal beds have always intrigued the imagination.
The sociological problems involved in the coal-mining industry are not passing ones—the dangers, the attendant discomforts are archaic in a modern age.
Although progress has been made by increasing mechanization and improved working conditions in most mines, the over-all impact is still negligible as measured against the dilemma of the coal industry, its labor and its management.
One possible avenue for solution of the major problems of coal utilization is through the gasification of coal seams.
This involves the release of the latent energy of such seams by controlled underground combustion.
This method has important possibilities in the production of synthetic liquid fuels, for electric power generation and for supplementing natural gas supplies.
During 1947, the first large-scale trial of underground gasification in the United States was conducted at Gorgas, Ala., by the Alabama Power Co. and the Bureau of Mines.
Other tests are scheduled by both industry and the Federal Government.
From these, it will be possible to determine the efficiency and economics of such energy production from various types of coal seams, and to chart areas of the Nation in which gasification might provide additional and economical sources of energy, If feasible, gasification may ultimately make possible the use of energy from coal beds where ordinary mining methods would be unsound.
The net effect of large-scale gasification on the extension of the national energy reserves would be immense.
Reflecting America's upward surge of energy consumption are the statisties of the electric power industry—public and private.
Between 1940 and 1946, the total production of electrical energy in the United States increased 48 percent—from 186,000,000,000 to 275,000,000,000 of kilowatt hours.
Although the production of power-consuming devices for home and industry has not yet caught up with the demand for many of these devices, there has been a marked increase in the use of electric energy since the end of the war.
For example, the average use for domestic customers for the calendar year 1946 was 1,329 kilowatt-hours, which was 8.15 percent, or 100 kilowatt-hours, greater than for the previous year.
This increase in usage may reasonably be expected to continue for some years to come.
The increase in number of customers has been comparable to the increase in use per customer.
At the end of December 1946, there were 36,140,291 ultimate customers of all classes representing an increase during the year of 2,109,218 customers, or 6.2 percent.
Commercial and industrial customers were up 6.7 percent and residential 5.9 percent, but the greatest increase of all was in the number of rural customers which increased 11.9 percent.
The noncoincident peak demand on generating plants of public utilities in 1946 was 45,000,000 kilowatts, up 4,350,000 kilowatts from the previous peak which occurred in 1944.
Compared with this increase in demand is the 1,115,000 kilowatt increase in capacity during the same period.
The spare capacity on the previous peak was 8,539,000 kilowatts, or 21 percent, whereas in 1946 this had dropped to 5,304,000 kilowatts, or only 12 percent, a dangerously small margin, even if all of it were available and applicable to points of greatest need.
The appetite of the American public for electric power-consuming appliances, the increasing dependency of national industry on electric motors and related electrical devices, and the amazing growth of electroprocess plants for the production of light metals, electrochemical and electrometallurgical materials are so compounding and multiplying the demands for kilowatts and kilowatt-hours that the Nation faces an immediately serious problem of maintaining capacity to produce on an even basis with consumption.
It seems likely that the extraordinary level of 275,000,000,000 kilowatt-hours consumption of 1946 will rise to about 376,000,000,000 kilowatt-hours in 1952.
This would represent an increase of 37 percent over 1946 and a doubling of 1940 levels.
In terms of capacity to produce these billions of kilowatthours, it will be necessary to expand the Nation's kilowatt generating capacity from an existing 57,000,000 to about 67,000,000 in the next 4 to 5 years.
Despite the continued efforts of the utility industry, publie and private, and of the suppliers of materials and equipment, the power situation is expected to remain serious for several years.
In some areas, at the present time, new customers cannot be connected, and increases in loads of present customers cannot be permitted.
There are even some areas where all of the present requirements of existing customers cannot be supplied.
Such shortage areas occur particularly in the Western States.
Actually there is very grave doubt that the manufacturing capabilities of electrical equipment manufacturers—for the fabrication of generators, water-wheels, transformers, and the like—can do much more than keep up with the demand for replacement of equipment and a relatively small amount of machinery for new installations.
In addition, the curtailment of Federal programs for the completion and construction of dams for the byproduct generation of electric power provide another element of doubt and concern.
The situation occasioned by this growing deficiency of primary electric power capacity will have serious repercussions on America's capacity to produce and conserve.
It will bottleneck the natural growth of consumer demands for labor-saving electrical devices, and will adversely affect the entire economy of certain sections of the Nation such as the Pacifie Northwest.
Although a major portion of the electric utility production capacity of the United States is dependent on fuel-fired generating plants, about 30 percent is in hydroelectric installations.
Their importance, however, is far greater than the indicated percentage.
Hydroelectricity is restorable and wherever possible should be substituted for expendable sources, particularly petroleum and natural gas which must be reserved for automotive transportation and for the chemical industry.
Then, because of the peculiar requirements of electroprocess industries for extremely low-cost and huge blocks of dependable electricity, hydroelectric power must be developed in expanding quantities to assure the future progress of these industries.
Unless additional domestic hydro is provided at the maximum rate permitted by fabricating facilities for water-wheels and generators, the production of materials essential to the expansion of the Nation's industrial economy—such as aluminum, magnesium, plutonium, phosphorus, ferroalloys and many others—will be seriously and perhaps irretrievably bottlenecked.
In addition, hydroelectric power provides a financial springboard for the multiple-purpose projects required for flood control, the improvement of navigation and the development of irrigable lands.
In the auspicious beginning which has been made toward securing the full benefits of the Columbia, the Snake, the Sacramento, the Colorado revenues from power sales have more than carried their legal obligations for the repayment of project costs.
Irrigation costs are fully reimbursable, but there are few, if any, irrigation projects remaining to be developed in which the water users will be able to pay the full irrigation costs.
The irrigation costs in excess of the water users' payments must be paid by power as flood control and navigation costs are not reimbursable.
Even where there is no such subsidy, it is only through the reduced costs that result from a dam constructed for more than one purpose that irrigation costs are brought within the ability of the water users to repay or that flood control or navigation costs are brought within the amount of the economic benefits and the projects thus made feasible.
There are few important flood control or navigation projects which could be financially justified on a reimbursable basis, if it were not for the power which is developed as a byproduct.
All investment costs charged to power are recovered with interest on the unpaid balance from power revenues.
The availability of low-cost hydroelectric power has made possible the establishment of numerous large industrial plants in the West, furnishing an important and expanding base for the creation of taxable wealth and gainful employment.
The national urgency for providing opportunities for the rapidly growing population of the Western States therefore points to the facilitating benefits of byproduct hydroelectricity.
With the exception of the power from the Tennessee Valley Authority projects, the Department of the Interior is responsible for marketing virtually all hydroelectric power developed at Federal water-control projects.
The vesting of this responsibility in the Department is the natural outgrowth of its long experience in marketing power from projects which it constructed and operated, when they were the only important Federal power developments.
The Bonneville Dam on the Columbia River between Oregon and Washington was the first War Department project from which the Department of the Interior was given the responsibility for power marketing.
A Bonneville Power Administration was created by statute within the Department in 1937 for this purpose.
Since it possessed transmission lines in Washington and Oregon it was later designated as the marketing agency for power from the Bureau of Reclamation's Grand Coulee Dam on the upper Columbia River in Washington.
It has also been designated to market power from the War Department's MeNary Dam on the Columbia River between Oregon and Washington and Snake River Dams in Idaho, and the Bureau of Reclamation's Hungry Horse Dam on the South Fork of the Flathead River in Montana.
Fort Peck Dam on the Missouri River in Montana was the second War Department dam from which the power was turned over to the Department of the Interior for marketing, under the provisions of the Fort Peck Act of 1938, which specifically placed this responsibility with the Bureau of Reclamation.
During the war, the operation of the Grand River Dam on the Grand River in Oklahoma was, by Executive order, taken over by the Federal Government and responsibility therefor placed with the Public Works Administration.
In 1943, by Executive order, this responsibility was transferred to the Department of the Interior which established the Southwestern Power Administration to perform this function.
The Southwestern Power Administration was also entrusted, by Executive order, with the marketing of the power from the War Department's Denison Dam on the Red River between Oklahoma and Texas and the Norfork Dam on the North Fork of the White River in Arkansas.
After passage of the Flood Control Act of 1944, section 5 of which placed the responsibility for the marketing of power from all War Department reservoir projects, heretofore or hereafter constucted, with the Department of the Interior, the Southwestern Power Administration, by departmental order, was made responsible for marketing power from any of these projects located in Arkansas and Louisiana and parts of Oklahoma, Texas, Missouri, and Kansas, including the Denison and Norfork projects.
The Grand River Dam project was returned to the Grand River Dam Authority, an agency of the State of Oklahoma, on September 1, 1946.
The Bureau of Reclamation markets the power from its own and all War Department projects west of the Mississippi River, except from those in the marketing areas of the Bonneville and the Southwestern Power Administrations.
At this time, the only authorized War Department project from which the Bureau will market power will be situated in the Missouri Valley and in the Central Valley of California.
The arrangement whereby an agency of the Department of the Interior markets power from both Interior and War Department projects is particularly appropriate in these areas, as it is in the Columbia Basin, because of the interrelationship of the projects.
In all of these areas it would be impossible to obtain the full potential benefits on any other basis.
In the area east of the Mississippi River and mainly south of the Ohio River, a number of War Department projects have been authorized.
A group of eight projects are authorized for construction in the Cumberland River Basin.
These projects are so situated as to belong naturally on the system of the Tennessee Valley Authority.
Accordingly, the Department of the Interior has reached an understanding with the Authority whereby the latter will handle the actual marketing of the power from these projects.
The other authorized southeastern projects are located in basin draining into the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic Ocean.
This area has been well covered by War Department investigations, and nine projects have been specifically authorized.
There is also a blanket authorization for development of the Alabama-Coosa River system.
River basin developments have been approved in the Apalachicola, Savannah, and Roanoke Basins, and developments have been investigated and found feasible in the Santee and Pee Dee River Basins which would be desirable for flood control and navigation.
The proposed developments will constitute a compact and well-spaced group of projects which ultimately should be interconnected in order that the greatest possible benefits may be derived from the power generated at these federally constructed dams.
At the end of the fiscal year, there had been authorized for construction by the Bureau of Reclamation and the Corps of Engineers projects having an ultimate capacity of 14,100,000 kilowatts.
Of this, 2,971,000 kilowatts were in operation and 3,296,000 kilowatts were under construction.
In addition, there are many projects in riverbasin development plans which have been approved and others which have been investigated and found feasible but as yet have not been authorized or approved.
In the Southeastern States alone, there are 1,094,000 kilowatts in approved projects and 880,000 kilowatts in feasible but unapproved projects included in recent investigations made by the Army Corps of Engineers.
There are also uncounted kilowatts of potential feasible power in streams which have not been completely investigated and in streams where partial developments for flood control alone have been made without taking advantage of the full potentialities of the streams for power developments.
Plans of the various marketing agencies contemplate the construction of backbone transmission systems in each area interconnecting the various Government plants through the load centers and connecting to the existing utility system in the area.
Such systems cannot in any sense be considered as duplicating lines of existing systems.
They will serve an entirely new function of tying together all of the power resources of a large area and permit the transferring of blocks of power to best suit the market conditions.
They will also play an important part in making this power immediately available for national defense purposes as well as for any other Federal needs.
The program of the Department thus recited depends on the rapidity with which necessary funds are obtained, how fast manufacturing capacity can provide turbines, generators, and electrical equipment.
The immediate future ability of the Department's power agencies to meet current power demands must also reflect the fullest and most effective utilization of existing facilities and those which can be brought into production most immediately.
By this token, therefore, all devices employed during the war to coordinate electrical operations and to gain energy and capacity are being continued.
Arrangements have been made, wherever feasible, for relaving excess power from one area to another, although this excess power may not be available continuously.
All the advantages of integrated system operations are being employed to the limit in every marketing area of the Department.
The Department's program is designed to improve the power situation in the Northwest through the installation of additional generators at Grand Coulee and the construction of the Hungry Horse project on the headwaters of the Columbia River in Montana and the Anderson Ranch and Palisades projects in Idaho.
Also, power from the War Department's MeNary Dam, now under construetion on the main stem of the Columbia River, will substantially increase the power available for sale by the Department.
Davis Dam, on the Colorado River, will afford partial relief in Arizona and adjoining territory in Nevada and California.
In the Missouri River Basin the Bureau of Reclamation now has under construction two Colorado-Big Thompson plants in Colorado and the Boysen, Kortes, and Heart Mountain plants in Wyoming, while the War Department is constructing the Garrison project in North Dakota and the Fort Randall project in South Dakota.
In California, the Keswick plant is nearing completion, and three units are being added to the power plant at Shasta Dam.
The Department's system in the Gulf Southwest will be supplied by the additional generators being installed at the Denison and Norfork power plants and from the Bull Shoals, Narrows, and Fort Gibson projects now under construction, all by the War Department.
Power from the Allatoona, Buggs Island, Clark Hill, and the Cumberland River projects will add needed capacity in the Southeast.
The American Indian and the resources to which he has inviolate right are a potentially rich part of the Nation's capacity to produce.
For instance, of the more than 56,000,000 acres of tribal and individually owned land, 3,000,000 acres are classed as agricultural, 16,000,000 as forest, and 32,000,000 as grazing.
A rough value for this land, its improvements and timber is placed at almost $400,000,000 to which must be added Indian livestock valued at $40,000,000 and an undetermined amount for mineral deposits which are contained in the Indian lands.
As an indication of the value of their minerals, an annual income of almost $7,000,000 was produced in the last year.
With the imminence of establishment of a full-scale phosphate industry in the West which would draw a portion of its requirements for rock phosphate from Indian lands, this income should be increased substantially.
Improvements of the Indian estate by the Federal Government in the discharge of its trusteeship responsibility can be estimated at $177,000,000 for buildings and structures, roads, and irrigation works.
This physical plant can carry its proportionate share of the national production.
Its potentialities for providing an increasing degree of well-being for the Indian population have barely been tapped.
The key to the achievement of a balanced contribution by the Indians and their resources is the degree to which the Federal Government through the Department of the Interior's Bureau of Indian Affairs can assist the Indian to develop his resources on a sustained-use basis and to transfer to the Indian, as rapidly as he is willing and able to assume it, full responsibility for management.
That progress is being made is demonstrated by the fact that for the first time since Indian relations under the Constitution were made a Federal responsibility, the resources of the Indian people have been stabilized.
Their land holdings for the first time are increasing rather than decreasing.
But the goal is still a distant one, and the intensity and magnitude of the overall effort must be sharply increased.
The Indian population is predominantly rural.
The 1940 census returns showed that only 9 percent of all Indians enumerated were living in urban areas.
The situation with regard to employment revealed a similar concentration : 30 percent of all Indians were listed as farmers or farm managers; 22 percent as farm or other laborers; and 18 percent were employed by CCC, WPA, and other emergency activities in rural areas.
Any population so situated obviously must look to the land for its security.
It is estimated that 44,000 Indian families, or slightly more than one-half of the Indian population, derive their income in whole or in part from agricultural pursuits.
The income derived from agriculture in 1946 was estimated at $40,000,000, or approximately $918 per family.
This compares with a national average in 1945 of $2,541 per non-Indian farm operator.
To understand these Indian averages, it should be explained that agricultural extension work was not organized among the Indian people until 1930.
Even after its organization, the work was hampered by lack of staff, a condition which still exists.
In 1932, Indians owned 170,800 head of beef cattle and 11,300 head of dairy cattle.
The income from all livestock operations in that year amounted to $1,300,000.
By 1946 the number of beef cattle owned had increased to 382,300 head and dairy cattle to 50,000 head.
Income from livestock in 1945 amounted to $21,000,000.
This rate of increase is encouraging, but the distance still to be covered is reflected by the following facts: Indians owning beef cattle in 1946 number slightly better than 16,500, yet the population of the predominantly grazing reservations amounts to 200,000.
As to the lands classed as grazing (including timber and woodland), Indians today are using approximately 35,000,000 acres out of a total of 45,000,000.
This area, if it could be brought into Indian use by making available credit and other facilities, would permit the Indians to increase their livestock holdings by better than 300,000 head.
This stock, on the basis of 60 breeding cows per family, would give an average income of $1,200 to about 5,000 families.
A somewhat comparable situation exists with regard to the use of agricultural lands.
In 1932 the Indians were reported using slightly over 500,000 acres in growing field crops and gardens.
This acreage had increased to about 900,000 acres in 1946, but even this left 1,800,000 acres in non-Indian operation.
The value of sales from crops production in 1946 amounted to $7,688,500 an average of $8.50 per acre.
If the same rate of return were realized, as on the lands in non-Indian use, the Indians would increase their agricultural income by more than $15,000,000.
On the basis of $1,200 per family, 12,500 additional families would benefit.
Similar parallels could be cited with respect to the use made of, and income derived from, the forests and mineral deposits on Indian lands.
The greatest single factor responsible for Indian use of resources is the revolving credit fund authorized by the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934.
July 1, 1935, and appropriations to date amount to a total of $6,600,000.
Money repaid into the fund becomes available for further loans.
Altogether $12,927,290 has been loaned in cash since the program was inaugurated.
The effectiveness of the program, from a banking point of view, is indicated in the delinquency rate.
Of $5,630,737 which was due in 1947, only $18,925 was written off, or less than 0.3 of 1 percent.
Supplementing these cash loans, the Indian Service has a revolving cattle pool which started with breeding cows obtained in 1934 and 1935 under the drought-relief program.
Altogether, a herd of 42 head, was obtained and distributed to loan clients who repaid in kind.
Up to the present, a total of 122,750 head has been loaned to Indians.
How the Federal Government may remove itself as trustee over Indian property and how it may discontinue the services which it now provides are questions requiring the most careful examination.
With its plenary power in matters affecting the Indians and their property, the Congress could at any moment withhold all appropriations for Indian administration and it could remove all trustee safeguards now in force.
Entirely apart from the injustice which such precipitate action would inflict on these first Americans, whose property rights do not derive from any benevolence of the United States, it would prove economically disastrous to reduce the resources available to the Indians.
In testimony before the Senate Civil Service Committee in February 1947, an attempt was made to suggest a fair and equitable basis upon which the the Government might measure its responsibility toward a tribe and so determine when it might withdraw as trustee.
Four factors were suggested: (1) The degree of assimilation of a tribe, as indicating aceptance by the Indians of white habits and acceptance of the Indians by the white community; (2) economic eondition of a tribe, to indicate a reasonable possibility of gaining a livelihood through the use of available resources; (3) willingness of the tribe to dispense with Federal aid and guidance, and (4) willingness and ability of States and communities to provide public services.
The testimony further indicated that, on the suggested basis of judgment, certain tribes and groups were at the point where, at an early date, if not in all cases immediately, Federal supervision could be curtailed or eliminated.
For a second list of tribes, a somewhat longer period of adjustment and preparation was indicated.
Finally, as to certain tribes and groups, where conditions with respect to all four factors were unfavorable, continued Federal assistance for an indefinite period seemed unavoidable.
Whether these are the proper factors to consider, or whether they are the only factors that need to be considered, is immaterial at the moment.
It.
In the report, reference is made to legislative proposals in the first session of the Eightieth Congress to remove restrictions against the alienation of Indian lands, to make these lands subject to taxation, and to throw the allotted Indians upon their own resources regardless of their readiness for such a move.
These proposals have had a disturbing effect.
To the extent that they reflect impatience with the rate at which the Government is achieving solutions for the many problems facing the Indian population, they have validity.
Granted, perhaps, that the rate of progress has been slow, it nevertheless follows that we get ahead no faster if we reduce our present effort.
A hungry and sick Indian is not brought nearer to the day when he may have food and good health if we allow his meager resources to be further diminished or wasted.
The territories and island possessions of the United States present a wide range of opportunities for the expansion of national production and as wide a range of problems toward the conservation of resources.
The kaleidoscopic variety of challenges to the ingenuity of both Government and private enterprise are exemplified by the contrast between the vast and grossly underpopulated area of Alaska and the small densely peopled acres of Puerto Rico, of the Arctic conditions of much of Alaska, and the tropical lushness of Hawaii.
Sharp as these physical differences may be, the canvas of development is the same: The blending of resources for the creation of opportunity for people.
The effort of the Federal Government, primarily residing in the Department and coordinated through its Division of Territories and Island Possessions, is of primary importance until such time as self-responsibility through statehood can be achieved for at least Alaska and Haiwaii.
For many years, the tremendous possibilities of development in Alaska have been recognized; but problems such as transportation, establishment of year-round industries, interesting new capital, and providing competition without dated established interests, have combined to erect barriers to the expansion of population which the territory should have.
The foundation for realizing the full potentials of Alaska is to be found in providing a free and competitive atmosphere for private enterprise—large or small.
Alaska's three basic present industries, built upon its natural resources, are commercial fishing, mining, and the taking of furs.
Potentially, it has at least two other important resources which can be developed to rival and surpass the importance of the first three— timber and tourist attractions.
The imminent development of these does not detract, however, from the necessity of a correlated expansion of Alaska's agricultural lands and its energy resources.
With these basic resources it will be possible to compound the opportunities for the ultimate population required.
Although for years, the appetite of the Nation's lumber industry has been whetted by the immense forests of southeastern Alaska, year after vear, millions of board feet of timber ripened, decayed, and died.
Conscious of this loss, the Territory through its officials and those of the Forest Service, sought interests to develop wisely this latent economic resource.
Today, Alaska stands on the threshold of one of its most important developments—the establishment within 2 or 3 years of possibly three large pulp and paper plants, guaranteed perpetuity of supply through sustained yield.
This could provide a doubled or tripled population for southeastern Alaska and, ultimately, as much as 25 percent of the entire national requirements for pulp and paper.
A major obstacle to pulp plant investment was the so-called “Indian possessory rights," the restrictive requirements of which, in large measure, were overcome by legislation passed in the last session of Congress.
The requirements of these pulp and paper plants for pure fresh water and large quantities of electrical power have drawn considerable attention to the hydroelectric potentials of southeastern Alaska.
The physiographie and elimatic conditions of this area are not unlike those of Scandinavian countries—deeply indented fjords, high mountains, and innumerable torrential water courses, fed by a very heavy precipitation.
Thus, last year, the Federal Power Commission and the Forest Service jointly completed a study of potential hydro sites in southeastern Alaska.
The principal purpose was one of determining whether low-cost electric energy could be made available to potential pulp and paper plants, and to other types of power-consuming industries feasible of ultimate establishment.
Although only 10 percent of the area was surveyed, 200 power sites were listed with a total estimated firm capacity of 590,000 kilowatts and an average capacity of more than 750,000 kilowatts.
A group of some 27 projects, with individual average capacities of more than 7,500 kilowatts, have a firm capacity of 335,000 kilowatts and a total average of 398,000 kilowatts.
Studies remain to be made of construction costs and consequently of rates for which energy could be delivered to the consumer.
If power can be produced at wholesale rates comparable to those of the Pacific Northwest, its availability in time can be an important factor in the establishment of nationally important electroprocess industries.
The possibilities of water-power development in southeastern Alaska, and the industrial requirements of the Territory as a whole draw attention to its mineral resources.
Because, traditionally, gold mining has been the alpha and the omega of the mining industry in the Territory, its vast potential in the field of less noble but extremely important industrial metallic and nonmetallic minerals is yet to be appraised in even the most rudimentary fashion.
The effort of Government towards a bare start in geological and mining reconnaissance can only be termed as pitifully inadequate.
Of course, gold mining— which the war disrupted seriously—can be expected to continue in relative importance.
At the moment, however, the gold-mining industry has not resumed operations to the scale of prewar production.
The needs for the development of small mineral industries—such as for the supplying of construction materials desperately needed in the Territory—will remain unsatisfied until such time as geological and mining investigations can reveal the raw materials which can sustain even moderately scaled operations by private capital.
The possibilities for securing substantial sources of critical and strategic minerals in Alaska will be unknown so long as exploration is conducted on the present miserly pattern.
In this respect, an object lesson exists in a comparison of the magnitude between the geological programs of the United States and those, reported in Congress, of the Soviet Union.
The bounties of Seward's “icebox” in terms of fish, fish products, and furs have been fabulous.
The potential is yet greater.
Alaska's fisheries, yielding an average of $60,000,000 annually, is the Territory's main source of revenue.
The yield in the last fiscal year was just under 4,000,000 cases of salmon, considerably below the normal pack of from 5,000,000 to 6,000,000 cases.
While development of this industry is largely confined to southeast Alaska, southwest Alaska, and the Bristol Bay area, its probable expansion appears to lie in the Arctic.
Some exploratory work has been done in this region north of Bristol Bay, but not yet sufficient to assure commercial activity.
While the presence of sizable runs of fish is indicated, there is need for more study, particularly by the scientists of the Fish and Wildlife Service.
Adequate funds to explore fully these possibilities might mean the addition of many millions in yield to the Alaska fishery.
While the canning of salmon continues to be the major processing activity in the fishing industry, plants for smoking salmon and other fish are beginning to appear.
These small establishments, often operated as hand-packing units, are doing much to give a greater spread to the industry.
Strangely enough, the fishing industry has much bearing on the continued development of Alaska's fur activities.
Revival of fur farming in the Territory offers an important opportunity to improve its economy.
Fur farmers, who operated to some extent prior to the war, learned that one of the basic foods of pen-raised mink, fox, and marten was the waste from fish canneries, such as heads, tails, and entrails, all of which is now thrown away.
It can be had at the canneries for the taking.
The one important barrier to revival of this industry is transportation.
Steamship companies have refused to take live animals aboard their vessels, with the result that the exchange of breeding stock between Alaska and other fur-raising areas has been curtailed sharply.
The cost of air transportation in this instance is prohibitive.
In the taking of wild fur, the Alaska Game Commission and the Fish and Wildlife Service has carried on a careful conservation program, closing certain areas where it has felt that the take has been too heavy to assure continued supply.
The fur industry in the Territory yields about $2,000,000 annually.
In addition, the average annual value of fur seals taken from the Pribilofs is approximately $1,000,000.
Perhaps no other natural resource of Alaska offers as great a challenge to the imaginative exercise of private enterprise as its tourist attractions.
Alaska is a land of rare natural beauty.
From its rugged, mountainous coastal area to the valleys and tundras of the interior, it has allure for travelers.
In its heart stands Mount McKinley, 20,300 feet, highest peak on the North American continent—a challenge to mountain climbers the world over.
Less than half-adozen parties have scaled it, although many attempts have been made.
Perhaps nowhere in the world can the sport fisherman find such variety and abundance of angling.
In Russian River, Illiamna Lake, and Naknek are the largest rainbow trout in the world.
In its lakes and streams abound the cutthroat, greyling, the salmon, the Dolly Varden, and many other varieties of game fish, such as the famed Shee fish of the Kobuk.
To the big-game hunter, Alaska is a trophy land.
There are found the great Kodiak brown bear, largest carniverous animal in the world, the great-horned Dall and Stone sheep, the crag-clinging mountain goat, the Arctic polar bear, the Sitka deer and moose of the Kenai Peninsula, from where has been taken the largest spread of moose horns on record.
In the mighty valley of the Yukon the traveler may see the great annual migration of the caribou spreading for miles.
The sportsman, the mountain climber, the camera enthusiast, the student of flora and fauna, all can fulfill their desires in Alaska.
However, this potential will remain unrealized until the present scarcity of tourist accommodations and facilities is overcome.
With few notable exceptions, the traveler is catapulted within a few minutes from the luxuries of modern transportation to rudimentary living quarters frequentlv lacking the barest of essential comfort.
This is a paradoxical situation because the rapid and well-developed facilities of air transportation make all of Alaska easily accessible, and steamship schedules continue to furnish a means of communication between coastal points.
What Alaska needs—to provide a major opportunity for an expanded population—is a great number of both small and large lodges strategically situated over its vast expanse.
The current capacity of transportation facilities—air, bus, and steamship—is far in excess of existing accommodations, no matter how primitive.
Given a network of adequate hotels, lodges, and camps, the tourist business would expand to a major industry with an income running into the millions and providing substantial employment.
Alaska is a long way from the populated centers of the west coast and of the Nation in general.
It has no connecting railroads, its highway system is subject to rigorous climatic conditions.
Although the airplane is a principal pipe line, the development of industry and of the Territory does and will depend on adequate and reasonable water transportation.
So far, it can be concluded that Alaska has not had that type of transportation.
Three steamship lines operating out of Seattle share the Alaskan traffic.
Tariffs increasing rates an average of 65 percent on most commodities were published even though the lines received a strong subsidy in use of Government-owned freighters at $1 per year and other benefits.
Alaskans found living costs mounting to an all-time high; but even with this subsidy, shipping is inadequate.
Most of the vessels are of the freighter type.
Passenger accommodations are limited to half-a-dozen vessels.
Southeast Alaska has once-a-week service from Seattle and service to westward Alaska is even worse.
Whether or not current rates and services are justified, it is clear that adequate and reasonable water transportation is intimately connected with industrialization.
Seasonal traffic occurring in alternate directions will always handicap growth of sound traffic and inhibit service at low rates.
Costly winter lay-ups for vessels could be minimized with full-time local industries.
Undeveloped agricultural, forestry, and fishery opportunities in the Territory of Hawaii have been studied since the end of the war with a view to strengthening and expanding the economy of these islands.
While experimentation will be necessary before the practicability of projects under study can be determined, preliminary work indicates that a much more extensive development is possible than any which has yet occurred.
The soil and climate of Hawaii remain its most important resources.
Farsighted planning by the sugarcane and pineapple industries have caused to be set aside from 11/2 to 2 percent of gross earnings for research into more efficient use of the land and its products.
Government agencies are engaged in research which will promote more extensive use of lands not suitable for the two primary agricultural enterprises.
Expenditures for research amount to more than 3 percent of the gross territorial earnings from livestock, truck, and fruit crops, coffee, and other miscellaneous farm enterprises.
One of the most promising possibilities for improvement in Hawaiian agriculture appears to lie in irrigation development, which would increase acreage as well as the yield of land now under cultivation.
Another development which holds considerable promise is the culture of a number of nut and fruit crops on soils too rocky for mechanized sugar production.
Experiments with the macadamia nut, avocado, lichee, and longan have shown that these can be grown on Hawaii's great acreages of rocky lava lands, much of which is wholly undeveloped.
Government agencies are expanding their experimental work in these fields.
Forestry also offers possibilities.
Remaining forests on Hawaii have been preserved mainly because they conserve water for agriculture and domestic use.
In modern times little timber has been harvested because operations have been uneconomical, due to the poor quality of the remaining trees, or because stands of desirable timber are scattered.
Although the replanting of native trees has been unsuccessful, there is ample evidence that certain trees of exotic species prized for their wood will produce a commercial crop on lands formerly occupied by native growths.
Also, in the high elevation lands, several of the finest commercial trees of continental United States are showing exceptional vigor.
Development of forestry seems emphatically worth pursuing, particularly as it would relieve pressure upon lumber sources in the United States.
In the postwar world it is expected that Americans will become world travelers to a greater extent than before the war, due partly to improved transportation, duè partly to a higher level of national income, and due also to the fact that as a Nation our financial, industrial, and political interests are expanding.
The Territory of Hawaii has a resource in its climate and scenic beauty which has provided recreational values for those who could afford to travel there for many years.