EVENTS of the pa year hae dmonsrated that Amica fy arassed by the possibility of war.
Under these circumstances chances for survival rest upon our strength.
Our strength in turn, will be measured by natural resources and ability to use them efficiently and wisely.
This will be true, in the long run, whether we have war or peace.
Our great industrial machine, the basis of our strength in peace as well as war, cannot function without a steady flow of the greatest stream of power and raw materials the world has ever seen.
Two great wars and generations of profligate waste have eaten into our natural resources and begun to exhaust many of them.
We have made America the world's most prosperous Nation despite a reckless use of our natural resources.
We have cut over miles of our best forests, without bothering to leave anything for future growth; we have let, and still let, billions of tons of our best top soil wash away to the sea every year; we have mined our more accessible minerals, and abandoned those more difficult to reach.
We are today, in the face of an approaching shortage of high grade iron ore, using 14 percent more steel in our automobiles than we did 15 years ago.
As a Nation we are like a young man who inherited such riches he did not think he would ever again have to worry about money.
After years of extravagant spending, he suddenly realized his wealth was no longer unlimited—that although he still was richer than most men, he would have to plan the future use of his money if he wanted to continue living well.
America's wealth is measured not in dollars; but in land, water, minerals, and forests.
They once seemed inexhaustible.
But today we can begin to see the end of many of them, and in some cases it is not far off—at the rate we are using them now.
We have reached the point at which if we want to continue living well we will have to plan the future use of our riches.
About 50 years ago we began slowly to try to stop the waste and look ahead a little.
Our first concern was our forests—and we took some steps to protect them.
But the waste and the use of our forests faster than we replenished them continued, and continues today.
It was only 10 or 15 years ago that we began to worry about some of our other great natural resources.
Until 1935 we did almost nothing to protect our land—the most basie of all our resources.
Since that time we have made more progress in conserving and developing our natural resources than in all the 150 years previously.
Meanwhile, our demands on those resources have multiplied, so that we are continuing to use up some of them faster than we discover or develop new ones.
Unless future generations are to face a declining standard of living, we must reverse this process.
We must rely more heavily on our inexhaustible supplies, stop the waste of irreplaceable materials, and find and develop additional resources as fast as possible.
Over-all, we still are a rich Nation.
Many of our basic resources, are plentiful enough to last us indefinitely.
Scarcer ones can be made to last for generations if we use them wisely, substituting more plentiful materials where possible, avoiding waste, and developing additional supplies from natural or synthetic sources.
We cannot do this so long as we select our use of materials on the basis of dollars and cents figuring without counting overhead and other social costs.
It was immediate cash profit figuring that led to the tragic waste of our forests, our minerals, and our soils.
That was as short-sighted as for a businessman to balance his day-to-day income against his outgo, without allowing anything for overhead, depletion or depreciation.
We need to devise a new basis for determining, for example, whether in a given instance we will use oil, or gas, or coal, or water, for energy.
We need to take into account all the costs and base our choice, at least to some extent, on future supplies and needs.
Some people may object that such a measuring stick would interfere with the American system of free enterprise, but I say they have not thought the matter through.
Our American system cannot last indefinitely if we continue to base all decisions on dollar and cents calculations which do not include all of the costs.
As Secretary of the Interior—serving in the Federal Department most directly concerned with preservation and development of our natural resources—I feel a responsibility for trying to inform the American people of the danger they face in the field of natural resources.
Part I of this report will deal with some of the more critical fields and conclude with recommendations for action.
Further data are contained in the reports of the various agencies of the Department which follow this section.
HE use of energy of all kinds is a significant measure of a modern nation's wealth and scale of living.
Energy is used to turn the wheels of industry, to heat homes and offices, to provide transportation and communication.
It is not used just to supplement manpower but, in fact, to serve as a modern age Paul Bunyan in providing almost 99 percent of what we need to secure the comforts of civilization and the power that protects it.
America is the biggest produeer and user of energy in the world.
In 1947 it is estimated that we used 45 percent of the energy consumed in the world.
Our nearest competitor was Russia, with only 11 percent.
We used 40 times as much energy per capita as some other parts of the world and 10 times as much as the average for all the rest of the world.
Until 50 years ago, outside of man and animal power, almost all of our energy came from coal, with a little from waterpower and wood.
Today almost half of our tremendous supply of energy comes from oil and natural gas.
These two sources now provide us as much as our old stand-by, coal.
Waterpower accounts for only about 4 percent.
This lavish use of oil is not entirely a result of the development of automobiles and airplanes.
Railroad, and space heating, and industrial consumption has enormously expanded.
This amazing record is a demonstration of our skill in developing and using our natural resources.
But it does not demonstrate our ability to use our resources wisely.
Waterpower—which provides the smallest fraction of our energy—is inexhaustible and we still have a substantial undeveloped potential.
We can use it over and over again forever, provided we take the necessary measures to protect our supplies of water.
Coal is relatively abundant because of our huge reserves, and yet almost every year we are getting a smaller and smaller percentage of our energy from coal.
Oil and gas, which we are using more freely every year, are our most exhaustible and limited sources of energy.
Solid fuel and waterpower cannot be used for most of these vital transport services.
The future of transportation—which, in turn, is the basis of modern civilization—rests on the availability of liquid fuel.
Yet in the face of the fact that oil is our scarcest fuel, and the only fuel for many vital uses, we continue to expand our use of it in place of coal and waterpower.
Every day more homes are converting from coal to oil heat; more factories are changing over from coal to oil to power their machinery; more electricity is manufactured from oil instead of using coal or waterpower.
This is the result of making our decisions on a narrow dollars and cents basis.
Many utility companies which generate electricity use both coal and oil, changing from one to the other, depending upon the current prices.
Because of the change of a penny a gallon in the price of oil these huge plants may convert from coal to oil from our more abundant supply of energy to our limited and precious supply of fuel for transport.
Oil is sometimes used even in the manufacture of steel, in the heart of our coal-producing regions.
The potential danger of this situation is not so much the amount of oil we are using unnecessarily now—large as it is—but the amount we soon will be using if the trend continues.
Not only are we increasing our total use of energy, but we are inereasing the percentage that comes from the scarcest sources.
In 1947 we installed 829,470 new domestic oil-burning furnaces, or a gain of 29 percent over the number in use at the end of 1946.
Further installations were made in 1948.
There was an equally spectacular gain in the use of oil-burning stoves.
Factory shipments in 1947 were nearly double those in 1946.
Nearly 25 percent more oil was burned in 1947 than in 1946 for the generation of electric energy.
In the first 6 months of 1948 fuel oil consumption at public utility power plants again showed an increase.
In 1947-48 we used half again as much oil for heating as 2 years earlier.
If this trend should continue, domestic petroleum supplies may be depleted far more rapidly than otherwise.
Meanwhile use of oil for the purposes for which it is necessary continues to expand.
Motor vehicle registrations during 1947 reached an all-time peak of nearly 38,000,000 automobiles, trucks, busses, and motorcycles.
This was a gain of 10 percent over 1946.
Motor vehiele travel was heavier than in any previous year, and continued to gain in 1948.
Agricultural use of gasoline in 1946 doubled the 1941 totals and was even higher in 1947.
Aviation gasoline consumption rose a third higher in 1947 than in 1946.
Obviously this trend eannot continue indefinitely unless we rely on foreign oil or develop more domestic sources.
In 1947 domestic production of crude oil and gasoline totaled 1,988,797,000 barrels— the highest in our history, but still only about equal to domestic consumption of 1,988,970,000 barrels.
Fortunately, we have many other sources of liquid fuel and other energy that can be developed.
Our situation is far from hopeless provided we look ahead and prepare for the future with a broad seale program of conserving our scarce resources and developing those which we are not now utilizing.
The following sections deal with energy resources that come under the jurisdiction-at least in part-of the Interior Department.
They do not discuss the possibilities of atomic energy or solar energyboth of which may change the long-range situation, but neither of which can be counted on at this time to provide our necessary motive power for transport in the foreseeable future.
In the following sections, various suggestions for conserving our energy supplies and developing new ones will be discussed.
As the previous section has indicated, petroleum is our most critical problem in the field of energy resources.
Petroleum with natural gas provides almost half our total energy.
It powers our great transport system—and for much of that system no other fuel is available.
It is the key to our national defense.
Nowhere else in the world is there such dependence on oil for economic well-being and national security.
Yet the petroleum situation is not as dark as it often has been painted.
While our reserves are limited, and we have used up a large proportion of our original supplies, there are many undeveloped resources from which we can obtain natural or synthetic oil.
Vast oil resources have been found in the Middle East and in South America.
American oil companies have played a big part in finding and developing that new supply.
It probably would be cheaper in the long run to use some foreign (or imported) oil than to develop some of our own more expensive sources and substitutes.
Unfortunately, we have no assurance of continued world peace.
So reliance on foreign sources—particularly sources half way around the world—is dangerous.
In time of war our demands for oil to power our ships and planes would multiply.
Yet we would have great difficulty curtailing the use of oil in our domestic economy.
Any wholesale conversion of industrial and domestic users from oil back to coal would be impractical in an emergeney.
We would find ourselves in a much tighter spot on oil than in the last war.
When the last war began we had a big developed reserve capacity.
Now we have virtually none.
Our wells are producing about all they can produce without endangering ultimate recovery.
Adequate reserve productive capacity must be restored to protect us in time of emergency—restored either from natural productive capacity or from synthetic sources.
The importance of petroleum to the Nation's security and welfare makes it essential that information as to reserves and availability, domestic and foreign, be as nearly complete as possible, yet there are large areas where adequate information is unavailable.
Although progress has been made toward overcoming this condition, such as the Bureau of Mines project for gathering and disseminating petroleum statistics, much remains to be done.
The best estimates we have of proved crude oil reserves—from the industry—place them at about 21,000,000,000 barrels.
This, of course, disregards new sources, which have always been found in the past.
It is not a reassuring reserve at the rate we are now using oil.
Certainly we are better off than those figures indicate.
Most experts believe the industry estimate of proved reserves is conservative.
Furthermore, many oil experts believe that we have vast unproven reserves, perhaps as much as four times the proven reserves.
Even if this were true, we have only about two generations of domestic crude oil supply left.
So far we are continuing to discover new oil as fast, or faster, than we use it.
But this is a hazardous base upon which to gamble our future.
True, the Nation has experienced scares over its oil supplies for years and we have not yet run out.
The fact remains, however, that the best information in the hands of the Government today does not justify complacency.
It is time for us to move with the greatest possible speed to develop alternate supplies.
It may take us fully 10 years to develop them sufficiently to keep our automobiles, airplanes, and trains moving in a future continuing emergency, not to mention keeping many factories running.
To a far greater extent than any other Nation the United States is dependent upon oil.
Continuation of our present standard of living, our pattern of population distribution, and possibly even of our very existence, presupposes the ready availability of liquid fuels in huge quantities.
Yet this imperative need for oil foreshadows continued high demand pressure on domestic reserves and their potential inadequacy long before the much greater reserves of less highly developed areas have been similarly depleted.
The obvious implications of this situation emphasize the magnitude and gravity of our oil problem.
There remain great areas in the United States that have not yet been explored completely for oil.
New fields or deeper productive horizons continue to be found by more extensive exploration even in areas that have been carefully combed for years.
No producing region in the United States has been so thoroughly explored that new deposits may not be found in it.
The finding of new fields has become increasingly difficult and more costly.
Somewhere in the future there awaits a peak and then the beginning of declining domestic supplies.
There is unquestionably an oil production level beyond which the United States will not be able to go.
The change in our oil productive capacity will not be marked with dramatic suddenness.
The gap between our domestic oil supply and our domestic demand for petroleum products, which narrowed to the point at which in 1947 the one equalled the other, again has been broadened.
Despite the continuing advances in total United States demand, 5,331,000 barrels daily in 1946; 5,900,000 in 1947; and 6,089,000 in the first nine months of 1948, a substantial improvement in our petroleum supply was achieved in 1948.
The United States now is producing and using substantially more oil than the entire world produced and used in 1938.
We are using 600,000 barrels a day more than at the peak of the wartime demand when we had thousands of ships and hundreds of thousands of planes and military vehicles to keep moving, in addition to shipping vast ouantities to our allies.
On a per capita basis, oil consumption within the United States increased from 368 gallons in 1938 to about 620 gallons in 1948.
This is a gain of 68 percent in 10 years.
Much of our additional domestic supply has come from the intensive development drilling and the increase of production-allowables in oil fields which had previously been discovered during the past two decades or more.
Additional transportation was provided by putting war-built tankers into service; the addition of pump stations to existing pipe lines; and the ice freeing of important barge-traffic waterways during the winter.
Additional refining capacity came from converted or activated war-built units.
New facilities accounted only in part for the vastly increased domestie output.
A review of the things done during the past 2 years indicates that the relatively easy means of augmenting supply now have been largely utilized.
From now on, additions to capacity and supply will call mostly for new work and probably will be more difficult.
As a main objective, the Interior Department has been working to assist the oil industry to enlarge its capacity to produce, transport, and refine oil, and to deliver increasing quantities of petroleum products to the public.
The demand for petroleum according to all indications, will continue upward.
That further increases are in the offing appears certain when it is considered that more automobiles will be manufactured; more tractors will be used; more homes will be built and heated with oil; more Diesel-motored facilities will be installed; and there will be expansions in other oil-consuming developments, such as jet propulsion.
Two principal items of the anticipated demand increases—Diesel-motor installations and home heating—will call for the production of substantially larger quantities of Diesel and heating oils.
We can look forward to additional oil development, including production, transportation, and refining, in the Eastern Hemisphere.
Such development would have the peacetime objectives of largely meeting Eastern Hemisphere demands from local resources, and of making the potential oil resources of the Eastern Hemisphere more accessible to the West.
The Western Hemisphere has only half of the proved oil reserves of the world and only a probable one-third of the oil resources which ultimately will be developed throughout the world; yet the Western Hemisphere has been supplying more than 80 percent of the world's oil.
This is a relationship which cannot endure too long, or the Western Hemisphere may find itself becoming dependent for oil upon the Eastern Hemisphere.
Although major attention is focused on the development of the great sedimentary basins, such as the Persian Gulf, Caribbean, and our own Gulf Coast, a surprising majority of the nations include within their boundaries sedimentary rocks which offer the possibility of economically-producible oil.
Nations having petroleum resources within their borders should have those resources developed, as resource development is the key to social and economic progress.
The attainment of local oil production would advance the local economy; reduce the burden of supply put on other areas; lessen the need for ocean hauls; provide a background of oil supply as a measure of security; and bring development which would remain in and be part of the country's assets.
An adequate distribution of oil finding is probably as important as the magnitude of the finding.
Conservation at home calls not only for more rational use of our supplies, but for elimination of wastes in production.
In some of our important oil States, conservation practices are well behind the advancing technology of oil production engineering.
Maximum efficient rates of production are exceeded, vast quantities of natural gas—an invaluable resource in itself and of vital importance in the production of associated liquid petroleum—are blown to the air.
Unitization of oil and gas fields, a key to maximum recovery and to operating efficiency lags far behind the needs of the Nation.
The States which have not adopted adequate legislation, or do not enforce the legislation they have for the protection of our vital oil resources, must act in the public interest.
We need, also, to develop and to apply the techniques for recovering oil left in the ground in the older fields.
We need to spend more money in geologic survevs to find oil and to explore the resources in the sedimentary basin of Arctic Alaska and the submerged lands of the continental shelf off the coasts.
We also need a whole range of measures for development of synthetic oil.
Some of the possibilities in this direction will be discussed later.
Natural gas, which is produced along with petroleum as well as separately, is today our third biggest source of energy.
It produces more than 13 percent of our total energy, measured in B.
Yet we are allowing about a fifth of our natural gas consumption to escape into thin air every year.
This waste—estimated at 873,000,000,000 cubic feet annually-would produce almost a thousand trillion B.
We need to study the uses to which we are putting this valuable natural gas.
It is an alternative source of liquid fuel.
Yet natural gas is being transported in huge quantities to the industrial East for purposes which can be as well served by coal, of which we have much more plentiful supplies.
Industry estimates of proved natural gas reserves place them at somewhere between 166 and 200 trillion cubic feet, or only enough to last 40 years at present rates of consumption.
Already our Eastern resources are almost exhausted.
Can we afford to use such a limited resource to compete with coal?
Estimates of the Nation's petroleum reserves include primarily the oil which has been discovered by drilling on land.
In addition, we may reasonably anticipate large oil and natural gas resources under the shallow waters of the surrounding oceans.
Oil is now being produced from the submerged lands along our coasts.
Extending outward from our costs is a continental shelf which varies in widths from a few miles to several hundred miles.
The total area of the continental shelf, including the part surrounding Alaska, is estimated at almost 760,000 square miles.
Most geologists maintain that these areas contain many billions of barrels of oil and trillions of cubic feet of natural gas.
If we have reserves of large magnitude along the continental shelf, it will change our whole petroleum supply situation.
But we need to know more about the extent of these resources in order to plan adequately for the future.
The United States Supreme Court has cleared the way for action by a decision holding that title to the oil in the submerged lands off the California coast, belongs to the Federal Government.
Until the Court acted, the State had claimed title to the oil and had been leasing it to the oil companies for drilling.
The Supreme Court's decision one of its most important in recent years—turns over to the Federal Government control of the oil in the California submerged lands, and, in effect, presumably along the rest of our coasts.
In view of this decision, and in view of our limited petroleum resources, the Government has a responsibility to act promptly to conserve and develop this resource in the national interest.
The States—particularly Texas—have claimed jurisdiction over vast areas of the continental shelf.
Texas has passed legislation including within her border the whole shelf, extending 60 or 70 miles off her coast in the Gulf of Mexico.
Legislation is pending in Congress which would give this vast area to the States.
The Interior Department has joined with the Justice Department and the Department of National Defense in opposing this legislation.
Instead, the Departments have asked for legislation which would protect the petroleum in the continental shelf as a national asset vital to the security of the Nation.
It would authorize the President to withdraw from leasing and reserve for future needs any of the submerged oil deposits that might be required for national defense.
Within recent years, oil companies have paid Texas and Louisiana millions of dollars for leases of this submerged land.
Drilling already has started.
If the Federal Government is to protect the national interest in this oil, it must move quiekly in the courts and in Congress to settle title to the land, and to establish long-range conservation policies.
With the end of our present supply of petroleum almost in sight, the Nation is extremely fortunate to have this new resource.
It would be the height of folly to let this rich heritage be used up on the same basis that has wasted so many of our exhausted assets.
Nothing short of the national interest should govern the use of this submerged oil.
Regardless of how much oil is found in the submerged coastal lands, America has one potential liquid fuel resource that could last for hundreds of years.
That is synthetic oil.
It can be developed from coal, natural gas, or shale.
Our resources of shale are almost inexhaustible.
Furthermore, our shale is not being used for anything else.
From the natural resource standpoint, it is the most logical substitute for our limited supply of petroleum.
It has been estimated we can recover several hundred billion barrels of oil from our vast, unused shale deposits.
It may ultimately be cheaper to produce shale oil than petroleum, counting all the increasing costs of new petroleum exploration and production.
Our natural gas supplies are almost as short as our petroleum and so gas is not a long-range substitute.
Congress has charged the Bureau of Mines with responsibility for developing oil from coal and shale, the two almost unlimited resources.
Research in both fields has reached the point where commercial size plants are needed to continue the progress made in pilot plants.
The Department of the Interior recommended during the fiscal year that Congress authorize construction of three commercial size plants for producing oil from shale and coal, two of the plants using different coal processes.
Private industry construction and operation was urged for the plants with Government financial assistance to the extent necessary to insure a successful experiment.
The Bureau of Mines’ oil-shale demonstration plant near Rifle, Colo., has been in operation for more than a year, producing about 50 barrels of oil a day from shale.
By a comparatively simple refining process this oil will yield a fair grade of residual fuel oil.
Mining operations in the naval shale reserves at the same place have demonstrated that shale can be mined in large volume mechanically at low unit costs, far below the cost of mining coal.
As a result of its pilot plant experience, the Bureau of Mines estimates oil, produced from shale, could be delivered to the large consuming centers for as low as 5.5 cents a gallon.
Further oil-shale research is being conducted by the Bureau of Mines in a laboratory at Laramie, Wyo.
Here, among many other experiments with shale and shale oil, tests are being made on shale gasoline and Diesel fuel to determine their characteristics for use in internal-combustion engines.
The Bureau of Mines is experimenting in the production of oil from coal at Louisiana, Mo., and at Bruceton, Pa.
A demonstration plant to produce 200 barrels of gasoline a day from coal by hydrogenation is expected to be in operation by next year, at Louisiana.
At the same place another plant is under construction to produce 80 to 100 barrels of oil daily by coal gas synthesis.
During the past fiscal year the Department dedicated the Bureau's main synthetic liquid fuels laboratories and pilot plants at Bruceton where research in making oil from coal will be centered.
Private industry also is experimenting in the production of oil from coal.
Development of a synthetic liquid fuels industry should be pushed ahead.
It may require Government financing, although the capital investment for shale oil is estimated at a lower figure than for new petroleum capacity and although private industry is showing increasing interest in it.
But regardless of where the money comes from, the Nation cannot afford to gamble on its supply of liquid fuel, the chief motive power for war, as well as peace.
Rapid development of a synthetic liquid fuels industry will safeguard America's future.
Military authorities estimate that another war would require production of tremendous quantities of oil over and beyond present production.
A synthetic fuel industry capable of producing a substantial amount of oil could not be built during a war emergency if we start from scratch.
It would be a long-range development, and the Department has recommended to Congress that we begin at once to work out the problems of commercial development.
Sufficient data has been accumulated by the Bureau of Mines to permit an immediate start which would tremendously speed up expansion in case of an emergency.
If our foreign supply of oil should be shut off by submarine warfare, or enemy control of our foreign oil resources we would face a transportation collapse.
A synthetic oil industry capable of filling this gap could not be built as quickly as our synthetic rubber industry was built during the last war unless some commercial production already is under way.
We could not convert our millions of oil consuming homes and industries to coal overnight.
Our only safe course is to begin at once the building of a synthetic fuel industry.
Coal still remains our most plentiful source of energy, although it now supplies only half, instead of the 90 percent it used to provide, of our national demand.
But it is available to supply a much higher percentage if needed.
We have half the known coal reserves of the world.
They have been estimated to be sufficient to last several hundred years.
These figures, however, include bituminous coal, subbituminous, and lignite.
Lignite will be a much higher cost fuel.
Our reserves of anthracite are estimated at about 16 billion tons, or enough to last 160 years at present rates of consumption.
Nevertheless, we are using up our richest and most available coal veins, and are running short of certain types, particularly those required for the production of coke for the manufacture of steel.
Huge amounts of our metallurgical-grade coking coals were burned during the war and in the post-war high production period.
There, conservation is of highest importance to the Nation.
Coke plant operators have been forced to look for new sources of coal and devise new methods for washing lower grade coals to make them fit for metallurgical use.
Despite our huge supplies of bituminous coal we cannot afford to waste it.
Coal may have to take the place of oil in our scheme of things before many years.
It would require a 50 percent increase in coal production to meet a deficiency in petroleum supplies of 2 million barrels a day.
In order to save our higher grades of coal for other uses, subbituminous coal and lignite might be used for conversion into oil.
Huge estimates of our coal reserves have created a dangerous complacency about our future fuel supplies.
In 1947 we produced 630 million tons of bituminous and lignite, or about as much as in the peak year of 1944.
Anthracite production was about 57 million tons.
Furthermore, some authorities question the estimates of coal reserves—pointing out the possibility that a large percentage of the reserves may be difficult to mine successfully, and that the amount of coal available for metallurgical use may be comparatively small.
We need a reappraisal of our coal reserves, particularly in coking coal.
To obtain the best use of our coal resources we must develop more efficient mining methods, and more efficient burning devices.
We must cut the losses in mining operations.
The latest survey—25 years ago— indicated that 35 percent of our coal was lost in mining operations.
About 60 percent of our coal is now mechanically loaded, but mechanical loading devices cannot discriminate between rock and coal, so much more "dirty coal" is hauled from the mines.
Techniques for loading coal have outstripped techniques for cleaning it.
Much more research is needed in this field.
It is high time for us to stop using high grade coking coals for other purposes—for which ordinary coal would suffice.
Again, this will not be done on the basis of dollars and cents choice.
We have the alternatives of continuing to waste our valuable coal reserves on uses of lesser importance to our national economy and security, or of making economic adjustments necessary to limit the use of special purpose coals to special purpose consumption.
We also should press our research into the use of lower grade coals.
Further experimentation is warranted on gasification of coal underground—a technique that would make it possible to use great quantities of coal that otherwise will never be mined.
Development of this technique would improve materially our long-time fuel supply situation.
Water power, one of the Nation's oldest sources of energy, remains a minor contributor to our energy supplies, despite all the giant hydroelectric projects built during the past 16 years.
It contributed only 4 percent of our total energy from all sources in 1947.
But potentially water power is a big factor in our energy supply situation.
With proper planning of our future industrial growth it could do much to save our limited oil supplies, as our energy needs expand.
Demand for electricity is growing at a phenomenal pace.
Every vear we are using more electricity in our homes, on our farms, and in our industries.
It turns practically all the wheels in our vast factories.
Electricity is one of the principal requirements in the manufacture of aluminum.
The development of new electrochemical, electrometallurgical and welding processes is creating greatly increased demand for huge quantities of electricity every year.
Production of power was 73 percent higher in fiscal year 1948 than in 1940 and still failed to meet demand.
But most of our electricity is manufactured from our exhaustible fuels such as oil, gas, and coal.
Out of 321 billion kilowatt-hours of electricity produced in the United States during the fiscal year 1948 only a little more than 80 billion—or about a quarter—was hydroelectric power, the one kind which is constantly renewed.
Every year we are burning up something like 60 million barrels of precious oil making electricity.
More than 100 million tons of coal and almost 500 billion cubic feet of natural gas are consumed the same way.
This use of these limited resources will continue to expand more rapidly than necessary as the demand for electricity mounts, if we fail to expedite development of our water power resources.
It is estimated that our demand for electricity will be over 400 billion kilowatt-hours by 1952.
If the energy were available, it could go far beyond that.
It has been estimated that demand may double in a decade or so.
Under present methods, most of this additional power will be made from oil, gas, and coal.
Yet preliminary surveys indicate we have undeveloped hydroelectric power sites capable of producing an estimated 393 billion kilowatthours of power a year, or almost five times what we are now getting from water power.
That much water power could meet a substantial part of our future energy demand.
No one contends, of course, that water power can meet all our future energy needs, nor even all our future needs for electric power.
Not all of the undeveloped hydroelectric sites are located where they are needed most.
Two-thirds of them are in the Mountain and Pacific States.
But this is the area of the country which is growing fastest and where there is the most room for industrial expansion.
Our current energy shortage is most severe in that area.
To the extent that we can develop and use this potential water power we can supply our future energy needs, without exhausting our mineral energy resources.
In many parts of the country, particularly the West, water power can be produced instead of using oil, gas, or coal.
When we use coal, oil, or gas, we use up our natural resources.
When we use water power, we use up none of our resources.
Water power can be employed again and again, year after year, without depletion of the supply, provided only that we maintain our water resources by proper conservation measures.
Supplying our future energy needs from water power, instead of from our exhaustible fuels, would contribute to, rather than deplete, our natural resources.
Most of our recent dams have added to national wealth in irrigation, flood control, navigation, and other benefits, as well as in power.
If, instead of developing our 393 billion kilowatt-hours of potential power from water, we used oil, it would burn up about a billion barrels of oil a year, or approximately as much as the rest of the world is using for all purposes.
If we used coal to get that much power it would burn about 250 million tons of coal a year, or more than a third of our present annual production of coal.
The Nation has an insatiable appetite for electricity.
As fast as we have developed hydroelectric and other generating capacity during the war and since, demand has continued to outrun supply.
The noncoincident peak demand on all generating plants in 1947 rose 4,382,000 kilowatts over the previous year as compared with an increase in installed capacity of only 2,054,000 kilowatts.
This left a reserve of only 1,849,000 kilowatts, or 3.9 percent of the peak demand.
This is a dangerously slim margin for electric power, which cannot be stored but must be generated when it is needed.
The crisis was highlighted during the winter of 1947–48 by actual shortages of electric energy in many parts of the country, which forced curtailment of industrial activity and "brown-outs" to save power.
Yet despite these efforts to curtail the use of electricity, domestic consumers increased their average annual use to 1,438 kilowatt-hours in 1947, or an increase of 8.2 percent over the previous year.
The number of consumers increased from 36,140,291 to 38,431,950, or 6.3 percent; and rural customers 10.2 percent.
In some areas the utilities have been unable to supply the requirements of old customers.
This was most serious in the Southwest in the past year.
It is also serious in connection with the light metals industry and atomic energy plants which are so dependent upon electricity.
Government to accelerate construction of additional dams on the Columbia River and its tributaries to meet the expanding demand.
Military officials also are urging rapid expansion of the Columbia's power facilities as a national defense measure.
Defense authorities have pointed out that we should look to the Pacific Northwest and the Federal low-cost hydroelectric power developments there for much of the future hydroelectric expansion of our aluminum production.
Aluminum is being produced now at a rate four times higher than prewar, but the industry estimates output must be increased at least another third to meet peacetime demand.
Military estimates are that present production would need to be at least doubled in time of war.
Completion of the Pacific Northwest's power projects is the most practical means of increasing the supply of aluminum by means of hydroelectric production.
Government construction of hydroelectric facilities has expanded manyfold during the past 16 years.
More than a million and a half kilowatts of capacity have been installed by the Tennessee Valley Authority alone.
The Bureau of Reclamation has installed almost 21 million kilowatts of capacity.
But even after this era of great development, total installed water power capacity of the Nation is only 17,000,000 kilowatts.
Another 77,000,000 kilowatts remain to be developed.
Even at the increased construction rate of the past 16 vears it would take another 150 years to make this potential water power available to the public.
The Interior Department, in connection with its reclamation work, has become one of the major agencies of Government for developing hydroelectric power.
Since 1933, it has boosted the total eapacity of power projects built and operated by the Bureau of Reclamation from 35,300 kilowatts to 2,577,000 kilowatts.
The ultimate capacity of these plants, and those under construction or authorized is 5,500,000 kilowatts.
Generation had risen on plants operated by the Bureau from about 154 million kilowatt-hours in 1935 to about 17 billion in 1948.
During the war this Reclamation power provided energy for a whole series of new western industries, including the giant magnesium plant near Hoover Dam at Henderson, Nev.
In response to the rapidly mounting demands for western power and irrigation, the Bureau of Reclamation has mapped a 7-year program which, by 1954, would triple its power capacity and produce more than 30 billion kilowatt-hours of energy a year.
Congressional appropriations, however, are running somewhat short of this goal.
An even bigger ultimate power capacity will be provided by dams being built by the Corps of Engineers of the Department of the Army, the power from which will be marketed by the Interior Department under existing law.
The Army projects—scheduled and proposed—are designed for an ultimate capacity of 8,508,575 kilowatts, but only 623,400 kilowatts capacity had been constructed by the end of the 1948 fiscal year.
Plants with an initial capacity of 1,671,575 kilowatts were under construction.
Selling power both from the Reclamation and the Army projects, the Interior Department has become the marketing agency for the biggest aggregate of hydroelectric power in the world.
Through the Bonneville Power Administration it markets the power from the Grand Coulee and Bonneville Dams in the Northwest; it markets power from the Army projects in the Texas-Oklahoma-Arkansas area through the Southwestern Power Administration; and it disposes of power from other Reclamation and Army dams throughout the West through the Bureau of Reclamation.
Power operations of the Department expanded rapidly during the fiscal year 1948.
Production of energy for sale totaled 19.6 billion kilowatt-hours, or 20 percent more than the year before.
Revenues from power sales were more than $43,000,000.
Through its Division of Power, the Department also was negotiating for the future sale of power from eight projects East of the Mississippi under construction by the Corps of Engineers.
These plants will have an initial capacity of 645,000 kilowatts.
All of the Department's marketing agencies plan the construction of backbone transmission systems in each area, tying together all the power resources of the area to permit the transferring of blocks of power to suit market conditions.
Development of a system of this kind in the Pacific Northwest, with 3,000 miles of transmission lines, has proved an important element in promoting full use of the Columbia River power resources by industry and agriculture.
Development of the Missouri Basin project will provide a similar system.
Such systems would be impossible under a policy of selling power at the dam, which is advocated by critics of Federal power policy.
In Oregon and Washington, more than $140,000,000 has been invested in plant and equipment for new privately operated factories served by the Bonneville Power Administration.
This was a big addition to the tax base of the two States, amounting to about 4 percent of their total taxable property in 1938.
By the end of fiscal year 1948, the 10 plants served directly by the Administration had produced more than $700,000,000 worth of aluminum pigs and other products.
These companies alone had paid by 1948 more than $50,000,000 in Federal taxes from their profits and more than $3,000,000 in local property taxes.
Industrial development in the Pacific Northwest provides a preview of what may be expected in those parts of the country in which hydroelectric power can be developed in large quantities at competitive costs.
Most of the future developments can, however, realize their full potentialities only if they have supplemental steam power.
Few rivers have the steady, abundant flow of water that is available in the Columbia.
Where the flow of water is irregular, steam plants are valuable sources of supplemental energy to improve the continuity of delivery of power.
But America's rich land resources are wearing out.
Many generations of exploitation, of overproduction, of plowing lands that should never have been plowed, of destroying forests, have taken their toll.
About 100,000,000 acres of cropland have been ruined, along with millions of acres of forests and livestock range lands.
Every year we let enough top soil to provide a normal cover for 500,000 acres wash or blow away.
This is the equivalent of land sufficient to feed and clothe 175,000 people.
Another 115,000,000 acres will be ruined unless we aet quiekly within the next few years to save them.
This acreage represents a fourth of our present cropland of 460,000,000 acres on which we are dependent for our food and much of our clothing.
Meanwhile, our population is growing.
We will have nearly 10,- 000,000 more people dependent upon our land resources by 1960.
The rest of the world can give us little help.
Most of it has less acreage per capita than we have.
As a result of World War II much of the world is now partially dependent on us for food and clothing.
It is time we stop and plan for our future, and the future of our children.
America has used its land resources wastefully.
We had so much we gave it away to anyone who would settle on it.
We placed no conditions upon its use.
Farmers abused the soil and then moved on to new and richer land.
We used our forests and our range lands without any thought of the future.
Now we have little additional land that can be cultivated economically.
With a growing population, we must get along on what we have, except for the relatively few million acres that can be developed by wise use of our water resources.
We have insufficient water for arid western farm lands and we face increasing difficulty in providing water for some of our heavily populated urban areas.
In some parts of the country, notably the Southwest, neighboring States have engaged in bitter battle for the remaining water supplies.
In short, unless we soon rationalize our use of land and water on a much broader national scale than we have in the past, our children's children will have barren wastes in place of some of our present rich cropland.
Shortage of water will limit the growth of some of our cities.
And silt will too rapidly fill up many of the great power and irrigation reservoirs.
Fortunately we still have enough resources to last, if we use them wisely and well.
We have rich deposits of phosphate rock to fertilize worn-out lands.
We have enough water in sight to irrigate almost 17,000,000 acres of new wealth-producing farm land.
We know what to do to rebuild our forests and ranges to protect and improve our timber and forage resources.
In addition, we have the potential industrial power to build all of the huge multipurpose dams we need for the development of our land and water resources.
All we need is an over-all national plan and a public will to do the job.
Within the past 16 years we have laid the pattern.
The great power, irrigation, navigation, and flood-control projects in the Tennessee and Columbia River Basins show us the way we must go.
We have also undertaken the development of the great Missouri River Basin, the lower Colorado River Valley and the Central Valley of California.
But there are more basins that we have barely touched.
Within the past 16 years, too, we have made a beginning on conservation and restoration of our range and crop lands.
The beginning has been slow and hesitating.
We have not yet caught up with the annual loss of land, to say nothing of turning the tide the other way.
We have made great progress, also, in saving our forests—particularly our publicly owned forests.
But we still are using up our valuable timber resources faster than we are replacing them.
At our present pacé the Nation will have a desperate shortage of saw timber and pulp within a generation or two.
More progress has been made in developing and conserving our water resources within the past 16 years than in all the years prior to that time.
But we still have millions of kilowatts of power and acres of productive land to develop.
Our power potentialities have been discussed in the previous section on energy.
Here they are discussed only in their relationship to our other water and land resources.
Power is the key to the rest of the natural resources development in our big river valleys.
Power not only provides energy for homes and factories, but it pumps water onto dry land and provides much of the revenue for irrigation.
Just as irrigation needs power, so power sometimes needs to be combined with flood control and navigation, to be economically feasible.
Power projects alone do not always produce low-cost electricity.
But when the cost of a big multipurpose dam is shared with irrigation, flood control and navigation, the public can get multiple benefits, with reasonably priced power and irrigation.
Furthermore, it is uneconomical to build huge dams to control floods without the many other measures necessary to slow down the flow of water off the land.
Without reforestation and revegetation, without storage reservoirs, and soil conservation measures over an entire watershed, the value of the great multipurpose dams is steadily diminished.
The various elements of basin development are so completely interdependent that unrelated development of one feature, without the others, may result in a waste of natural resources, instead of a saving.
In the great Colorado River Valley, for instance, a lop-sided development has provided lop-sided, and in some cases only temporary, benefits.
Most of the development so far has been in the lower basin resulting from the needs of southern California and Arizona for power and water.
In the upper valley huge reserves of phosphate and other precious minerals lie unused because the low cost hydroelectric power needed to produce them has not been made available.
It is estimated that the waters of the Colorado and its tributaries can produce 6 million kilowatts of power to vitalize industry and agriculture throughout the entire valley.
In recent years the Bureau of Reclamation has been approaching the problem of western resource development on the basis of broad river basin planning under the authority provided in the Reclamation Project Act of 1939 which authorized construction of multiple-purpose reclamation projects and provided for conservation of the West's limited water resources through coordinated programming and coordinated use.
The Bureau was provided with funds for making comprehensive investigations of entire river basins, rather than isolated irrigation projects scattered through the West.
As a result, the Bureau is making comprehensive studies of the western river basins and has now embarked on its share of the development of the potentialities of the Missouri River Basin, the Columbia, the Colorado, and the Central Valley of California.
It also has launched a 7-year program of western irrigation and power development which will provide water for 2 million acres of irrigated land, supplement the water supply for three and a half million acres, and triple the Bureau's power capacity.
But the Bureau is only one of many Federal agencies concerned with western resource development.
Seven other agencies of the Interior Department—the Bonneville Power Administration, the Fish and Wildlife Service, the Park Service, the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the Geological Survey, the Bureau of Mines, and the Bureau of Land Management—also are involved.
So are half a dozen agencies in the Department of Agriculture, the Corps of Engineers of the Department of the Army, and the Federal Power Commission.
These agencies work under separate legislative authority and administrative direction, often with overlapping functions and competing or conflicting objectives.
There is no single financial or legislative plan for the river basin development programs.
No one agency is responsible for the most effective operation of the multipurpose projects to achieve the maximum effectiveness for all purposes.
In the Columbia River Valley, for instance, the planning, construction and operation of projects is divided between the Bureau of Reclamation and the Corps of Engineers, and yet the power from the dams is distributed and marketed by the Bonneville Power Administration.
The Federal Power Commission also had a hand in planning the Army projects.
Except in the Tennessee Valley there is no effective administrative mechanism for looking at the Nation's river basin resources and the programs for a region as a whole, for moving all such programs along together on an integrated basis under a single legislative charter, or for the development of related programs such as the encouragement of industrial activity in the basin.
Some coordination has been achieved through interagency committees, but these committees have been unable to resolve basic conflicts, often based on conflicting legislation.
The individual agencies still make their own decisions under their own legislative mandates.
A much more effective job of regional resource development could be done in the Pacific Northwest where the whole economy of the area is linked to the construction of great multipurpose water control projects in the Columbia Valley.
The time has come for the establishment of one agency with responsibility for carrying forward on a unified basis the Government's share of the resource development work in the Columbia Valley.
Most of America's land is now in private hands.
The Nation, since its birth, has distributed more than a billion acres of land to private owners.
The Government, however, still controls in continental United States about 458,000,000 acres.
Inaddition there is an estimated 365,000,000 acres of public land in Alaska, bringing the total to about 823,000,000 acres.
About three-fourths of this is under the jurisdiction of this Department.
Interior is responsible for about 282,000,000 acres in continental United States.
Under the Bureau of Land Management are 139,000,- 000 acres of land in grazing districts; 4,000,000 acres in stock driveways, and 48,000,000 in unappropriated, unreserved public domain.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs is responsible for almost 56,000,000 acres of Indian lands; the Bureau of Reclamation for 15,000,000 acres reserved for reclamation developments; the National Park Service for 15,000,000 acres in the national parks; and the Fish and Wildlife Service for 6,000,000 in game and wildlife reserves.
Another 165,000,000 acres of public land in continental United States is under the Agriculture Department of which the United States Forest Service has 158,000,000; and 10,000,000 acres are held by the Military Establishment.
The public land still in the hands of the Government in continental United States, except for the parks and valuable forest land, is mostly land that is uninhabitable.
It is a land virtually without people situated high in the mountains, or in desert areas.
But it has a vital part in the preservation of our natural resources.
Much of our meat, wool, and leather supplies comes from the public range; some of our best timber comes from the publicly owned forest lands; vast mineral supplies lie under the public domain, some of them almost untouched and unexplored; and our wildlife is protected on the wildlife refuges.
Furthermore, the way we handle this vast area of land will affect our ability to control the waste of soil and water on privately owned land throughout the West.
A considerable proportion of our food supply comes from irrigated lands.
Our success with them depends to a large extent upon protection of the watersheds, control of erosion, reduction of siltation, and other conservation measures on the public lands.
Various phases of our problems relating to land, water, and forests are discussed at greater length below.
The Reclamation program is almost half a century old.
Congress authorized it in 1902.
But for the first 30 years it was made up chiefly of comparatively small irrigation projects here and there throughout the 17 far Western States, without any over-all development plan.
Many of the benefits were dissipated through land speculation; and power development, which now carries much of the load of irrigation costs, was a minor feature.
Up to 1932, when the Reclamation program was 30 years old, 3½2 million acres of land were being served by Federal systems, and the total power capacity installed on Reclamation projects was only 106,000 kilowatts.
In the drought years of the 1930's the West shriveled and dried up for lack of water during the summers, while in the springs floods damaged huge areas.
The shortage of water was so desperate that underground water tables in many areas were pumped down to dangerous levels.
The first approach to multipurpose valley development, in which power revenues would help to finance other benefits, came with the Hoover Dam in the lower Colorado River Basin, begun in 1930's.
It was the first Federal dam designed to pay a substantial portion of its cost through power revenue.
Its benefits included flood control, power generation, irrigation, municipal water supply, silt removal, navigation, and wildlife refuge.
As a single project, it fell far short of the intergrated programs that have been developed since in other valleys.
Hoover Dam has been followed by such bold and broad visioned projects as the Central Valley program in California; the Columbia Basin project in the Northwest; the Colorado-Big Thompson project to divert water across the continental divide to farmlands in northeastern Colorado; the Fort Peck and Shoshone-Riverton-Kendrick-North Platte transmission systems in Wyoming and the great Missouri River Basin project.
By 1942 the Bureau of Reclamation was functioning as the chief single supplier to the West of hydroelectric power and water—the basic needs for hundreds of cities, thousands of war factories, and millions of war workers.
The war contribution of new power capacity—11/3 million kilowatts—constituted 84 percent of the additional capacity made available in the 11 Pacific and Mountain States during the war years.
By the end of fiscal year 1948, the Bureau of Reclamation was supplying irrigation water to more than 5,000,000 acres in the West and the installed power capacity at reclamation projects totalled 2,637,000 kilowatts.
The Missouri Basin project, undertaken jointly by the Bureau of Reclamation and the Army Corps of Engineers, is designed ultimately to irrigate 5,000,000 acres of range and dry lands to stabilize the living of 400,000 families and to provide the opportunity for a good living for more than 200,000 people on 53,000 family sized farms.
It will mean a new day for the whole Missouri Valley area, which was hit as hard as any part of the country in the great drought of the 1930's.
It is a peculiarity of the Great Plains in which the Missouri Basin is largely located that a fractional change in the amount of rainfall can bring a flood or a drought.
In this it differs, basically, from most of the other valleys such as the Colorado where irrigation is necessary all the time or farmers cannot survive.
Dry-land farms in the Missouri Basin pay off in wet years without irrigation, dry up and blow away in drought years.
Reclamation is planned to supplement the inadequate normal rainfall, to conserve and store water for use when needed.
This program will eliminate or minimize losses from drought, and stabilize agriculture in the area.
The population will be anchored and not find it necessary to move as was necessary in the thirties.
Recognizing that despite the progress, the Reclamation program was inadequate for the needs of the West, the Bureau of Reclamation has, since the war, mapped a 7-year construction program designed by 1954 to add 2 million acres of irrigated land and provide supplemental water to 31/2 million additional acres now inadequately served.
Realization of this program would almost triple the power capacity on Reclamation projects, bringing total capacity up to more than 6 million kilowatts.
Under this program it is estimated that the gross value of all crops grown by farmers on land supplied with irrigation water by the Bureau of Reclamation would increase about $400,000,000 annually.
In 1947, the latest year for which complete returns are available, farmers on Reclamation projects reported gross crops valued at $555,000,000.
These figures represent the value of crops only and do not include livestock or livestock products, the value of which were estimated at about $150,000,000 more.
The economic benefits from the augmented power under the 7-year program may also be estimated.
One yardstick is the translation of hydroelectric power into barrels of oil that would be needed to supply the same energy.
The increased power capacity proposed for Reclamation projects would save an estimated 40 million barrels of oil annually.
It would mean industrial development for the West several times the recent growth of industry in the Pacific Northwest, provided the same low cost public power policies prevail.
Shortages of power and water have retarded the West's development.
The western half of the country today has only a fifth of the Nation's total population; a fourth of its productive farms and a much smaller proportion of its industry.
Despite a tremendous natural wealth of land, minerals, and forest, much of the West today remains largely undeveloped and 45 years of construction work by the Bureau of Reclamation and other agencies have barely begun the development of this great potential addition to national strength.
An example of the West's vast natural resources is found in its wealth of minerals.
In the 17 Western Reclamation States are huge reserves of industrial fuels such as coal, petroleum, and natural gas, as well as potential metallurgical coke.
Water is the key to the entire development of the West.
Basic data gathered by the Geological Survey in planning the 7-year program indicated that the 17 Reclamation States have about 400,000,000 acrefeet of stream run-off annually, only a fifth of which has thus far been put to use.
It is clear that a substantial portion of this water is susceptible of development for multipurpose programs.
This additional water development would transform millions of acres of land, now largely desert waste, into productive irrigation farms and assure sufficient water for other millions of acres now crippled by short water supply.
This additional area of irrigated land would have a productive capacity two to three times that of dry-farmed land dependent on natural rainfall.
These new farm lands could therefore replace all the land in the United States now branded as unsuitable for cultivation—estimated at more than 40,000,000 acres.
Farmers now sweating out their energy for inadequate living could raise their families under decent conditions, and the land being used improperly could be turned into forest or range land.
In addition, the demand for family size irrigated farms from the increasing population of the West will absorb all the new acreage to be brought under irrigation.
This entire 400 million acre-feet of water also could develop more than 150 billion kilowatt-hours of energy annually—sufficient to supply the needs of New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, Philadelphia, and Detroit, the five largest cities in the United States, and enough to save a third of a billion barrels of oil a year.
The power could be used to pump water onto productive land, to provide water supplies for new cities and augment the supplies for present urban areas, to develop additional ground water supplies, and to provide revenues for the whole natural resource development of the West.
It is estimated that on future multiple-purpose projects power must provide the major share of the revenue to repay the power and irrigation portions of the construction costs.
These resource development programs are essential to the realization of the benefits to the Nation of western development.
This great region can contribute its full share in the maintenance of a high level of national production only if its undeveloped water resources are unlocked and put to productive use.
Slow development for the West means slow development for the Nation.
Proper management of the public lands can play a major role in the conservation of our natural resources.
Although much of this land was left in Government hands because no one wanted to assume the responsibility of its ownership, it contains valuable forest, range, soil, and mineral resources, and is all-important in the protection and development of the scarce water supply of the West.
Most of the public lands lie where the western rivers originate and where the silt load of the streams can be reduced by protection of the forests and other vegetation.
The protective plant cover of this area regulates the silt load in the streams below.
As this protective cover is weakened, soil erosion is accelerated on the private lands as well as on the public lands.
Properly handled, the publie lands can serve many purposes.
They can provide an important part of the forage for our livestock.
They can offer a continuing supply of timber.
They can make an invaluable contribution to our Nation-wide effort to develop our soil and water resources.
And at the same time they can offer recreation for our people, protection for our wildlife, and a possible rich supply of minerals to raise our standard of living.
These are not conflicting goals.
They can be achieved simultaneously by adequate coordination of our conservation planning and by the appropriation of sufficient funds to rectify the mistakes of the past.
Unfortunately these mistakes of the past were of tremendous scope, because it was not until recent years that the multipurpose value of these lands under public management was recognized.
For more than 100 years the chief function of the Federal Government with reference to the public lands was to act as trustee for the disposal of them to private owners.
Much land was transferred to private ownership that would have served the publie interest better under multipurpose management by the Government.
Little thought was given to the best ultimate use of the land.
Huge areas were given away to subsidize construction of wagon roads, railroads, and canals.
Later, in the homesteading era which did so much to settle the West, land was given to anyone who would settle on it, with little regard to how well adapted it was for farming.
The Interior Department operated primarily as a real estate office.
Ultimate disposal was the only policy of the Government for the publie lands.
No thought was given to protecting or developing their resources.
As a result, huge areas of forest were cut so ruthlessly that their value for future timber supplies and for retarding soil removal was seriously impaired.
Range lands were open to the public and over-grazed until they were less useful for forage or for control of the water run-off.
Land that should have been left in grass was plowed for crops, contributing to soil erosion.
Even after the conservation movement got started more than half a century ago, it dealt largely with the resources derived from the soil, primarily the forests rather than the basic soil and moisture supply.
Few people gave any thought to the soil itself.
Only within recent years has there been a widespread awakening to the needs for better care of the soil.
The first organized movement toward conservation of the soil came after 1933 when the Soil Erosion Service was established in the Interior Department.
This was followed by the enactment of the Taylor Grazing Act in 1934, and the passage of the Soil Conservation Act in 1935.
But it was not until 1940, when President Roosevelt transferred to the Interior Department responsibility for soil and moisture conservation on lands under its jurisdiction that real progress was made on the public domain.
Enactment of the Taylor Grazing Act placed the emphasis on conservation and proper use, rather than neglect and promiscuous disposal of, the publie land.
The act also made provision for the care and management of the remaining public lands.
Additional legislation in 1937, and subsequently, strengthened the management of the forest lands under the Bureau of Land Management of the Interior Department.
Under these various laws, the Department of Interior has made since 1933 more progress in protecting and conserving the natural assets on the public lands under its jurisdiction than had been made in all the history of the country up to that time.
Grazing is limited on the public lands, and a start has been made toward repair of past damage to the range.
We have launched a program to place most of the timber under sustained yield management.
Fire-control facilities have been expanded.
Millions of acres have been devoted, at least in part, to conservation of wildlife.
And thousands of small dams have been constructed to conserve water supplies.
Of the 282,000,000 acres of land in continental United States under the jurisdiction of the Interior Department, nearly 20,000,000 acres of critically eroded land have been given conservation treatment.
Some of this is now permanently protected, but parts of it need further treatment.
Conservation measures on this land have included the seeding to permanent vegetation of nearly three-quarters of a million acres; construction of nearly a thousand miles of dikes and levees; the placing of nearly 50,000 small soil-saving dams in gullies; construction of another 17,000 small dams to detain surface water; stabilization of more than a thousand miles of stream banks to save vast areas of bottom land and to decrease siltation in the reservoirs downstream.
But this is only a beginning.
Another 40,000,000 to 60,000,000 acres of land are critically eroding.
About 47 percent of the 282,000,000 acres under the Interior Department needs early attention to prevent serious or critical erosion.
These figures do not include the 343,- 000,000 acres in Alaska, for which the Department is responsible, because no survey has been made of the situation there.
The 160,000,000 acres of range land under the management of the Interior Department now feed more than 2,000,000 cattle and horses, and 6,500,000 sheep and goats.
Our western livestock industry depends to a large extent upon proper conservation and development of this land.
America's demand for meat is growing year by year.
Fully half the range needs restorative work.
Much of it needs to be reseeded, to repair past damage.
Altogether 22,000,000 acres of public land need reseeding.
Fences need to be erected to control the drift of livestock.
Additional water supplies are needed to develop some 15,318,000 acres of unusable range.
This area alone would support an estimated 1,000,000 animal unit months of forage.
Proper development of the entire range would expand tremendously our meat production capacity.
Protection of the range has been seriously impeded by lack of sufficient appropriations to police it adequately.
Records of the Department indicate that during the 1948 fiscal year 57,600 cattle and horses and 87,400 sheep and goats consumed 562,330 animal unit months of forage in trespass operations of the kind which result in overgrazing and serious damage to the range.
This amounted to 15 percent of the lawful grazing.
Failure to protect the range not only jeopardizes future meat supplies, but increases the cost of meat to consumers.
A sharp cut in the funds for policing the range, effective during the previous fiscal year, was partially restored during the fiscal year 1948, but the appropriation still was inadequate.
About 28,000,000 acres of forests and woodlands are under the Interior Department's jurisdiction in continental United States.
Under special legislation, the forests on Indian lands have been effectively managed since 1910, but sound policies were not authorized for the other Interior forests until recent years.
The commercial forests of the revested railroad lands in western Oregon have been managed properly for only the past 10 years, and sufficient funds have not vet been made available to extend such management to the scattered forests throughout the public domain.
For the 120,000,000 acres of forests in Alaska it has not been possible even to maintain adequate fire protection.
There is a large but unknown quantity of mature timber on the public domain which should be cut.
It would help to protect the forests, and would supplement our supplies.
But lack of funds has prevented even this common sense and economical measure.
For the first time in history the Department now has adequate authority to manage its forests properly, but it still has not been given sufficient money for surveying, construction of access roads, or marketing.
In fiscal year 1947 only 7 persons could be employed to administer and survey the forests scattered through 20 States.
Legislation to protect the forests from fire started back in 1850.
But not until the Civilian Conservation Corps was set up in 1933 was much advance made.
Until 10 years ago there was no forest fire control program in Alaska and fire control was seriously inadequate on the public domain forests in the United States.
Although adequate funds are not yet available, the loss from fires in public domain forests and grasslands during 1947 was cut to one-half of 1 percent of the area.
Yet 598,000 acres of land in grazing districts, having substantial grazing values were burned over.
And there still is little protection from fire afforded for some 20 million acres of land outside the grazing districts.
In Alaska the fire story is more serious.
During 1947 fire destroyed 1,432,000 acres of forest with an undetermined, but tragic, loss.
Much remains to be done to protect the forests both in the United States and Alaska.
Over-all development and conservation of the resources on the public lands is impeded by failure to classify these lands for their best uses.
Critical as we are of past generations for their failure to put the public land to its best use, we of this generation have failed in the same direction—until we have completed the job of studying and determining the best use for every acre of public land.
The inadequacy of land elassification is one of the great deterrents to putting an appropriate public land poliey into action.
We need to classify our remaining public land to determine which should be retained by the Government for the public benefit, and which is subject to disposal under the public land laws for cropping, mining, or other specific uses.
Such a survey of the 180,000,000 acres of unreserved public land would take 10 years to complete under the most favorable conditions, but could be financed at a cost of only about 4 cents an acre.
The Geological Survey is experienced and well equipped to do this job, if funds become available.
The classification would discover and indicate the highest use of the lands; locate some of the mineral resources; find those few areas which are still suitable for homesteading and make them available to settlers: uncover the location of isolated tracts of no use to the government: and indicate the areas that are important for multipurpose use under Government management.
Land classification also is the key to an orderly development of the land resources of Alaska, in order to avoid the mistakes we made in land disposal in the States.
There is little excuse for our failure to make the expenditures necessary to develop and protect our public lands, particularly in view of the constant stream of revenue they provide in grazing fees, oil royalties and mineral lease payments.
We have the over-all plans for conservation and development of these public resources.
All that is needed is sufficient appropriations to carry them out.
The 21,000,000 acres of land including territorial areas in the national park system contain, in addition to their spiritual and recreational values, many of our richest natural resources, including forests, land, water, and wildlife.
The objective of the National Park Service is to maintain these areas in their natural state, subject only to the development of facilities so the public can enjoy them.
This objective was carried out prior to World War II.
In the years between 1933 and 1940 more progress was made in developing and improving the Nation's parks than in any similar period in American history.
Much of this was due to the relief programs, particularly the Public Works Administration and the Civilian Conservation Corps.
The Civilian Conservation Corps built many fire trails and forest fire prevention facilities such as look-out towers and ranger cabins; constructed administrative and utility buildings, sanitation and water systems; did reforestation and soil erosion work; and accomplished many other things for the protection of the parts.
Almost $20,000,000 of PWA funds were allocated for park improvements such as buildings and $34,000,000 for roads and parkways.
These funds, plus regular appropriations, permitted the construction or improvement of more than 1,000 miles of park roads and 249 miles of parkways.
By 1940 the parks were in better shape than ever before.
But during the war, and since, the maintenance of the parks has suffered.
The national park system is threatened today from two different directions.
First is the wear and tear as a result of the heaviest public use load they have ever carried, plus the normal wear and tear of nature.
The second is the pressure from commercial interests for use of the forest and range lands within the parks that would impair or destroy their value.
The parks are for human use.
But to provide for human use without destruction of the qualities that give the parks their essential greatness requires carefully planned development, and sufficient appropriations to safeguard and maintain them.
For the past 6 years they have not been kept up because sufficient funds to do so have not been provided.
Those units which have come into the system during the past decade are largely lacking in even the most essential developments required for satisfactory use.
Existing facilities in the older parks have not been kept in repair, and the facilities in them, which were planned for a much smaller number of visitors, are wholly inadequate to handle the millions of people who are now visiting them.
Throughout the system shortages of physical equipment are matched by shortages of staff.
Not only does this mean that the public is not adequately served; but, more seriously, it means that immensely valuable and frequently fragile resources of the parks and historic monuments are damaged by carelessness or vandalism that could be prevented, at least in part, by adequate protection.
Use of the parks has increased tremendously in recent years.
The number of visitors to the parks annually has risen from less than half a million in 1917 to more than 25,000,000 in the 1947 travel year, and an estimated 30,000,000 in 1948.
Public accommodations are inadequate for this many people; the roads are wearing out; and even the natural beauties of the parks are endangered by lack of maintenance.
One of the most serious results of this overuse is the progressive destruction of soil and vegetation which could lead to permanent damage.
Field staffs, particularly in the ranger, naturalist, and maintenance forces, should be increased considerably if natural and historic resources are to be protected adequately without interruption of public use of the parks.
The National Park Service has estimated it would require $395,000,- 000 over a period of years to meet the needs for conservation and development of the park system to handle the load of visitors now using it.
This would cover the cost of roads, trails, parkways, structures, utilities, and other physical improvements.
Almost half of this is needed for the road system alone.
By contrast with this, the appropriation for the roads and trails in the parks for the fiscal year 1949 was only $3,110,000 which was not enough to maintain existing roads.
Only $735,000 was provided for physical improvements, most of which will have to be spent for repair and rehabilitation that can no longer be deferred.
There are actually fewer facilities available in the parks today than in 1941 when the travel load was much lighter.
Commercial threats to the park system include the current attempt to reduce the area of Olympic National Park to make its unique virgin forest available for logging; recent pressure to open the erosionsusceptible mountain meadows of the Sierra parks to grazing; the constant effort of stockmen to open the parks generally to grazing, and their recent move to eliminate all grazing lands from the parks.
Legislation in the Eightieth Congress to reduce the area of Olympic National Park was blocked, but probably will be revived.
The Department continues to oppose the proposal to abolish the Jackson Hole National Monument.
The Department also has opposed proposals to flood more than 19,000 acres of scenic wilderness in Glacier National Park by construction of a dam at Glacier View on the North Fork of the Flathead River.
More than 800,000 acres of the park system remain under private ownership, posing another constant threat to the proper maintenance of the areas.
The National Park Service cannot control the use or misuse of this section of the parks.
It should be purchased by the Government, not only for the sake of the park system but to save rich forest resources.
No program for conservation of natural resources would be complete without a well-rounded national effort to protect our wildlife resources, which not only contribute to the pleasure of hunters, but provide furs for warm clothing, and meat and fowl for the table.
Wildlife conservation fits into the whole national resource conservation movement.
Wildlife refuges serve many purposes, including conservation of soil and water, as well as other natural assets.
During the past 16 years, huge tracts of Federal land have been set aside as wildlife refuges, and a cooperative Federal-State program for conserving wildlife resources has been established.
Only about 16 refuges for waterfowl had been established prior to 1934.
Today there are 282 national wildlife refuges in the United States, of which 196, with a total area of 18,107,024 acres are primarily for waterfowl.
In addition to the waterfowl refuges, the Fish and Wildlife Service is now operating 16 big-game refuges and ranges, comprising more than 10,500,000 acres and 25 general wildlife refuges, totaling about 4,000,000 acres.
Many of these refuges overlap the national forests and other public domain, and are used for many purposes other than protection of wildlife.
Public use of the areas for recreation is encouraged, as long as it does not interfere with wildlife.
Even farming is permitted in many areas.
It has been estimated that our national waterfowl resources have a capitalized value of a billion and a half dollars, in addition to the intangible values which are a part of any recreational activity.
But these resources have been subject to two attacks—from the ever growing number of hunters, and from the destruction of the natural habitats of the birds as our civilization destroys or transforms more and more of the land and water we inherited from the Indians.
The North American population of ducks and geese probably reached their lowest level in history early in the 1930's.
The critical decline in their numbers has been brought about by a combination of natural and man-made conditions—a series of dry years which reduced the suitable nesting areas, ill-planned drainage operations, and excessive hunting.
The population of migratory waterfowl had quadrupled by 1943, as a result of the refuge program, restricted hunting, and favorable weather.
But a combination of poor nesting seasons and increased hunting pressure after the war cut this gain in half.
About one-fifth of our total waterfowl population makes use of the refuges established by the Government.
It is significant that the refuge populations are remaining fairly stable, and do not reflect the sharp declines periodically seen in the total population.
The refuges seem therefore, to be protecting a basic brood stock, which is necessary for repopulating the breeding grounds in the United States, Canada, and Alaska.
But although the brood stock is being protected, the present system is not sufficient to protect the level of total population against the hunters, and the drainage and pollution which destroy natural breeding, resting, and feeding grounds.
For several years it has been necessary to curtail the length of the open season and reduce the daily bag and possession limits to maintain the balance.
The Fish and Wildlife Service, which conducts this conservation program, has been facing increasing difficulty in enforcing hunting regulations.
The number of game management agents has remained fixed at 67 for several years, while the number of waterfowl and other migratory bird hunters has more than doubled.
Violations of the conservation laws are inereasing, even faster than the number of hunters.
More violations of the Migratory Bird Treaty Act and more violations of State game laws were prosecuted during the fiscal year 1948 than in the preceding year.
The number of Federal game law enforcement agents should be increased to insure preservation of our migratory game birds and the future sport of hunting them.
Even with inadequate enforcement, however, the reduced take by hunters under the lower legal limits of the 1947–48 season appears to have checked a 3-year decline in the number of waterfowl and enabled a slightly increased number of birds to return to the northern breeding grounds in the spring of 1948.
More is now being accomplished under the joint Federal-State conservation program than at any time since the program was established in 1937 because of increased appropriations starting in the fiscal year 1948.
But not enough is yet being done.
There are more deer in the United States today than at any previous time, but this increase is poorly distributed.
A program of transplanting live animals from one area to another may in the future provide a better distribution.
Fur bearing animals have been grossly neglected in the past.
Because of this the United States is producing only about one-half of the furs needed to supply current demand.
Yet this is one group of wildlife species that literally is capable of paying its own way if properly managed.
In many areas set aside for waterfowl management, the muskrat harvest alone will go a long way toward paying all operating costs.
Most marsh areas are only about half productive under present conditions.
With sufficient appropriations, proper management could be provided which would result in doubling the annual fur harvest.
It has been demonstrated in the wildlife refuges that properly locater water impoundments are turning relatively worthless land into reservoirs of production.
Under multiple use development they are providing habitats for waterfowl and fur bearing animals and at the same time raising and maintaining water tables.
In addition, upland game species find drinking water and cover, and fish are usually benefited.
Field borders, windbreaks, and permanent watering places in the wildlife refuges are greatly increasing the game-carrying capacity of the land and at the same time protecting it from erosion and abusive farm practices.
Every year there is increased planting of lespedezas and multiflora rose on the wildlife projects.
Twenty-three States now have restoration projects under the joint Federal-State program.
During the past year the Fish and Wildlife Service gave more protection from depredations of harmful animals than ever before in history.
More than half the coyotes caught last year were taken with coyote-getters, a device developed by a former employee of the Service, and 25 airplanes were used in hunting this destroyer of farm animals.
The Service also was active in control of rats and other rodents.
During the latter part of the year, the Department sponsored a national rat control campaign which attained the first coordinated Nation-wide drive on rats.
For the first time, 580 American cities acted with 879 counties to control rat infestation simultaneously.
With 12,000,000 hunting licenses issued during the year, and the number of game hunters growing annually, the work of preserving our wildlife resources must be intensified if future hunters are to have adequate opportunity.
The Nation's Indians are poor because much of their land is poor.
Yet some of the Nation's most valuable natural resources, including forests, grazing land, and minerals, are on the 56,000,000 acres of land owned by Indian tribes and individuals.
These resources if properly developed can contribute far more than they have in past years not only to the Indians but to the Nation as a whole.
Indian resources include 3,000,000 acres of agricultural land, 16,000,000 acres of forest, and 32,000,000 acres of grazing land, as well as a wide diversity of minerals.
Development of these natural resources is tied into the problem of developing the human resources of the Indian people, for without health or education the Indian has neither the will nor the ability to make the best use of his assets.
In the past the Indians have leased most of their best crop and grazing land to non-Indians instead of operating these areas themselves.
This not only was bad for the Indians but bad for the land.
Some of the most serious soil depletion has occirred on farm lands leased by the Indians to white lessees on insecure tenure, which did not encourage proper maintenance of the soil.
Much has been done within the past 16 years to develop the resources of the Indians and to help them to make the best use of their natural assets.
Some of this improvement has been based on agricultural extension work, which was made available among the Indians for the first time in 1930.
The first objective of that program was to encourage the Indians to use their own land and resources instead of leasing them.
This program really became effective after enactment of the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934, which provided more adequate credit facilities for the Indians.
Since that time the Indians have increased the acreage of cropland they farm themselves by 400,000 acres and have taken over the operation of more than 7,000,000 acres of grazing land.
Indian-owned livestock has increased from 171,000 head in 1932 to 361,000 in 1947.
Total agricultural income of Indians has risen from $1,850,000 in 1932 to almost $49,000,000 in 1947, which included $12,000,000 worth of farm products consumed at home.
It is conservatively estimated that more than 12,000 families have been completely or partially rehabilitated and are now self-supporting, or nearly so.
Yet too much Indian land still is leased to others.
Resource development during this period included the construction and expansion of many irrigation systems and water conservation facilities.
Dams and reservoirs built between 1932 and 1947 added 250,000 acre-feet of water storage, and placed 102,500 acres of Indian lands under irrigation.
This brought the total of Indian irrigated lands to 537,500 acres at a total cost of $58,000,000.
An additional 300,000 acres of non-Indian land gets water from Indian irrigation projects.
Investigations now are under way looking toward the development of all the potential irrigated Indian land, estimated at another 475,000 acres.
Until 1933 many Indian forest lands were inaccessible and undeveloped because of lack of funds, equipment, and trained personnel.
The creation of the Civilian Conservation Corps in 1933 and the subsequent allotment of funds to the Indian Service for work on Indian reservations made possible an expanded and coordinated program of forest management.
By 1942, when the work was suspended, $30,- 000,000 had been invested in truck trails, telephone lines, lookout towers, water facilities, blight eradication, and other forest and range improvements, exclusive of reforestation and range reseeding.
Beginning in 1941 the Bureau of Indian Affairs was given responsibility and separate funds for the conservation of soil and moisture resources on Indian lands.
Since that time marked progress has been made in the conservation and restoration of land resources.
Indian tribal councils, individual land owners, and lessees of Indian lands have contributed increasing amounts of money, labor, and materials to conservation work.
In 1941 the proprietors and users of Indian lands barely matched Government expenditures for land conservation.
By 1948 the contributions from the land owners and users amounted to $3 for each dollar spent by the Government.
Recently, the emphasis has shifted from stopping land depletion to the more affirmative approach of building up the soil through weed control, the planting of cover crops, green manuring, improved plowing techniques, the use of commercial fertilizer, strip cropping, and similar devices.
On the Nez Perce and Coeur d'Alene Reservations in Idaho it is estimated that from 12 to 15 bushels per acre have been added to the wheat yield on Indian lands by these methods.
The lands in question had been planted to wheat regularly for almost 50 years and in that period it is estimated that about 40 percent of the top soil had been lost.
Until 1933, roads in many Indian reservations were so bad that Indians were using pack animals and even their own backs to bring supplies into their communities.
Even if they had products, Indians could not get them to market, nor could their children get to school in bad weather.
A service-wide program of road construction got underway in 1934 and by 1948 Congress had appropriated more than $37,000,000 for new roads, $23,000,000 for improvements to roads and bridges, and $14,000,000 for maintenance.
The Service today operates almost 8,000 miles of graded and drained roads, of which 3,300 are gravel and about 200 are paved.
Development of Indian human resources has kept pace with development of their natural resources.
Appropriations for Indian health service increased from $2,677,800 in 1933 to $8,653,300 in 1948.
During that period 46 new hospitals were constructed in the United States and five in Alaska.
Nurses on duty increased from 298 in 1934 to 513 during the past fiscal year.
The effectiveness of this health program is reflected in declining mortality rates.
Deaths in 1928 occurred at the rate of 21.8 per thousand of population, while in 1945, the last year for which figures are available, the rate was down to 12.04 per thousand of population.
Education among Indian children has made like progress.
In 1928 only 19 percent of all children in Indian schools were at their proper grade or only 1 year back.
In 1946, the latest year for which statistics are available, this figure had risen to 62 percent.
In 1928 only 12 Indian schools were offering high school courses and they were located away from reservations.
Since then 26 reservation high schools have been added.
A total of 27 accredited Indian Service 4-year high schools were operating in 1948.
In 12 other schools 10 grades were offered.
Similar progress has been made in the development of Indian selfgovernment and repeal of oppressive and discriminatory laws.
The biggest advance was made in the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934 which gave tribes with written constitutions power to veto disposition of tribal assets by government officials.
The Indian Reorganization Act stopped the alienation of Indian lands.
Since that time, instead of losing more land, the Indians have acquired almost 4,000,000 acres.
But despite all the progress of the past 16 years the Indians still remain among the lowest income groups in the Nation.
They must have long-range financial help to build their human and natural resources to the point where they can make their proper contribution to the national welfare.
Recognizing this need, the Department last year submitted to Congress the first of a series of regional programs for long-term capital investment in the Indian people.
This program recommended the investment of $90,000,000 in the poverty-ridden Navajo and Hopi Reservations for schools, roads, hospitals, soil conservation, off-reservation employment, water development, ereation of small industries and revolving loans, and a possible additional $60,000,000 ultimately for irrigation.
Only through bold long-range reservation planning of this kind, designed to build upon the natural resources and to meet the problems of each reservation, can the Indians realize their full potentialities as American citizens.
If we have been laggard in conserving and developing our land resources, we also have lagged in exploring and safeguarding the vast resources of the oceans which adjoin our land.
The oceans contain unexplored and undeveloped fish and other resources of inestimable value to meet our ever expanding hunger for proteins.
The recent war provided a dramatic illustration of the way seafood can supplement and augment short meat supplies.
World food shortages emphasize the importance of conserving known fisheries, developing new fishing grounds and fisheries for unutilized species, and making the most efficient possible use of the catch.
As the population of the world increases, it must rely more and more upon the resources of the sea for its food.
And yet we have overfished some areas to the point of destroying the basic resources, while leaving other areas virtually untouched, and even unexplored.
The United States produces from its fisheries 4 to 5 billion pounds annually of raw product yielding protein foods, vitamin oils, animal feeds, and other valuable byproducts.
The 1947 production of the commercial fisheries was estimated 4.4 billion pounds of fish valued at $300,000,000 at the production level and $763,000,000 at the wholesale distribution level.
But this yield could be vastly expanded.
It has tripled within the past 68 years.
The fisheries of Alaska alone during the past 15 years of intensive operation have yielded products with a total value in excess of $800,000,000, as compared with the $7,200,000 we paid for that Territory.
The average annual value of these products has been about $54,000,000 and in 1947 the all-time record was established with a haul valued at $107,166,931.
The commercial fisheries are the mainstay of Alaska's economy.
They are the chief source of employment, income, tax revenue, and shipping in the territory.
They continue after 80 years of commercial utilization to yield increasing quantities of protein food products to meet world needs.
This emphasizes the important basic point that our fishery resources are renewable, if properly used.
If overused, however, they can be destroyed, just as surely as our soil resources can be destroyed in the same way.
The salmon fisheries of Alaska are the most valuable in the world and are responsible for more than two-thirds of the world production of canned salmon.
Production has totaled 85,000,000 cases in the last 15 years.
A peak production of 8,437,603 eases was reached in 1936.
But in recent years, due to increased commercial fishing and lack of an adequate enforcement staff to cope with illegal fishing, the pack has declined.
It was down to a low of 3,970,000 cases in 1946, and 1947 was little better.
Drastic regulatory controls have been established to restore this resource to its former abundance.
Alaska's fisheries can be maintained at a level of high productivity by an integrated program of scientific investigation, sound regulation, and vigilant enforcement.
But these activities must be expanded.
Some progress in this direction was made in 1947 when two additional airplanes, obtained from military surplus, and two new small patrol craft became available.
Further expansion of scientific investigation and enforcement is planned.
Alaska fisheries furnish notable examples of the application of research knowledge.
The yield of Alaska herring has increased substantially under controlled utilization, and the Karluk River salmon investigations have disclosed that in a lake which serves as a “nursery ground" for young sockeye salmon the fertility of the water, which can be artificially increased, is a vital factor in production.
Preservation of our fisheries is dependent on adequate statistics.
Statisties indicating variations in the catch in relation to fishing effort, areas of capture, and methods by which the catch was taken are frequently the only measure of fluctuations in the condition and size of the stock of individual fish products.
To be of maximum value, complete statistical information relative to the fisheries must be collected every year.
Unfortunately, funds for gathering this essential data for all sections of the United States have been available in only 2 years—1880 and 1931.
In other years we have had to rely on partial coverage.
One of the keys to the conservation of our fishery resources is to develop processing, distribution, and marketing to the point where all of the catch is devoted to the highest possible uses.
Important technological studies are being carried on to determine a suitable means of salvaging waste by converting it into salable industrial products.
In the Alaskan salmon industry alone, the cannery waste amounts to more than 100 million pounds annually.
Waste products from other domestic fisheries probably bring this total up to 300 million pounds a year.
Properly processed into marketable products this waste would become an asset rather than a detriment to the industry.
The utilization of fish waste for products other than oil and meal is being given increased attention.
This material is a potential source of certain pharmaceuticals and other products for industry.
A better conservation of our vitamin supplies may be attained by study of the factors affecting extraction of vitamin A from fish livers and the stability of this vitamin.
It has been estimated that the total catch of fishery products could be increased 325 million pounds annually through utilization of waste fish that are now destroyed by current methods of fishing for more valuable species.
This destruction of small fish occurs principally in the North Atlantic, South Atlantic, and Gulf areas where quantities of small and unutilized species are taken incidentally in the trawl fishery for groundfish and shrimp.
Investigation into the means of using these species is of paramount importance.
Even more important than conserving existing fish resources is the development of new and unexplored resources.
Evidence indicates that waters more remote than those usually frequented by our fishermen support sizeable populations of fish.
The tuna resources in the Central Pacific have never been measured and may be one of the world's richest.
Exploratory fishing for king crab and bottomfish in the Bering Sea as far north as Nome is being accelerated.
The anchovies of the Pacific coast are practically an untapped resource estimated to offer a potential yield of 250 million pounds annually.
We have lagged far behind the rest of the world in exploring the ocean resources.
Other countries with important fisheries have had up to a score of fishery research vessels in operation.
Until a year or so ago, the United States—with the second biggest fishery production—had none.
We now have one—the Albatross III, in operation on the New England fishing banks to gather information relative to such valuable species as the haddock.
Three more vessels are being prepared for work in the vast reaches of Oceania, where American interest in the tuna and other fisheries was aroused during World War II.
Another ship is being prepared for investigations in the North Pacific, but other areas warrant such exploratory operations.
Mineral raw materials are as much the lifeblood of modern industry as mineral fuels.
Our industrial machine is chewing up every year more and more of our exhaustible mineral deposits.
Some of our vital raw material minerals already may be nearing exhaustion, and for many of them we are digging deeper every year to come up with leaner ores.
Any exact or final measurement of our mineral resources is impossible to make.
Undiscovered deposits cannot be accurately measured nor can future trends be precisely predicted.
For instance, how long present reserves of iron ore will last depends not only upon our future rate of consumption, but also upon the discovery of new reserves, and the development of new processes which make it feasible to use ores that are not economically usable today.
But it does not require any exact measurement to disclose that some of our most essential raw materials already are in short supply and becoming increasingly costly to mine and process.
As our supplies decrease, our demands increase.
Every new advance in industrial technology creates additional needs for minerals—often the very minerals we need most for other uses.
No attempt will be made here to analyze our mineral supply situation in detail.
The latest data on mineral resources were outlined in a joint report by the Bureau of Mines and the Geological Survey in 1947, entitled "Mineral Position of the United States."
That report showed plentiful supplies of many minerals including magnesium, helium, nitrates, phosphate rock, potash, salt, and sulfur.
But it also disclosed critical or possibly critical shortages of such materials as iron ore, copper, lead, and zinc, for most of which we have had ample supplies in the past; and continued shortages of such minerals as chromite, manganese, nickel, tin, quartz crystals, and asbestos.
Our dependence on minerals is so great, and our over-all supply is so uncertain, that we need to move quickly in every way possible to conserve our known deposits, find new deposits, develop techniques for using low grade and off quality reserves, and to synthesize and find substitutes for minerals in short supply.
With respect to some of our minerals drastic action may be necessary to rationalize uses, so that our remaining supplies will not be wasted.
Conservation of our mineral reserves means, among other things, recovery of the highest possible percentage of our ores, rather than wasting those that prove difficult to get.
Here is a place where some measuring stick other than the usual commercial judgment needs to be used.
It may cost a little more to mine the last copper ore in a given mine, but we should not permit production to close down because of a few cents difference in the cost of mining, when national defense may be involved.
Measured in terms of natural resources, that remaining copper may be cheap at the increased cost.
Finding new deposits and extending the limits of known deposits may be our biggest hope in meeting future demands for minerals.
Both the Bureau of Mines and the Geological Survey are active in this program.
They have tested thousands of domestic mineral deposits and are publishing the results.
The work has yielded increased data on the importance of many of the deposits and in many instances has disclosed substantial reserves of critical and essential minerals, previously unknown.
Some of these are now being developed by private capital.
Others are of marginal character, not now capable of profitable exploitation, but they form a reserve of potential value for the future.
A low-grade copper deposit was developed in Arizona in the course of this program.
It seemed at first too poor to be of current economic interest, but continued drilling indicated millions of tons of ore.
Private capital took over the development, and at latest reports, had indicated by drilling the presence of nearly 500,000,000 tons of low grade ore, thus adding another to the several huge "porphyry-type" copper deposits from which the United States gets the bulk of its copper.
Preparations for mining this deposit have begun.
The work on manganese and iron ore deposits have disclosed large reserves totaling hundreds of millions of tons.
Only a part of this is of current usable grade, but part of the balance may enter the economic picture in the not too distant future.
As its current share in the program of finding new mineral resources, the Geological Survey during the fiscal year was actively conducting 71 field exploratory projects in metalliferous and nonmetalliferous geology.
Because of the eritical need for base metals, 24 of the projects dealt with copper, lead and zinc and 15 with deposits of iron and ferro-alloy minerals such as tungsten, chromite, and manganese.
An extensive study of the phosphate deposits in Florida, Idaho, Montana, and Utah, was begun, and considerable attention was given to the geology pegmatites as sources of feldspar, mica and similar materials.
The Geological Survey also is continuing aggressive field and laboratory research in the science and art of ore finding, including fundamental research directed toward increasing our understanding of the occurrence, mineralogy distribution, and origin of mineral deposits.
Ore-finding covers a much wider field of science than it did when demands for minerals were more moderate and new deposits were easier to find.
Today ore-finding and appraisal are highly complex and technical processes involving not only the many specialized fields of geology to an increasing degree, but geochemistry and geophysies as well.
The essential step in ore finding is regional geologie mapping because it provides the background for forecasts of the possible occurrence of ore.
It also is essential in the search for and conservation of water resources, in land classification, in soil conservation, in dam, highway and other kinds of heavy construction, and in military planning.
But the United States has lagged far behind other nations in geologic mapping.
Less than 10 percent of the Nation has been thus mapped on scales, adequate for modern use.
We rank with backward nations of the world in this respect—far behind England, France, Germany, Japan, and Italy.
The status of geologic mapping in the United States is comparable to that of Poland and Algeria—we are a little behind Algeria, but we are ahead of Poland.
Increased appropriations since the war have permitted a little increase in the rate of geologic mapping.
But even at the present rate the job of mapping the United States will not be concluded for 180 years.
Topographic mapping of the country, needed in mineral findings as well as for other planning of natural resource development and national security, also is lagging far behind our needs.
Aerial photography has speeded up the preparation of topographic maps, thus permitting current operations to include as much as 300,000 square miles.
Many of the maps previously prepared by the Geological Survey, since it began preparing such maps in 1879, are inadequate to meet modern needs; in fact, only about a fourth of the country can be considered adequately mapped.
At no previous time in history has the demand for topographic maps been so great.
At least one request has been received for almost every tract of land in the country.
In some instances as many as six or eight public agencies have requested maps for the same area.
Requests for mapping Alaska alone total more than the area mapped in continental United States during the last 25 to 30 years.
Topographie mapping, as well as other basic data studies, should be made to precede the planning and design of the great engineering projects carried out by the Bureau of Reclamation and other agencies.
Our highway construction program is expected to cost $20,000,000,000 during the next 20 years.
The economy that could be effected in road building alone, through the use of good topographic maps, would finance the completion of the standard topographic map for the entire United States.
From a military standpoint, the provision of accurate topographic maps is an essential measure in the National Defense program.
The Bureau of Mines is giving special emphasis to the work of finding substitutes for scarce minerals and developing techniques for using low-grade ores.
The metallurgical accomplishments of the Bureau during the war period and in the years since have been particularly outstanding.
Lower grade ores and minerals were brought into production through improved ore-dressing methods; new structural materials have been developed, and synthetic mineral products have been substituted for scarce natural resources.
As the grade of our ores continues to decline, ore dressing becomes an ever-growing problem of increasing importance.
The Bureau of Mines has developed new processes for producing concentrates from the ores.
Already these developments have brought into the economic picture certain marginal deposits formerly considered impracticable to exploit.
The Bureau's metallurgists have proved that many of the leaner ores of iron, copper, lead, and zinc can be economically upgraded, thus making possible the use of formerly uneconomic reserves.
Successful work also has been done by the Bureau of Mines in finding substitutes for scarce minerals.
Substitutes have been developed for Indian Kyanite and for nickel, chromium, and tantalum for some uses.
The Bureau now is studying methods of manufacturing synthetic products to replace sheet mica and spinnable asbestos, and to develop substitutes for diamonds in industrial production.
Another activity of the Bureau of Mines in the field of resource conservation is the development of uses for waste products such as vanadium and gaseous fluorine now lost in treating phosphate rock for fertilizer; the recovery of rare metals driven off and deposited in flues from smelting or roasting processes, and the production of light-weight aggregate for use in concrete.
Conservation of the lives of miners is a problem related to the conservation of mineral resources.
Both the Bureau of Mines and the Geological Survey are active in this field.
The Bureau of Mines is conducting studies to reduce the loss of life from roof and coal-fall accidents which account for approximately half of all fatalities in coal mines and made nearly 4,700 coal-mine inspections during the year.
The Geological Survey requires safe and efficient operation of properties under its supervision.
Ten out of twenty-three certificates of achievement in safety awarded to bituminous coal mines in the annual national safety competitions are held by Federal lessees.
One of our mineral reserves—phosphate rock—is of such importance in agriculture that it deserves separate consideration in this report.
Phosphate rock is the raw material used in the manufacture of phosphate fertilizers and a large number of phosphorus compounds used in the food and chemical industries.
A large part of the Nation's phosphate reserves are in the West—chiefly in Idaho, Utah, Montana, and Wyoming.
There is a big and growing demand for phosphate fertilizer to maintain the soil of western farms.
Yet almost all the plants manufacturing phosphate fertilizer are in the East, so that western farmers have paid in freight charges up to $60 a ton for phosphate plant food.
This combination of circumstances, plus the fact that the Northwest has much undeveloped water power which could be used for the production of phosphate fertilizer, has led the Department to conduct a many-sided investigation into the possibilities of creating a big phosphate fertilizer industry in the West.
Private industry has begun to develop these possibilities and within a few years a greatly enlarged western industry, based on western resources, can be expected to provide cheaper fertilizer to maintain the fertility of western farms.
The West badly needs this development.
Western farms are suffering from depletion of the soil.
Because of the cost of fertilizer they have not been able to put back into their soils what they take out.
Production year after year of record-breaking crops is increasing the need for fertilizer to replace the plant food which the crops take from the soil.
Responding to this need the western farmers, despite high freight costs, increased their use of phosphate fertilizers in 17 Western and North Central States from 35,000 tons before the war to 240,000 tons in 1947.
Much of this had to be hauled from Tennessee and Florida.
It is estimated that farmers in these 17 States need 850,000 tons of plant food annually, or almost four times what they used in 1947.
They probably would buy this much if they could get it at reasonable prices.
It is in the national interest to help them get it as a means of developing soil-conserving farming practices.
There is one possible catch to this proposition.
The bulk of western phosphate deposits must be mined by underground methods at higher cost than those in Florida, where most of the eastern deposits are located and where cheap strip-mining is possible.
On the other hand, low-cost hydroelectric power, fuel, and low-priced sulfuric acid may overbalance this in the final cost of production—so that the shorter freight haul should put the fertilizer on western farms at lower costs.
In addition, the western phosphate rock contains other elements such as vanadium and fluorine that may help to lower fertilizer costs when refining processes are perfected to recover these byproducts.
In order to provide for this new industry the Department has planned transmission lines to make available to the phosphate fields in Idaho and Montana cheap power from the Columbia River Basin.
Potential sources of fuel and sulfuric acid are being investigated by the Department.
America is fortunate to have available for development a new frontier a fifth as large as Continental United States and rich in natural resources.
That new frontier is Alaska—a vast area of almost unexplored natural wealth, which may include many of the mineral and other raw material supplies we need most.
Its fisheries already have been developed into a major industry.
Other big industries probably can be developed from Alaska's forests, waterpower, agricultural land, furbearing animals, and tourist attractions, as well as its minerals.
In developing Alaska’s resources we have an opportunity to apply the lessons we learned from both our successes and failures in developing resources at home.
The Government still owns most of the land just as it did originally in the western part of the United States.
We have a choice of opening that land for unplanned and possibly wasteful exploitation, or deciding in advance the best ultimate use of these resources and developing them according to plan.
Under the first alternative we would give away natural assets in wholesale quantities to encourage private enterprise to exploit the area, as we did in the western part of continental United States.
Under the second alternative, the Government would put money into the territory for planning and providing access to the resources as a basis for their wise development by free enterprise.
This plan costs more money at the outset, but means tremendous savings ultimately in the conservation and efficient development of the resources.
Fortunately we have so far chosen the second alternative.
Instead of giving away the resources to encourage private development of the railroad, for instance, the government has built and maintained the railroad system.
But until the outbreak of World War II, when Alaska suddenly acquired military importance, development of the area had been handicapped by the failure of the Government to open up the Territory for development.
Even now the inventory of Alaska's natural resources is far from complete.
Only a small fraction of the 225 million acres of vacant public land in the Territory has even been surveyed, and only a million acres have been classified for use.
Exploration of its minerals has barely begun.
In order to plan a wise resource development program for Alaska we need to speed up our topographic and geologic mapping of the area and follow up with detailed mineral investigations and survey of potential transportation routes and power sites.
These are essential to wise over-all planning for development of the area.
Yet until the past fiscal year progress in this direction had been almost imperceptible.
During the year just ended, the Department of Interior expanded the Alaskan development program substantially, and presented to Congress plans for a still more rapid development of the area.
During the 1948 fiscal year appropriations for the Interior Department's Alaskan development program jumped to $16,559,863, plus contract authorizations of $15,000,000 as compared with total appropriations of only $9,999,062 the year previously.
These additional appropriations provided for speeding up construetion of Indian facilities such as schools and hospitals; expansion of mineral resource investigations, and investigations of fisheries; faster construction of roads and the beginning of a 3-year program for rehabilitating the Alaska Railroad.
Appropriations to the Department for the Alaskan development program during the 1949 fiscal year are $37,225,257, plus additional contract authorizations of $31,829,000.
These bigger appropriations will permit the Department still further to speed up rehabilitation of the railroad and construction of roads: start an investigation of water resources for development of hydroelectric power; increase fire protection in the forests; speed up land classification, mapping, and mineral resource investigations; and start construction of a mining experiment station.
More money also was provided for enforcement of the conservation laws protecting the fisheries and fur seals.
The 1949 appropriations for topographic mapping and planimetric mapping were increased four times over the 1948 funds; appropriations for mineral resource investigations and geologic surveys were increased about a quarter; funds for gaging streams were tripled; and appropriations for the investigation and development of mineral deposits were increased nearly three times.
Appropriations for roads, which are necessary to provide access to Alaska's resources, were more than doubled.
For the first time in peacetime history, sizeable amounts of money were being devoted to building up Alaska's transportation system.
From the standpoint of national security, as well as fairness to the people of Alaska, these appropriations for development of the territory have come none too soon.
Alaska has been under the American flag for more than 80 years, but until recently has lacked for development money.
During that period, while the population of continental United States has grown by 100,000,000 people, only 64,000 have settled in Alaska exclusive of military personnel.
Even adding the aboriginal population of 30,000 this provides only 1 inhabitant to every 8 square miles.
The Scandinavian countries and Finland, comparable in climate and terrain, have 13,000,000 people living in economic stability on only two-thirds as much land.
Alaska's timber and minerals can provide most of the raw materials for developing the area.
But those timber and mineral resources cannot be made available until roads are built, until housing is available for workers and their families, and until water power is developed to process the raw materials.
Eventually these raw materials should provide a flourishing export business to help finance the economy and reimburse the Government for its expenditures.
Quicker classification of the land and revision of the land laws are needed to make acquisition of the land easier.
With Alaska's superabundance of land, and lack of population, it must be made easy to obtain land for uses that fit into long-range development plans.
Other prime needs in Alaska are more and better housing, conservation to protect the fisheries and wildlife, improved health facilities, tourist accommodations, better water transportation, and adequate information and advice for farmers.
These things should be provided as soon as possible.
We have spent less, comparatively, for Alaska's development than for opening the West.
Our national interest calls for an increase in the permanent population of Alaska.
The urgency is based not only on the importance of expanding our known reserves of mineral and other resources but upon national security.
Hawaii is another territory with possibilities of resource development.
Hawaii, in addition to serving as a strategic military outpost, has important natural resources including land, fisheries, forests, and recreational assets.
Most of Hawaii's wealth has been built upon its soil, which produces rich sugar and pineapple crops.
The land used for these cash crops has been well maintained, but that has not been true of nearly a third of the territory's land which is used for grazing.
Serious soil waste has occurred on the grazing lands due to overgrazing and permitting the land to be overrun by nonpalatable noxious weeds.
Further research is needed into the adaptability of other crops to the climate and soil, and into irrigation, so that Hawaii's limited acreage can be put to its highest use.
Hawaii's forests have been used primarily to protect its water supplies for its valuable crops.
The replanting of native hardwood trees has been unsuccessful, but there is evidence that trees of exotic species with highly prized wood could be produced commercially on lands formerly occupied by native trees.
This utilization of marginal lands offers great promise.
Fishery resources in Hawaii also offer great development potentialities.
It is estimated that less than 5 percent of the usable surplus of tunas which pass through the territorial waters are harvested.
This is because the catch has been limited by a fishing technique dependent on live bait seined out of inshore waters, the supply of which is limited.
Exploration of the deep-sea fishery resources and development of better techniques for harvesting the tuna would create a major industry for the benefit both of Hawaii and the Nation.
Hawaii has a spectacular beauty and a climate which are attracting a growing tourist trade.
But much more Leeds to be done to develop proper accommodations and provide recreational facilities for tourists.
One of the raw products on which America depends is newsprint, the paper on which its newspapers and magazines are printed.
It is made from certain kinds of wood such as spruce and hemlock which are plentiful in only a few parts of the world.
One of these areas in Alaska.
The United States is the world's biggest consumer—and has to import most of its needs.
We, along with the rest of the world, have difficulty getting enough.
It should be possible to develop a newsprint industry in Alaska which would benefit the Territory as well as the Nation.
The world shortage of newsprint is estimated at somewhere between 1 and 2 million tons a vear.
In Great Britain newspapers are limited to four pages.
In the United States small newspapers, including religious and trade union publications, are constantly threatened by the shortage and resulting high price of newsprint.
Many publishers manage to get enough through long-term contracts and by ownership of producing companies.
But the shortage for some smaller publications operates as a limitation on freedom of the press in this country, and seriously impedes the flow of information throughout the world.
Demand for newsprint in the United States is rising rapidly.
Our newsprint consumption in 1947 was the highest on record—4,753,000 tons.
Consumption in 1948 is estimated at 5,000,000 tons, and by 1960 it is expected to reach about 5,500,000 tons.
Alaska offers a solution to the problem of newsprint supply.
The Territory has vast, undeveloped spruce and hemlock forests.
It is estimated that under sustained yield management of the Alaskan forests, they could produce enough newsprint to meet about a quarter of our present national demand indefinitely.
This would be a boon for the Territory and a boon for the free press of America.
Interior Department is continuing its efforts to interest newsprint producers in the possibilities of Alaskan timber.
During the past vear the United States Forest Service approved a contract for construction of a pulp mill near Ketchikan in Southeast Alaska which will ultimately produce 500 tons of pulp a day.
It has a timber supply sufficient to maintain that capacity in perpetuity.
A second company also is negotiating for such a mill, but so far the newsprint industry has not moved into Alaska.
The pulp in both instances is planned for use in manufacturing rayon.
Construction of this first pulp mill is a big industrial advance for Alaska.
It means the investment of $30,000,000 and jobs for 1,000 men.
But it will only indirectly affect the shortage of newsprint in the United States.
There is plenty of room in Alaska for a newsprint industry.
HIS report has outlined some of America's more serious natural resource problems.
These are problems of such consequence to the future welfare of America that I feel strongly we cannot allow them to go much longer without adequate solutions.
The longer we delay finding answers to them the poorer we become in some of the vital natural resources on which America's future strength and prosperity depend.
During the past 16 years the Government has made great progress in recognizing these problems and dealing with them but our remedial efforts have been "too little and too late."
We need to do a great deal more than we have done so far.
Some additional measures are clearly and unmistakably necessary.
We must push ahead as rapidly as possible with the development of all practicable hydroelectric power.
We need to develop within the next 20 years at least 40 million kilowatts.
The Federal Government probably will need to build at least 30 million of those kilowatts at a cost of 12 billion to 15 billion dollars.
This program should include the St. Lawrence power and sea way which is needed not only for power, but also for transportation.
This second need may soon become paramount in order to bring the newly important iron ore from Labrador and South America to American steel plants.
Another absolute essential to our future protection is the rapid development of our synthetic fuels program.
The Government should invest whatever is necessary to push ahead with this program.
If private enterprise is unwilling to take the risk, the Government must.
More than almost anything else we need to push our program of discovering and developing hidden mineral resources.
Canada and Labrador have discovered a new “Mesabi range" of iron ore.
We may have such assets hidden in the United States or in the unexplored interior of Alaska.
If so, we need to find them.
The Geological Survey should employ every competent geologist it can find to speed up our geologic exploration.
The Bureau of Mines should be given all the money it can spend efficiently in the development of techniques for using low grade ores, and substitute ores.
The Geological Survey and The Reclamation Bureau should be authorized to proceed as rapidly as possible with surveys of our potential water resources in the West and in Alaska.
These are the obvious and unchallenged needs for the protection of our future national safety.
In addition we must meet the need for immediate measures to protect the Nation's economy from the effects of critical shortages.
I cannot close this report without once more calling attention to the urgency of these problems.
We are engaged today in a world-wide ideological struggle involving the future of our nation and the future of democracy.
Our success in that struggle depends to a large extent upon our ability to make our system work so well that its superiority cannot be challenged.
That, in turn, depends on our supply of raw materials.
With so much at stake, we cannot afford to take chances and hope we will have enough.
We must make sure we will.
HE construction program of the Bureau of Reclamation during fiscal year 1948 reached the highest mark of accomplishment in the history of Reclamation.
Despite continued shortages of labor in some areas, deficiencies in certain types of construction materials, prolonged delivery periods for large manufactured equipment, and severe limitations on design offices, 169 million dollars of construction work was completed.
Alva B. Adams Tunnel—Colorado-Big Thompson project, Colorado.
Prospect Mountain and Ramshorn Tunnels—Colorado-Big Thompson project, Colorado.
Altus Canal—W.
C. Austin project, Oklahoma.
Coachella Main Canal—All-American Canal system, California.
At the end of the year construction was in progress on authorized projects on 25 dams (including 2 diversion), 11 power plants, 26 pumping plants including the major installations at Čoulee Dam and Tracy, Calif., 249 miles of main canals, and 1,592 miles of transmission lines.
Project development was continued with major contracts awarded for construction of 14.7 miles of the Friant-Kern Canal and 13.6 miles of the Delta-Mendota Canal on the Central Valley project, California.
Construction of a highly specialized underground irrigation distribution system for the Coachella Valley, Calif., was started with award of contracts for the first four units containing 21,200 acres.
Power development progressed with award of contracts for turbines and generators for the second group of three 108,000-kilowatt generating units for the right powerhouse at the Grand Coulee Dam, Columbia Basin project, Washington.
Initial contracts were awarded for construetion of a transmission substation at Beulah, N. Dak., and 115- kilovolt transmission line from Gering to Sidney, Nebr., and from Sidney, Nebr., to Sterling, Colo.
Montana.
This contract in the amount of $43,431,000 for construction of a 520-foot-high concrete arch dam and 285,000-kilowatt capacity power plant is the second largest contract to be awarded in Reclamation history, being exceeded in amount of money only by the contract for Hoover Dam.
Other outstanding awards during the fiscal year included contracts for the Boysen Dam and power plant, Boysen unit ($13,900,000) ; the Medicine Creek Dam, the Frenchman-Cambridge unit ($4,270,000) ; and the Heart Butte Dam, Heart River unit ($2,360,000) ; all on the Missouri River Basin project.
A construction contract in the amount of $2,499,000 was awarded for completion of the Anderson Ranch Dam and power plant on the Boise project, Idaho.
Preconstruction activity was accentuated with award of contracts for Government camps on the Canyon Ferry, Narrows, and St. Francis units of the Missouri River Basin project.
The total value of all contracts awarded during fiscal year 1948 amounted to about $160,000,000.
This amount, comprising the face value of over 1,400 separate contracts for construction, materials, equipment, and supplies, represents the largest volume of contracts ever awarded by the Bureau of Reclamation in a fiscal year.
Of the total contract amount, construction contracts accounted for $105,000,- 000 or about 65 percent.
By comparison, construction contracts awarded during the previous year amounted to approximately $62,- 000,000.
Construction progress was accelerated on Reclamation work generally during the fiscal year.
Contractors who had experienced dificulty since the war in developing their organizations and acquiring necessary equipment and materials had largely overcome these difficulties by the beginning of the fiscal year and had stepped up production on all fronts.