My DEAR MR. PrEsiDENT: I am transmitting herewith the reports of the agencies of the Department of the Interior for the 1949 fiscal year.
These reports provide a remarkable documentation of the variegated role of government in a democracy.
The reclamation of arid land, the production and marketing of hydroelectric power, the inventorying and evaluation of our physical resources, the development of the territories, research in biological resources, the health, education, and welfare of the Indians—these are just a few of the responsibilities of the Department on which we report this year.
They are responsibilities fundamental to the well-being of our Nation.
They are tasks which, when carried out, respond to needs which individuals are unable to provide for themselves, and yet which must be provided in order to assure the broad base which our national economy requires in order to function properly.
It is unnecessary to recount in this letter of transmittal the measures of progress of the Department of the Interior during the 1949 fiscal year.
These are deseribed adequately in the reports of the individual agencies which follow.
Of more consequence is a brief account of the growth of the Department during its first century, the end of which was marked during this year, and some of its major contributions during this century.
These 100 years have witnessed the unfolding of a new era.
The industrial revolution erupted and spread its effects throughout the western world in this century.
This Nation has made its contributions to these changes, and has been greatly affected by them.
Our territorial growth, the phenomenal expansion of our population, the complexity and efficiency of our economic machine culminating in increase of almost a hundredfold in our national income since 1849 are a few indications of these changes.
It has been called upon repeatedly to take an active part in the development of this era of progress.
Under a long succession of acts of the Congress it is charged with responsibility for administering a major share of the activities of the Federal Government that deal directly with the conservation and development of the resource base of our economy.
Consequently, its activities affect directly the adequacy of that resource base to provide the raw materials which this Nation consumes in its expanding role in the political, social, and economic affairs of the world.
To have envisioned in 1849 the world of 1949 would have indeed required a rare facility of imagination.
It is not surprising that the Department of the Interior in the administration of President Zachary Taylor, consisting of Secretary Thomas Ewing, a Chief Clerk and 637 emplovees little resembles the Department of today, with more than 50,000 employees and its wide range of interests.
Although this early Department contained the germ of its present mission in its responsibilities for the public lands and the Indians, it was, despite its broad responsibility for promoting "the arts of peace and production," an administrative receptacle for a variety of public responsibilities—pensions, the census, patents to inventors, and other domestic activities.
Through the years, the Department in effect, became the "Mother of the Cabinet."
The Department of Agriculture originated as a bureau of the Department until it was elevated to Cabinet status in 1862.
A Bureau of Labor was established in the Deépartment and so existed until it acquired departmental status.
Similarly, the Department of Commerce began as an agency of Interior, until it was merged with the Department of Labor into a Department of Commerce and Labor.
Other agencies originated in the Department: the Veterans' Administration, the Office of Education, the eleemosynary institutions of the Federal Government.
Suffice it to say that out of the diverse activities which have characterized the Department during the past century there has emerged a clearly understood departmental mission, a significant and comprehensive role for the Department to play in the affairs of the Nation.
This mission, although originating in the responsibilities of the Department of 100 years ago for the custody of the publie domain and the Indians, has been tempered by the times through which the Department, and the Nation, have passed.
This mission has been shaped by the increasing awareness during the years that something must be done to conserve the resources of our vast national domain.
At about the turn of the century strenuous efforts at conservation began, directed mainly toward slowing up the rate of disposition of natural resources and preventing their monopoly control.
As a corollary to these efforts was the development of the sound concept that our renewable resources should be maintained on a sustained vield basis; and more recently the public recognition of the need for all-out development of unused resources to serve the need of an expanding national economy.
The Reclamation Act of 1902 is an expression of this philosophy, although it reached its present stature many years later.
In the 1920's and at an accelerated pace in the 1930's such forward looking resource management laws as the Mineral Leasing Aet, the Taylor Grazing Aet, and the Bonneville Act were adopted.
In the late 1930's and the 1940's came the inception of vast multiple-purpose programs such as the TVA, the Missouri Basin, Columbia Basin, and Central Valley projects, programs which envisage the conservation and development of the total resources of great river basins.
Over 5,000,000 aeres of arid and semi-arid lands in Western States have been made fruitful with irrigation water.
Hydroelectric plants with installed capacity of nearly 3 million kilowatts, 18 percent of the Nation's total utility hydroeleetric supply, have been built.
Value of crops grown on federally irrigated land last year was more than $555,000,000 and power revenues another $32,000,000.
Federal mine inspection and mine safety programs have brought the death rate in coal mines down to 1.56 per million tons of coal mined.
In 1910 when the Bureau of Mines was established the rate was 5.62 per million tons of coal mined.
Methods of making synthetic liquid fuels out of coal and shale have been developed and proven practical at costs approaching present natural liquid fuel costs.
The Department has developed the exclusive production of the national supply of helium in this country, one of the few known supplies in the world.
New and important peacetime uses have been developed by the Department in addition to its use in medicine, including welding, and tracing of underground petroleum.
Extensive metallurgical research essential for industry and military purposes has been completed on hundreds of metals.
Typical is the development of metallic titanium, which can be now used for construction equipment, machinery parts, and other uses.
It is half as heavy as steel and twice as strong.
Conservation work in irrigation, forestry, and minerals was initiated by the Department.
This resulted in later creation of the Forest Service of the Agriculture Department and the Bureau of Reclamation, Bureau of Mines, and the Bureau of Land Management of Interior.
Topographic and geologic maps have been prepared which have served as the basis for virtually all important detailed surveys in this country, and for important construction, public and private.
Accurate records have been maintained for approximately half a century on stream flow which allows prediction of flood conditions and planning of dams and levees.
Over 5,000 stream gaging stations are now maintained by the Survey.
Ground water studies have permitted cities and industries to locate and construet work for adequate water supplies and have warned of possible disaster in certain areas from a lowered water table.
The affairs of 400,000 Indians have been administered on more than 200 reservations.
Education has been improved so that today about 62 percent of Indian children are in their proper school grade compared with 20 percent in 1928.
Some 227 schools and 72 hospitals have been built and operated.
Twenty-eight national parks have been acquired and developed, including 11,347,269 acres which are being preserved for their beauty and public interest and recreation, and 146 national monuments, historic sites, and recreational areas.
Two hundred eighty-two wildlife refuges comprising 18,000,000 acres, have been acquired and developed for protection of wildlife and birds which were in danger of extinction.
A research program has been developed and administered for the $100,000,000 Alaskan salmon industry resource, so that future salmon runs would not be damaged.
From 1910 to date, the fur seal herd on the Pribilof Islands has been so managed as to increase it from 132,000 animals to more than 3,380,000.
The existing public domain has been managed for many years so as to make a profit for the Government over its own costs of operation.
Approximately 285,000,000 acres of public lands have been disposed of in Western States under homesteading laws which permitted wide settlement and later development of vast areas.
Cadastral surveys of 1 billion, 300 million acres of public lands have been made.
Grazing activities on western public lands havę been administered through 58 grazing districts which permit orderly use of 154,000,000 acres of public land by private stockmen.
The Department serves as the Federal Government liaison and advisor for the nearly 3,000,000 American citizens who live outside the borders of continental United States.
In addition, it has helped to secure equality of legislative treatment for residents of territories and insular possessions.
In the development of the programs of this Department we have recognized that our land, water, and mineral resources must be regarded as a unity, and managed as a unity.
These resources occur in the same land areas.
Action taken, or the failure to take action, in one field inevitably affects other resource fields.
The despoiling of timber lands in higher altitudes causes serious erosion and damaging floods.
Overgrazing these lands may reduce the original capacity of water reservoirs.
The development of phosphate deposits on the public lands may be completely dependent on the availability of hydroelectric power.
Although important resource development tasks of the Department are in the West, we have important work to do in every State and Territory of the Nation.
Consider the geographic diversity of these functions.
The Geological Survey works in every State and in all of the Territories.
The Bureau of Land Management functions in 29 States and the Territories, wherever the Department has responsibility for federally owned lands.
The National Park Service and the Fish and Wildlife Service serve the public—east and west—north and south.
Similarly, the Bureau of Indian Affairs supervises the administration of the affairs of the Indians in the East as well as the West and Alaska.
The Bureau of Mines' valuable projects are carried out in Alaska, Pennsylvania, Arizona, and Alabama—in fact in every State in which there is a present or future prospect of mineral development—east and west of the Rockies.
In the public power field progress has been made in the regional agencies—Bonneville in the Northwest, the Southwest Power Administration, and we have begun to market power in the Southeast.
Only in the case of our reclamation activities are we restricted to the West by law at this time.
All in all—our 50,000 employees work in 1,500 offices distributed through the 48 States and Territories.
We cannot afford today to look back and predicate our future actions on past accomplishments.
It is essential that we look forward, and rely on the past only as the provider of experience with which to anticipate the requirements of the future.
We recognize today the vital link between our natural resources and the requirements of our expanding economy and national security.
We are attempting to inform the Nation of these relationships of the need for protection of nonrenewable resources and for a sustained yield plan for renewable resources.
We have stressed the necessity for developing processes for utilizing lower-grade minerals, and the need for guarding our scenic and historic areas against commercial exploitation, the necessity for expanding our land base by irrigation, and the urgent necessity for meeting critical expanding energy needs.
You have provided a goal to which our sights must be raised.
Your economic report to the Congress discussed at considerable length the prospects for national economic growth and pointed out that national production could increase by 3 or 4 percent each year over the next few years.
This amounts to an increase of about one-third over the next decade.
This forecast of increase in national output is based on the prospect of gain in output for each individual worker—for, although the number of employed may increase over the next few years; the average work week may become shorter.
This increase in man-hour productivity will come about from equipping workers with more and better tools which use greater volumes of energy.
The Interior Department bears a heavy responsibility for assuring that technical progress, on which increased productivity is dependent, is made possible.
To a considerable extent Interior's activities determine whether the additional metals, the timber, chemicals, and power from which the tools and energy are produced will be at hand.
Interior does not supply all of these products by itself, of course, but it plays an indispensable role in their production.
For example, Interior's geologic mapping and exploration are prerequisite to mineral discovery, its research and development activities are essential to encouraging increased mineral output and to providing substitutes for scarce materials, we must assist in usefully developing the energy in our rivers and must market it wisely if the large increment of necessary electrical energy is to be available, and Interior must see to it that the wealth in public lands is made available for wise use.
The programs of the Department directed toward these purposes are truly investments by the Nation in its future well-being.
It is our job to manage these investments wisely.
To do its part in meeting the long-range energy requirements of the economy, the Federal Government should develop by 1970, 30 million of the 77 million kilowatts of economic hydroelectric power potential contained in our rivers.
Despite progress to date, 'we have developed less than 20 percent of this potential hydroelectric power.
In addition, research in long-distance power transmission should be encouraged.
A Federal program to produce electric power from atomic energy should be continued, and research to produce heat from solar energy and the heat pump and to produce power from the wind should be accelerated.
Future population growth, particularly in the West, and significantly enhanced living standards will require enlarged output from our agricultural plant.
The Department's program for reclaiming land by irrigation will contribute to this national need.
Our longrange program provides for the new irrigation of 17.7 million acres and the supplemental irrigation of 9.1 million acres by 1977.
Even this program may fall short of requirements.
The Department of the Interior administers more than 200 million acres of range land in the West.
Fully half of this range needs restorative work.
Twenty-two million acres need reseeding now; 15 million acres are partially or entirely unusable now without further water development.
To do the job within 20 years will require an annual rate of expenditure nearly triple the Department's expenditures for 1949.
This resource, improved, adds to the agricultural plant of the United States, fundamental to the production of meat, wool, and hides.
Well managed, with proper conservation of soil and cover, it contributes a supply of clear water, evenly distributed, to multiplepurpose reservoirs.
Neglected, it adds to the devastation of floods and rapidity of siltation of reservoirs.
We must complete the geologic mapping of the areas of the country still unmapped.
Develop adequate perpetual reserves of timber for commercial cutting; replant and reseed hundreds of thousands of acres of forest lands under Interior supervision; increase fire and disease protection.
A rigorous research program should be initiated for making economically feasible the large-scale reclamation of water from the ocean, through distillation or other means.
These selected objectives are illustrative of the relationship between the work of this Department and affirmative national policies and programs to promote long-term economic growth.
It is our intention, as the Department of the Interior enters on its second century, that its record of accomplishment during this century will be measured by the extent to which it participates in anticipating the needs of a healthier, happier, and wealthier America.
Secretary of the Interior.
During the period covered by this report J. A. Krug was Secretary of the Interior.
This program, representing a widely diversified undertaking of design and construction of dams, canals, power plants, pumping plants, transmission lines, and other important features intrinsic in the Bureau's projects, was by far the largest in Bureau history.
Embracing an expenditure of almost 250 million dollars, the 1949 program was more than 40 percent greater than the 1948 program.
Included in the 1949 program was the continued expansion of construction on the largest of the Bureau's basin-wide developments, the Missouri River Basin project; the start of major construction activity at Hungry Horse Dam, largest concrete dam now being built; and the continuance of construction of important irrigation and power features on the Columbia Basin, Central Valley, Colorado-Big Thompson, and other projects.
A significant development during the year was the leveling-off of construction costs and increased rate of accomplishment by contractors' forces.
Notable also was the general willingness of contractors to submit more competitive bids.
Noteworthy progress in research on materials of construction during the last year indicated substantial savings could be realized on structures which are now under construction and on those which are to be undertaken in the future.
These savings are accomplished by improved use of construction materials and new methods of construction.
Major contracts awarded during the year included construction of Canyon Ferry Dam in Montana, Cedar Bluff Dam in Kansas, and Bonny Dam in Colorado.
The largest award of the year was made for the completion of the Grand Coulee pumping plant and miscellaneous construction work at Grand Coulee Dam in Washington.
The total value of the more than 800 construction, material, equipment, and supply contracts awarded during fiscal year 1949 amounted to about 163 million dollars.
Of the total contract amount, construction contracts accounted for 139 million dollars or about 85 percent.
By comparison, construction contracts awarded during the previous year amounted to approximately 105 million dollars.
A summary of the major contracts awarded during fiscal year 1949 is given in table 1.
At the end of the year, construction was in progress on 23 storage dams and 1 diversion dam, 9 power plants, 22 pumping plants, 440 miles of main canals, and 1,600 miles of transmission lines.
The rate of construction progress on many projects was greater than had been anticipated.
For example, the construction of Jackson Gulch Dam on the Mancos project in Colorado was scheduled for completion by April 1950 but was actually completed in December 1948.
By the end of the fiscal year, construction on O'Sullivan Dam on the Columbia Basin project was virtually completed with only 62 percent of the contract time elapsed; thus completion was approximately 18 months earlier than was required by the contract.
A significant increased rate of accomplishment on Bureau of Reclamation projects was made during the year.
Notable was the increased rate of progress of placement of earth fill in dams, excavation for large canals, and lining of canals.
The trend toward acceleration in monthly placement quantities in earth-fill dams was particularly outstanding.
This increase in placement quantities was attributed to three major factors: more efficient use of older types of earth excavating and transporting equipment, production of larger capacity models of such equipment, and development of new machines and procedures.
The high rate of accomplishment on Bureau projects has required revisions in payment schedules on some projects.
As a result, supplemental funds were needed to continue the rapid pace of construction.
During the year, the main embankment of Davis Dam was completed.
What is believed to be a record for earth placing operations on a Bureau project was established at this dam during February 1949 with the placement of 770,000 cubic yards of material in the 3,500,000-cubic-yard embankment.
Excavation work continued on Hungry Horse Dam, largest of Bureau dams under construction.
Installation of equipment for handling aggregate and concrete was in progress to facilitate initial placement of concrete by the fall of 1949.
Work on the principal contract for the construction of Boysen Dam and power plant was about 60 percent complete by the end of the fiscal year as compared with 43 percent of the contract time elapsed.
Principal features completed on Bureau projects this year are shown in table 2.
The structures tabulated in table 3 are among the major features expected to be placed under construction on Bureau of Reclamation projects during fiscal year 1950.
Major features of Bureau projects expected to be completed in fiscal year 1950 are indicated in table 4.
Approximately 560 miles of transmission lines and over 150 miles of canals now under construction are expected to be completed during fiscal year 1950.
Costs of both material and labor, which have shown a continuous increase since 1940, appear to have reached a peak during the last half of 1948.
Bureau of Reclamation construction cost indexes in most categories, as illustrated in table 5, indicate a slight decline in costs of the principal types of Reclamation work for the period ending June 30, 1949.
It will be noted, however, that one type of work actually increased while four others remained the same as in January 1949.
An easing in the tightness of the supply of materials accompanied by a decline in the cost of some materials and a noticeable increase in labor efficiency and in the number of bidders on Reclamation work were evident during the vear.
These factors were offset, however, by increases in labor rates as a result of certain classes of labor receiving wage increases and in the readjustment of minimum wage rates.
As a result, there was a leveling-off of construction costs rather than a sharp decline.
During the vear a definite increase was noted in the number of bidders on most Bureau work.
This has resulted in some instances in lower bids being received.
Also noted was the smaller spread between the high and low bids, indicating that contractors were computing their estimates more closely.
For example, bid openings for construction of transmission lines covering identical work previously advertised showed not only a large increase in the number of bidders but also bids from 4 to 30 percent lower than those received during the preceding year.
While this reflects to a large extent the availability of transmission-line materials, it also indicates in general a willingness on the part of contractors to submit really competitive bids.
Contractors are now more willing to accept contracts without including in their bids large contingency items to cover every possible expenditure.
The amount of force-account work performed by the Bureau was within legislative limitations and represented a negligible proportion of the total construction work accomplished during the fiscal year.
However, minor construction activities by means of force-account work were carried out on some projects.
These activities ranged from operation of a sawmill at Keswick Dam to installation of electrical equipment on various projects after the major construction was completed.
This year the Branch of Design and Construction initiated the use of standard specifications for construction of canal systems which has as its objective the elimination of duplicate material and the expediting and review of specifications of structures of similar nature.
Specifications for canals, laterals, and similar structures were published and issued under this plan.
Also, a volume of standard specifications and drawings for H-frame, wood-pole transmission lines was prepared and used during the year.
As an example of measures taken to attract more and possibly lower bids, the readvertisement for Canyon Ferry Dam and power plant contained a provision allowing the contractor to obtain monthly payment for 85 percent of his investment in special concrete plant and equipment.
The payments to the contractor were to be repaid to the Government by deductions from the contractor's earnings at a specified rate per cubic yard of concrete placed in the dam.
In construction specifications, provisions were included, when practicable, to provide for the contractor to prepare reinforcement-bar detail drawings.
This method was inaugurated in the specifications for the construction of pipe lines on unit 6 of the Coachella Valley distribution system.
A procedure for supplying duplicate bidding schedules to bidders on both supply and construction specifications was inaugurated.
By use of this procedure, the bidder can retain a copy of the specifications for his records and submit his bid on the duplicate bidding schedule and accompanying forms.
Four hundred and thirty specifications for both construction and long-form supply contracts were reviewed and issued by the Branch of Design and Construction this year.
A staff development program inaugurated this year by the Branch of Design and Construction aimed at providing new employees broader knowledge of the Bureau's activities and giving young engineers an opportunity to obtain diversified experience in the various design, research, and construction functions of the branch.
New employees rotate from one assignment to another, receiving valuable training under the guidance of experienced Bureau engineers.
6 months of design experience, 3 months of research experience, and 3 months of field experience during the first year.
During the second year of the program, the participants are given an opportunity to specialize in the field of work for which they are best qualified.
Concurrently with the work experience program, supplementary instruction is given by technical specialists in the Branch of Design and Construction.
To assure the satisfactory service condition and functioning of Bureau of Reclamation structures and facilities at all times, a program of inspection and preparation of operators' instructions was initiated.
Principal objectives of the program are the verification of the safety of the works or disclosure of unsafe conditions; verification of the adequacy of the works in their current condition to meet operating requirements; and the utilization of the service experience for the improvement of design and construction practices.
Engineers in the Branch of Design and Construction participated in many activities of professional engineering societies, including the American Society of Civil Engineers, the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, the American Society for Testing Materials, the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, the American Concrete Institute, and the Geological Society of America.
Besides serving as members on important committees of these societies, the engineers presented over 35 technical papers at various meetings of the societies.
Bureau engineers actively participated also in the affairs of several international professional organizations.
Technical papers by these engineers were prepared for such organizations as the International Assembly of Scientific Hydrology and Geophysics, the Pan American Engineering Congress, and the International Conference on Large Electric High Tension Systems.
Research, geologic investigations, and testing activities of the Denver research laboratories were intensified as many new features of Bureau projects entered design and construction phases.
Major activities in the laboratories included the testing of construction materials, such as cement, aggregate, soils, and protective coatings of metalwork, the verification of design through the use of structural and hydraulic models, and the appraisal of foundation conditions and structure sites.
Noteworthy progress was made in the fields of special experimentation wherein new techniques and procedures could be utilized in the solution of future research problems.
Central Valley project.
Investigations advanced materially in the measurement and prevention of water seepage from canals.
Research directed toward the development of more effective and cheaper canal linings culminated in several test installations of buried asphalt membrane and in the development of rapid and inexpensive placement of concrete linings by the use of relatively simple equipment.
Research toward the continued improvement of the protection of metal linings of pipes and conduits was exemplified by the application of 24 test sections of various protective coatings to the penstocks of Shasta Dam.
The first Bureau installation using cathodic protection, an electrical method for preventing corrosion on metalwork, was made on two steel water tanks on the Boulder Canyon project.
Research in control of weeds in canals was noteworthy for the development of a new "slug treatment" by which large quantities of weed killer could be applied for a short period to water in the weedinfested canals.
Investigations were made for the control of algae infestations of hydraulic works, and tests were performed on the effect of weed killers upon crop growth.
The method devised in the Denver laboratories for measurement of residual stresses in rocks exposed in tunnels and excavations was further developed.
Studies made on the pressure of ice on dams and other structures led to increased knowledge that will be of great usefulness in the design and construction of future projects.
Studies of cavitation and protection measures for the avoidance of this damaging effect upon hydraulic structures were continued.
Experimentation was directed also toward improved design of reinforced concrete and the better utilization of new types of reinforcement steel.
Investigations of the physical properties of loess soils and their possible utilization as foundation and construction materials on structures in the Missouri River Basin were undertaken.
Studies were made also on the design of satisfactory concrete mixes that include the inferior aggregates of the Kansas-Nebraska region.
Notable new developments in geological and related studies were made through the application of geophysical techniques in the study of foundations and construction materials available at construction sites.
Research was carried out on ground-water investigations, and studies were made of the permeability of rocks and soils as well as of the effect of expansive pressures exerted on structures by certain types of foundation clays.
The effectiveness of the research and testing facilities of the laboratories was greatly enhanced during the year by the installation of special equipment, including a flame photometer for use in the chemical analysis of engineering materials, X-ray diffraction apparatus for quicker and more detailed study of soils, minerals, and other substances, and equipment for the identification of materials by the method of differential thermal analysis.
Installation of a new 5- million-pound testing machine was begun.
This huge machine, when installed, will permit more extensive experimentation and research on large specimens and structure models than was previously possible.
An important research accomplishment was the culmination of studies on the use of pozzolanic materials in concrete structures.
Although these studies have not been completed, they have progressed sufficiently to indicate that about 30 percent of the cement in the concrete for Hungry Horse Dam could be replaced by fly-ash (an inexpensive waste product of coal-burning boilers).
Not only will an improved concrete result through the use of this material, but substantial savings will be realized on this dam and similar concrete structures to be undertaken in the future.
As a result of its preeminence in the field of design and construction of structures of unprecedented size and complexity, the Bureau has been called upon for assistance from outside agencies and other Government departments.
By agreement with the International Boundary and Water Commission, the Bureau engaged in the preparation of detailed designs and specifications for the Falcon Dam which is to be built by the Commission on the Rio Grande River about 60 miles downstream from Laredo, Tex., as provided by the Water Treaty of 1944 between the United States and Mexico.
During the vear, alternate preliminary designs and estimates were prepared and presented at a joint conference in Denver, from which a final design scheme was selected.
Following selection of final design of the dam, rapid progress was made in preparation of detail designs and specifications to arrive at allocable costs, and a design feature report was furnished to the Boundary and Water Commission.
Bureau engineers attended several conferences with the United States section of the Commission, and three joint conferences were convened to implement the work so that the completion of construction as provided by the treaty could be accomplished by 1953.
Under a contract with the city of Seattle, Wash., the Bureau's Denver laboratories conducted tests on the determination of creep factors in mass concrete specimens from Ross Dam.
In connection with this work, field data on temperature, stress, and strain measurements of the mass concrete in the dam were obtained.
Bureau of Indian Affairs, tests of wood preservative for the Forest Service, aggregate and concrete durability studies for the Puerto Rico Water Resources Authority, aggregate studies for the Tennessee Valley Authority, and concrete studies and hydraulic model testing for the Salt River Valley Water Users Association.
A cooperative program of investigations of lightweight concrete, performed in conjunction with the Housing and Home Finance Agency, was brought to a successful conclusion.
During the year Bureau of Reclamation mapping activities and particularly those using aerial photography were coordinated with the programs of such primary mapping agencies as the Geological Survey to insure that no duplication occurred.
Other agencies included the Army Map Service, Coast and Geodetic Survey, and Soil Conservation Service.
Contracts for aerial photography and mapping were awarded by the Bureau for areas in California, Montana, New Mexico, Texas, and Utah, where urgent requirements could not be met by the primary mapping agencies.
Coordinative seismological studies with the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey and the National Park Service at Hoover, Shasta, and Hungry Horse Dams were continued and expanded during the year to meet requirements of the Bureau and the Coast and Geodetie Survey.
Twenty new inventions were reported by employees of the Bureau of Reclamation, and patents were granted on three devices which were previously reported.
Technical assistance to foreign countries given by the Bureau of Reclamation in the various fields of water resources use and development including irrigation, hydroelectric power, drainage, and comprehensive basin development was furnished in four general categories.
Under authority of Public Law 402, Eightieth Congress, in-service training was given to 53 young engineers from seven foreign countries, the period of training averaging approximately one year.
These were all class B grants (Public Law 402), each handled individually with costs being borne by the countries concerned.
In response to specific requests or in accordance with established exchange arrangements, approximately 2,000 items of technical data and publications pertaining to Bureau methods and practice were distributed to individuals and agencies of foreign governments.
The Bureau furnished advice and consultation to some 600 engineers, professors, and responsible officials from 56 foreign countries in matters related to development of water resources.
Visits by these people varied in length from a day or two to several weeks.
Advice and consultation were given in respect to specific projects in some cases and in regard to a wide range of subjects in others.
Requests for these visits were received through the Department of State and assistance was given under provisions of Public Law 402.
Where detailed advice and consultation were given, costs were borne by the country concerned.
Typical of the many requests for Bureau engineering assistance on foreign work was the request from the Economic Cooperation Administration that Bureau engineers review the plans for the proposed Fasideri Dam in Greece.
In consultation with two engineers from Greece, engineers in the Branch of Design and Construction suggested changes in the design of the dam and made specific recommendations for modifications in the basic designs.
Through arrangements with a consulting engineering firm in the United States, the Bureau engineers undertook the highly complex problem of analyzing the stresses for the 850-foot-high concrete Kosi Dam which is to be constructed by the Indian Government.
Materials testing, hydraulic model investigations, and other studies made in the Denver laboratories of the Bureau were undertaken for several foreign agencies, including those of India, Colombia, Portugal, and Greece.
The Bureau is receiving increasingly numerous inquiries by mail from individuals in foreign countries requesting engineering data on a diversity of highly complex problems.
Questions received concerned such topics as the selection of turbines for hydroelectric generating plants, techniques and methods for lining canals, design of earth dams, and design of irrigation distribution systems.
Experienced engineers were lent to various foreign governments in connection with water resources development.
Requests for these assignments were received through the Department of State and were made under provisions of Public Law 402, Eightieth Congress, with recipient countries bearing the costs.
Foreign assignments varied from 2 months to 1 year.
Countries receiving this type of assistance were Ceylon, Colombia, India, Japan, Southern Rhodesia, and Venezuela.
In addition, Bureau engineers were lent to ECA to assist in its reclamation programs in Greece and Italy.
As official representatives of the United States Government, Bureau engineers attended international engineering conferences at Cairo, Egypt: Rotterdam, Holland; Paris, France; and Stockholm, Sweden.
Delegates to the Rotterdam and Stockholm conferences also visited Paris where they furnished advice and consultation to the Administrator, ECA.
One delegate represented the Bureau of Reclamation at an international engineering conference in Rio de Janeiro.
Operation and maintenance is the phase of Reclamation most closely integrated with the Bureau's entire program from the very first time an irrigation project is considered for construction until long after water has begun to flow down the ditch.
Operation and maintenance means providing irrigation water for more than 100,000 settlers on over 5 million acres of land, preparing lands for settlement where ultimately many times the present number of settlers will become Reclamation farmers, and last but not least to see that thousands of miles of irrigation facilities throughout the 17 Western States are kept in good working order to conserve and use the water to the greatest advantage and assure service to the people ofthat area.
Operation of the 60 irrigation projects, or divisions of projects, completed by the Bureau, including the use of water, maintenance of irrigation systems, the production of crops and livestock, and the general welfare of the water users on the land are problems of primary concern to every Reclamation employee from the man on the ditch to the Commissioner.
The Government has invested large sums of money in these projects and it is of paramount importance that they be maintained on a sound financial, agricultural and economic basis if the settlers are to succeed and the Government is to realize full return on its investment.
Noteworthy operation and maintenance accomplishments during the year were the large number of repayment and amendatory contracts which were executed in compliance with a directive from Congress.
A report on this situation was made to Congress and to irrigation groups in February 1949.
A considerable amount of work was completed under the newly launched rehabilitation and betterment program, progress was noted on the lower cost canal lining program, sprinkler irrigation studies, as well as continuing improvement in weed-control activities.
Hundreds of veterans-settlers profited from the new development farms, as well as from the various agreements executed by the Bureau with the United States Department of Agriculture and State agricultural colleges.
Through these agreements assistant county extension agents help advise in matters relative to crops and livestock, and advise on numerous other problems which confront new homesteaders.
This was the third consecutive year in which crop values exceeded one-half billion dollars despite some decline in prices.
Of the value of crops produced, approximately 42 percent were food crops, 32 percent grain and forage, 11 percent cotton fiber, 10 percent seed crops (including cottonseed) and about 5 percent of the value was represented by miscellaneous crops and payments to water users by the Government and commercial agencies.
The cumulative value of irrigation crops grown on Federal Reclamation projects since 1906 totals slightly more than 6 billion dollars.
The volume of crops harvested in 1948 totaled 13,258,688 tons.
Prices received by farmers averaged somewhat lower and production costs continued at a high level.
Significant shortages of surface water supplies were experienced on the Salt River, Rio Grande, Carlsbad, and Moon Lake projects.
The population on the 69,146 farms on regular Bureau projects and storage projects is estimated at 235,100 and the population on 23,322 farms served under Warren Act or special contracts is estimated at 93,400, making a total of about 328,500 people on 92,468 irrigated farms.
Towns in and adjacent to these irrigation project areas, numbering about 370, have a population of approximately 1,298,000.
The Reclamation area population therefore totals about 1,626,500.
Irrigated farms served by Federal Reclamation have increased from 86,181 in 1941 to 92,468 in 1948 and the over-all population of the farms and adjacent towns has increased during this same period from 1,088,500 to 1,626,500.
In 1941, there were about 126 banks in which 237,600 depositors held about $269,000,000.
In 1948, 563,400 depositors held $1,143,000,000 in 181 banking establishments.
The inventory value of livestock and equipment on Federal Reclamation projects as of November 1, 1948, was $221,273,287 which exceeded the previous year's value by $35,965,191.
Livestock were valued at $99,253,237, and equipment, including motor vehicles, at $122,020,050.
Irrigation facilities were extended in 1948 by the Bureau whereby irrigation service could be provided for 5,380,015 acres, an increase of 213,232 acres over that of the previous crop year.
The area irrigated in 1948 totaled 4,458,755 acres, an increase of 97,053 acres over that of the previous crop year.
The difference between the acreage for which irrigation facilities have been provided and the acreage irrigated is due principally to the need for allowing land to fallow for a season and, to a lesser degree, to the need for completion of distribution systems.
During the year, activities relating to the operation of storage, regulation, and distribution of irrigation water supplies were the prime business on operating projects.
Irrigation water was delivered to the water users during fiscal year 1949 without a major break in the distribution system of any Bureau-operated project.
Crops were profitably matured on all operating projects during the year despite some water shortages which occurred in the Southwest.
On some projects where surface water was not adequate, ground water was pumped to supplement surface water supply.
Programs for the control of irrigation transmission losses, sprinkler irrigation, reuse of return flows, project rehabilitation, and other items of water conservation were aggressively pursued so that the full utilization of our water resources might be accomplished.
In accordance with established congressional and Bureau poliey, three projects were transferred to the waters users for operation during the year.
These were Grand Valley in Colorado, Belle Fourche in South Dakota, and Vale in Oregon.
Negotiations are now under way for the transfer of the Carlsbad project in New Mexico to the water users.
Additional drains were constructed to relieve areas of high ground water, and surveys were made to determine the extent and solution of future drainage problems.
As cooperation is a "must" between experienced operation and maintenance personnel and the planning and designing forces in any large construction organization, the Chief Engineer has taken positive steps to make certain members of both branches cooperate in ironing out possible future problems which may arise in the design stage of any structure.
He is arranging for the appointment of an engineer experienced in both design and operation, whose chief duty will be to find examples of unusually good or bad operating results and pass this information along to the designing staff.
In some regions, groups of designers have inspected operating projects with operating personnel, who point out the salient favorable or unfavorable features of the development.
A start has been made toward the collection and analysis of recent water records for use in checking past plans and making new ones.
Sprinkler irrigation gives promise of making possible the satisfactory irrigation of lands which can be irrigated by surface methods only with great difficulty, if at all.
Since certain Bureau projects contain large areas of land of this character, the Bureau initiated a rather thorough investigation of the possibilities.
Upon the conclusion of this investigation, an extensive report was prepared.
It is titled "Sprinkler Irrigation" and copies are now available to the public.
These may be purchased for 20 cents each.
Requests should be sent to the Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing Office, Washington 25, D. C.
Sprinkler systems have been installed by the Bureau of Reclamation on the Columbia Basin project in Washington, the Missouri River Basin project in both North and South Dakota, and the Gila project in Arizona.
In these areas many types of systems are being used on a large variety of crops and under a wide range of conditions.
These systems will be operated long enough to provide definite results.
The preliminary reports are favorable.
Conclusions so far are that sprinkler irrigation is well-established as a successful practice with most crops and on most arable lands.
It does not yet appear to be as economical or otherwise superior to surface methods on lands well-adapted to the latter.
Income-tax revenues from Federal Reclamation projects areas represent a return on the Federal investment above and in addition to the return of the construction costs by the irrigators and from power revenues.
Estimates have been made of the Federal individual income taxes paid from seven selected project areas, including the territory and town adjacent thereto.
These seven Federal Reclamation areas paid almost 63 million dollars of individual income taxes in 1948 and more than 300 million dollars have been paid since 1916, when Federal income taxes were initiated.
The construction costs through June 1948 for these projects total about 132 million dollars.
Thus, the individual income-tax revenue has already amounted to almost 21/2 times the Federal project costs.
The individual income taxes paid from these areas in 1948 amount to about $50 per irrigated acre, and the total taxes paid since 1916 equal almost $300 per acre.
These tax revenues represent not only taxes paid by irrigation farmers but also the taxes paid by the individuals of the nearby towns and villages whose business or employment depends upon the Reclamation development.
In addition to the above tax revenues, an appropriate share of corporation income taxes and other Federal taxes are either directly or indirectly attributable to business and industrial activity resulting from Reclamation developments.
Rough estimates of these additional Federal taxes were made of Maricopa County, Ariz., which represents the Salt River project area.
These additional Federal revenues, plus the $27,000,000 of individual income taxes, would raise the total Federal tax revenue from that area in 1948 to over 60 million dollars.
The inclusion in the estimate of all Federal taxes would raise the above figure for the seven project areas to more than 80 million dollars for 1948 and to more than 400 million dollars for the period 1916–48.
It is roughly estimated that about 1.2 billion dollars of individual income taxes or more than 1.6 billion dollars of all Federal taxes have been paid into the Treasury since 1916 from all Federal Reclamation areas.
This compares with a Federal construction cost on these projects of less than 500 million dollars.
These estimates do not include projects under construction such as Columbia Basin, Central Valley, and Missouri Basin, nor power developments at Hoover, Fort Peck, Parker, and Davis Dams.
During the fiscal year 1949 notable progress was made in developing standards and procedures for repayment contract negotiations, in sorting out and classifying repayment problems, and in identifying and evaluating basic considerations in determining project payment ability.
Negotiation and execution of repayment contracts for new projects and units of projects exceeded the pace set in fiscal year 1948 to keep up with the accelerated construction program.
Under the authority of the Reclamation Project Act of 1939, investigations were continued into the repayment problems of operating projects.
Fiscal year 1949 saw the first substantial harvest of amendatory repayment contracts from investigations initiated in prior years as part of a coordinated program of investigations of the financial and repayment status of operating Reclamation projects.
These amendatory contracts are designed to eliminate inequities in existing contracts and put the water users on a sound financial base.
In most cases the significant change involved an adjustment of annual payments from an arbitrary basis to one which conforms more closely to the water users' ability to pay based on economic analyses of the projects.
During fiscal year 1949 a total of 12 amendatory, supplemental, and interim repayment contracts were executed.
Six of these were contracts negotiated under provisions of section 7 of the Reclamation Project Act of 1939 and congressional approval obtained through Public Law 56, Eighty-first Congress, first session.
Colorado: Uncompahgre Valley Water Users' Association, Uncompahgre project (Public Law 56).
Montana: Bitter Root irrigation district, Bitter Root project (Publie Law 56).
Oregon: Shasta View irrigation district, Klamath project (Publie Law 56); Jefferson water conservancy distriet, Deschutes project.
Utah: South Ogden conservation district, Ogden River project.
Washington: Roza irrigation district, Yakima project; Kittitas Reclamation distriet, Yakima project (Publie·Law 56) : Okanogan irrigation district, Okanogan project (Public Law 56).
Wyoming: Midvale irrigation district, Riverton project; Willwood irrigation district, Shoshone project (Publie Law 56).
Section 7 negotiations were completed on six other amendatory contracts which were pending consideration of Congress at the close of the fiscal year as Senate bill 2089 and House bill 5184.
Oregon: Vale Oregon irrigation district, Vale project; Stanfield irrigation district, Umatilla project; Westland irrigation district, Umatilla project.
Wyoming: Deaver irrigation distriet, Shoshone project.
Idaho: Black Canyon irrigation district, Boise project; Owyhee projeet (eight districts).
Montana: Malta irrigation distriet, Milk River project; Glasgow irrigation district, Milk River project; Frenchtown irrigation distriet, Frenchtown project.
Oregon: Hermiston irrigation district, Umatilla project; West Extension irrigation district, Umatilla project.
Financial adjustment investigations or negotiations for supplemental contracts were initiated or programmed during fiscal year 1949 with 42 more water users' organizations.
Arizona: City of Phoenix, Salt River project.
California: Lindsay-Strathmore irrigation district, Central Valley project: Summit City public utility district, Central Valley projeet; Lindmore irrigation district, Central Valley project; Orange Cove irrigation district, Central Valley project.
Colorado: Conejos water conservancy district, San Luis Valley project.
Nebraska: Bostwick irrigation district, Missouri River Basin project.
New Mexico: Fort Sumner irrigation distriet, Fort Sumner project; city of Tucumcari, Tucumcari project.
Montana: Savage irrigation district, Missouri River Basin project.
Oregon: Arnold irrigation district, Deschutes project.
Texas: Lower Colorado River Authority, Marshall Ford project; city of El Paso, Rio Grande project.
At the close of the fiscal year, negotiations had been completed on seven additional new contracts which were pending formal execution by either the water users or the Government.
Arizona: North Gila Valley irrigation district, Gila project.
Colorado: North Fork water conservancy district, Paonia project.
North Dakota: City of Dickinson, Heart division, Missouri River Basin projeet; Heart River irrigation district, Heart division, Missouri River Basin project.
Oregon: Ochoco irrigation district, Deschutes project.
In addition, detailed physical and economic investigations were completed and negotiations well advanced on seven repayment contracts on the Central Valley project, and one on the Frenchman-Cambridge unit of the Missouri Basin project.
Following the inflexible demands on manpower, equipment, and supplies of World War II, deferment in maintenance of Reclamation and irrigation projects accumulated.
These conditions, coupled with the high postwar costs, have continued almost up to the present time.
Consequently, there is a backlog of delayed operation and maintenance work, which, in the best interests of Reclamation projects, cannot be longer delayed.
The cost of performing this backlog of delayed operation and maintenance work is, in practically all cases, beyond the ability of the districts to finance on a current basis, particularly when considered in connection with the relatively high and increasing annual operation and maintenance costs.
The cost of the delayed work will be met by the water users by installments over a sufficient number of years.
By placing these projects in good operating condition now, crop losses, which may occur through interruption in water service, are avoided and precious irrigation water is husbanded and conserved through the repair, replacement, improvement, and modernization of the many existing deteriorated and leaky wooden structures and other irrigation features that will bring project irrigation systems and works to an efficient operating condition.
It will also result in lower future operation and maintenance costs, and improved service.
An inventory of the rehabilitation and betterment needs of the existing projects was initiated following the war, and an improvement program was started on a limited scale in fiscal year 1949 when Congress appropriated one and a half million dollars for this purpose.
Obviously, only the more urgent needs of a few projects could be undertaken with these funds.
In making the appropriation, Congress pointed out that work should be done first on those projects with smaller monetary requirements, and that any remaining funds be used to carry out rehabilitation and betterment on those projects where needs were most urgent.
Examples of some of the work performed are as follows: On the Fort Shaw unit of the Sun River project in Montana a 6-mile drainage system was completed, resulting in the rehabilitation of 600 acres of land; work on the replacement of a high-line flume on the Orland project in California was nearing completion.
The entire project will benefit from this repair along with the planned replacement of gates for Stony Gorge and East Park Dams, and other general improvements either under way or planned; on the Willwood division of the Shoshone project a new drainage system was nearing completion which would guarantee protection to the entire acreage of the Willwood division, and work was progressing rapidly on the replacement of deteriorated wooden structures that have been in service for over 20 years.
Ever since the first postwar public-land opening was held on the Klamath project in Oregon and California at the close of 1946, Nationwide interest has been expressed in the remaining Reclamation publicland units.
While the number of remaining farm units is relatively limited, each time the Bureau announces a new public-land opening, a flood of applications pours in.
As an example of the interest shown, an announcement of the homestead drawing held on Minidoka project on March 3, 1949, resulted in requests for 9,601 copies of the publie notices, for which 1,112 ex-servicemen qualified and 46 public-land farm units embracing 4,465 acres on the Hunt unit were awarded to lucky veterans.
Five land openings covering public land on four projects and private land on one project were held during the past fiscal year.
Inquiries regarding the first three of these (latest figures available at the time the report went to press) exceeded 36,000.
The total area involved, public and Government acquired, was 30,728 acres, which were to be divided into 296 farm units.
Of these, 846 acres comprising 10 units were Government-acquired lands on the Columbia Basin project in Washington which were sold to prospective settlers.
These marked the first lands served by the irrigation facilities of this 1,000,000-acre project.
Gradually the number of acres which will be irrigated will increase and the number of units available for resale to individuals will rise accordingly.
The Bureau will have 87,000 acres of this, its biggest individual irrigation project, available for settlement by 1952.
Veterans, under existing law, in all cases involving public lands have a 90-day preference period in which to apply for homestead units.
So far, most veteran homesteaders, at the close of the first year that they have been on the land, have reached the stage where they are building homes, establishing residence on their entries, and have cleared, leveled, and cultivated a portion of their land.
The Bureau of Reclamation has both a moral and legal responsibility for seeing that settlers on Bureau of Reclamation projects have adequate technical assistance.
It is concerned with the financial success and the consequent level of living of farm families on its projects.
Furthermore, the Bureau is responsible for obtaining repayments of construction costs allocated to irrigation.
It thus cannot escape its responsibility for seeing that everything necessary is done to enable settlers to obtain sufficient income to support their families at an adequate level of living and repay their obligations to the Government.
It is the policy of the Bureau, however, to encourage other agencies—local, State and Federal—to render the maximum amounts of the required assistance which their programs and facilities will permit, with the Bureau rendering only that assistance within the limitation of its program and facilities not rendered by other agencies.
Such cooperative relations in settler assistance work may be provided for by either formal or informal agreements.
Settler assistance in many cases is provided for through formal agreement with State colleges of agriculture providing for the employment of assistant county agents who give special assistance to settlers on specified Bureau of Reclamation projects.
Under the terms of these agreements the State agricultural extension service employs assistant county agents who are approved by the Bureau of Reclamation, but who work under the supervision of the State extension service.
The extension service pays the salaries and office expenses of these assistant county agents, but the Bureau of Reclamation reimburses the extension service for the salaries paid.
Memoranda of understanding are now in effect with the respective State colleges of agriculture providing for the employment of assistant county agents on the following projects: Columbia Basin, Yakima, Owyhee, and Deschutes in Washington; Boise in Idaho; Shoshone, Riverton, and Kendrick in Wyoming; Vale in Oregon; and Milk River in Montana.
Much of the cooperative settler assistance work is provided for through informal agreements with various local, State and Federal agencies.
Where several agencies such as the Farmers Home Administration, Soil Conservation Service, Production and Marketing Administration, Rural Electrification Administration, and the extension service are in position to cooperate in settler assistancework, representatives of these agencies formulate a program outlining the type of assistance which each agency is in position to render.
This program usually is prepared in pamphlet form and made available to the settlers in order that they may be informed where to go for the several types of assistance needed.
Programs of this type have been carried out on the Shoshone, Minidoka, Yakima, Klamath, Gila, and Yuma projects where farms have been opened to settlement during the past 3 years.
As a part of its settler assistance program the Bureau is conducting development farms for the purpose of demonstrating approved practices in farm layout, irrigation methods, cultural practices, weed control, etc.
In all cases the site for such development farms is selected in cooperation with the respective State agricultural colleges.
The annual program for the development farm is formulated in cooperation with the State colleges.
In some cases, such as on the Columbia Basin Project, the Bureau of Plant Industry and the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture also cooperate in the development farm program.
In most cases a portion of the development farm is set aside for experimental work conducted by the State college and/or Department of Agriculture agencies.
Eight development farms are now in operation.
Three of these, namely, Moses Lake, Winchester and Pasco are located on the Columbia Basin project in Washington; one is on the Milk River project in Montana while four are on the Missouri River Basin project, two of which are in North Dakota at Bowbells and Mandan, and two in South Dakota at Huron and Redfield.
The program on some of these farms is just getting under way, this being the first year of operation.
These demonstrations will be of increasing interest as the program continues.
All of the farms, with the exception of the one at Milk River, are located in new areas where irrigation is just getting under way or will be initiated during the next few years.
In addition to demonstrating approved irrigation practices the farms will serve to show the results which may be expected from irrigation.
In addition to technical assistance as outlined above, settlers on many projects are in need of actual assistance in land development including clearing, rough leveling, and the roughing in of farm irrigation and surface drainage ditches.
Such assistance is furnished either by the Bureau itself or through informal agreements with Department of Agriculture agencies.
On several projects consisting primarily of privately owned land, arrangements have been made whereby the Soil Conservation Service is giving special assistance to new irrigation farmers in the lay-out of the farm irrigation system, arrangement of farm fields, clearing and leveling of land and establishing crop rotations.
In such cases Bureau of Reclamation representatives cooperate with Soil Conservation Service personnel by supplying them with all available information such as land classification data, topographic maps and engineering plans.
On public land projects the Bureau, in appropriate cases, gives direct assistance on a reimbursable basis in the development of farm units including clearing and rough leveling the land and roughing in of farm irrigation and surface drainage system beyond the farm turn-out.
In these cases the individual settlers make application for land development work and agreement is reached as to the nature and extent of the work to be done.
The Bureau performs the work with its own equipment and the settler makes payment for this work over a period of years.
One of the most important functions of the Branch of Operation and Maintenance is its weed-control program.
Special investigations concerning the water losses and operation and maintenance costs created by weed growths on irrigation distribution and drainage systems and project farms as well as the ditchbanks adjacent thereto were completed this year.
These studies provided the basis for a publication entitled “Control of Weeds on Irrigation Systems" which is now available to the public. It might well be termed a"Weed" manual and will be of interest and assistance to every irrigation farmer, county agent and all various State and Federal officials who have to deal with the weed problem in any way.
Copies may be obtained for 35.
This publication was prepared with the full cooperation of numerous Federal and private irrigation districts, experimental stations, the extension service, and various other Federal, State, and county agencies, along with the Bureau of Plant Industry, and Soils and Agricultural Engineering, Department of Agriculture.
The publication describes the combined investigations which led to the finding of and adapting of new chemical methods for solving various weed problems.
One such method developed in the Bureau's Denver Chemical Laboratory has reduced the cost for chemicals to about one-tenth of those previously used for the control of water weeds.
These pests often prevent efficient delivery of water, cause excess seepage, necessitate costly dredging of silt deposits and reduce the effectiveness of drains.
The introduction of methods, determined through research, for controlling canal bank weeds and willows has materially reduced maintenance costs and has allowed more extensive control operations.
This is resulting in the more effective elimination of these types of weeds which cause operation problems and transpire an estimated million acre-feet of water per year on Federal and private irrigation projects.
The educational weed-control program carried out for the benefit of project farmers through cooperation with Federal, State, and county organizations is resulting in more effective weed control on croplands.
This, in turn, increases farmers' profits and helps protect the Government's investment in Reclamation projects because of the increased repayment ability.
In addition to the program for controlling existing weed infestations, special consideration is given to prevention of weed growths, especially on new projects.
The research work, together with a regional weed-control program, is changing weed-control activities from costly, temporary and haphazard guesswork to an orderly program based on scientific methods.
The Bureau of Reclamation participates in the Department's soil and moisture conservation program, looking toward effective control of accelerated erosion on the 14,500,000 acres of public lands under Reclamation's jurisdiction; protection of its reservoirs, canals, and other irrigation works from siltation; and prevention of water losses detrimental to irrigation projects.
Within the limit of the funds made available to the Bureau for these purposes, surveys to delineate our worst problem areas and enable programming of remedial measures to be taken thereon, and an action program for restoring some of the depleted lands and affecting a reduction in water losses, were continued during the past fiscal year.
Construction of dams and reservoirs for irrigation and power development provides incidental but very definite benefits to the public through the creation of exceptional recreational opportunities.
This is particularly true in the more arid parts of the West where a Bureau of Reclamation reservoir may be the only body of water of any size within hundreds of miles.
D. Roosevelt Lake (Grand Coulee) in Washington; and Millerton Lake in California, the administration of recreational facilities is handled for the Bureau by the National Park Service.
At certain other reservoirs which are located within National Forest boundaries, recreational facilities are administered by the United States Forest Service.
At a few of the smaller reservoirs, the Bureau operates necessary recreational facilities directly and does, in some instances, award concessions for boating and leases for cabin sites.
During the past fiscal year, the Bureau has been planning development of a program for optimum recreational use of all of its existing reservoirs, as well as for those under construction or still under investigation.
As a prerequisite to achievement of such a program, legislation is required to provide for the expenditure of nonreimbursable funds for development and administration of these recreational resources.
Assistance to school districts, on which an undue financial burden is or will be placed by reason of Federal Reclamation construction activities, was provided under Public Law 835 (general legislation) and Public Law 841 (Interior Department appropriation bill, 1949).
The administrative proviso in Public Law 841 authorized payments to school districts, provided the Bureau of Reclamation charge and collect tuition in the amount of $25 per semester for each dependent of Bureau employees and of contractor employees attending such schools.
The requirement for the collection of tuition was contrary in many States to constitutional or statutory provisions of free public schooling.
As a consequence, the Bureau during fiscal year 1949 was unable to provide, under this legislation, an appropriate measure of assistance to unduly burdened school districts.
Clarifying language included in the Secondary Deficiency Appropriation Act of 1949 places the administration of school payments under the provisions of Public Law 835.
At the close of the fiscal year, an order outlining the basic principles for the administration of the act was being prepared for consideration by the Secretary.
The proposed order delegates authority to the Commissioner of Reclamation for administration of the Act.
During the past year unsatisfied demands for electric power in the Western States continued to increase.
Great emphasis has been placed on the power shortage in the Pacific Northwest.
Although this area is still faced with serious shortages, other areas receiving less public attention are experiencing deficiencies in power supply which are equally serious handicaps to their future growth.
Typical power shortage areas are in the Southwestern States and the Missouri River Basin States.
Applications for power to be generated at the Davis Dam power plant, located approximately 80 miles downstream from the Hoover power plant, were almost four times the firm capacity output.
In the Missouri Basin States of North Dakota, South Dakota, Minnesota, Iowa, Nebraska, and Missouri, the applications for firm power to be generated initially at Fort Randall and Garrison power plants, located on the Missouri River, were almost three times the initial block of firm power.
The Western States in general are deficient in electric generating capacity.
Development of potential mineral resources have been deferred due to lack of an adequate source of power.
Rural cooperatives have either retarded their expansion into new areas or have resorted to the installation of higher cost steam plants to meet the increased demands.
Power requirements for irrigation pumping, municipal and industrial uses in Arizona have remained unsatisfied.
The entire output of Davis Dam for use in Arizona will be immediately utilized for irrigation pumping and other uses as soon as it is placed in operation in fiscal year 1951.
Additional capacity now being installed at the Hoover power plant will also be fully utilized as rapidly as it can be installed.
The rapidly increasing population of California which contributes to increased industrial and agricultural expansion continues to place heavy demands on existing power facilities although generating capacity, both public and private, is being installed as rapidly as possible.
Power shortages will still threaten for some years to come.
Since practically one-half of the installed capacity in the Central Valley is in hydrodevelopments, additional steam capacity is required to assure adequate protection to the power users during the periods of drought and low run-off, as was the experience during 1948.
In all of these areas the development of irrigation pumping, both public and private, has given great impetus to the demand for electric power.
Tapping underground sources of water supply for irrigation purposes can well expand the development of arid lands which cannot be supplied directly by canals from water storage structures.
The construction of transmission lines into these areas will permit the utilization of lower cost projęct power for greater expansion of agricultural irrigation developments than has been known heretofore.
If the trend in the use of sprinkler irrigation continues, even greater demands will result.
The extension of this type of irrigation, which has been confined to relatively small areas in the past, leads to a new concept in the irrigation of arid lands that cannot be economically developed by canal and ditch type irrigation.
The sprinkler type of irrigation gives the farmer better control of the application of water, and results in conservation measures which may provide more widespread utilization of the existing water supply.
Greater application of electric power for farm use, coupled with increased industrial activities and the extraction of vast mineral resources by more modern techniques, will continue to place increasingly heavier demands on the power systems of the West.
The development of the water resources now going to waste through lack of adequate development can and should be harnessed to assure broad scale development of the western half of the United States.
The Bureau of Reclamation has planned its construction program to meet the increased power requirements, insofar as possible, consistent with the full development of the water resources of the West for irrigation and other purposes.
During fiscal year 1949 the Bureau of Reclamation had in operation 17 power plants with a total installed capacity of 2,757,400 kilowatts.
The increase of 263,000 kilowatts capacity resulted from the addition of one 108,000-kilowatt generating unit at Grand Coulee power plant on the Columbia Basin project, two 75,000-kilowatt units at Shasta power plant on the Central Valley project, the last of 5 units, and a 5,000-kilowatt generating plant at Heart Mountain on the Shoshone project.
Power plants operated by others on Reclamation projects total 16, of which 9 were constructed by the Bureau of Reclamation with a total installed capacity of 30,827 kilowatts, and 7 were constructed by others with a total installed capacity of 62,900 kilowatts.
During the fiscal year 1949, 10 new power plants, which will have an ultimate capacity of 892,100 kilowatts, were under construction by the Bureau of Reclamation.
Contracts were awarded for turbines and generators for two additional 82,500-kilowatt units at the Hoover power plant of the Boulder Canyon project.
Construction was continued on the Keswick Dam and power plant of the Central Valley project which will have an installed capacity of 75,000 kilowatts in three generating units.
Upon the completion of this power plant during fiscal year 1950, the Central Valley project will have a total installed capacity of 454,000 kilowatts in the Shasta and Keswick power plants.
The Marys Lake power plant of 8,100 kilowatts capacity and the Estes power plant of 45,000 kilowatts capacity, now under construction on the Colorado-Big Thompson project in Colorado, are scheduled for initial seasonal operation during the spring of 1950.
This will bring into operation the initial phase of the eastern slope power development of this project.
Work is progressing on the addition of approximately 100,000 kilowatts of capacity to develop the power drop between the Estes power plant and the Foothills storage system of the project.
This capacity is scheduled for initial operation in fiscal year 1953.
On the Missouri Basin project, the Kortes power plant of 36,000 kilowatts capacity near Seminoe Dam in Wyoming is scheduled for initial operation during the spring of 1950.
Work is progressing on the completion of Boysen Dam and power plant in the Big Horn Basin in Wyoming.
The power plant of 15,000-kilowatt capacity is scheduled for operation in fiscal year 1952.
Davis Dam and power plant, located on the Colorado River, will have an installed capacity of 225,000 kilowatts and is scheduled for operation in the spring or early summer of 1951.
The power plant at Anderson Ranch Dam in Idaho will have an initial installed capacity of 27,000 kilowatts and is scheduled for operation in the spring of 1950.
The Hungry Horse Dam and power plant of 285,000 kilowatts, now under construction on the South Fork of Flathead River in Montana, is scheduled for initial operation in October 1952; the second unit in operation by December 1952.
The last two units are scheduled for operation in August and November of 1953.
The Canyon Ferry Dam in Montana is now under construction.
The power plant is scheduled for initial operation in 1954, although restrictive language in the appropriations bill for fiscal year 1949 prevented the Bureau of Reclamation from initiating work on the design and purchase of the necessary generating and electrical equipment.
On the Fort Peck project in Montana, the Corps of Engineers is progressing on the installation of a third unit which will have a capacity of 35,000 kilowatts.
Operation is scheduled for fiscal year 1952.
The Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army, has under active construction the Garrison Dam in North Dakota and the Fort Randall Dam in South Dakota.
Although power requirements of the area indicate the immediate need for generating capacity, the initial operating schedule for Garrison and Fort Randall power plants are tentatively 160,000 kilowatts capacity in fiscal year 1953 at Fort Randall, and 240,000 kilowatts in fiscal year 1954 at Garrison.
Actual progress which can be made is contingent upon appropriations to meet these schedules.
The schedule of the power plants in various stages of construction but not in full operating status are shown in table 9.
Additional authorized plants not presently under construction will consist of 22 power plants with a total installed capacity of 809,960 kilowatts.
Additional power plants authorized for construction by the Corps of Engineers, from which the Bureau of Reclamation is responsible for marketing power, will total 630,000 kilowatts in three plants on the Missouri River.
At the close of fiscal year 1949, the Bureau of Reclamation had approximately 3,300 miles of high-voltage transmission lines in operation.
During the fiscal year the principal lines placed in operation were approximately 25 miles of 230-kilovolt transmission line from Shasta power plant to the Shasta substation of the Pacific Gas & Electric Co.
72 miles of 115-kilovolt line from Elephant Butte to Sorocco, N. M., on the Rio Grande project; initial operation at 33-kilovolt of the 100-mile Fort Peck to Bainville, Mont., section of the 115- kilovolt Fort Peck-Williston line; and initial operation of the 37-mile Beulah to Garrison section of the Williston-Garrison 115-kilovolt transmission line.
Approximately 2,000 miles of additional high-voltage transmission lines were under construction during fiscal year 1949.
These additional lines will be placed in operation during the next 2 or 3 years.
The Bureau of Reclamation operated 17 power plants during the fiscal year, and, under the provisions of the Fort Peck Project Act of 1938, marketed the output of the Fort Peck power plant operated by the Corps of Engineers.
During this year the sales of electric energy, not including transactions between Bureau projects, totaled approximately 18,144,000,000 kilowatt-hours.
The revenue from these sales reached an all-time high of approximately $32,000,000.
This compares to a total of sales of 15,191,150,147 kilowatt-hours, and revenues of $25,342,811 during fiscal year 1948.
Revenues for fiscal year 1949 exceeded previous estimates by approximately $6,000,000.
A large part of this increase in revenue resulted from heavy demands for electric power, and integration of the Bureau hydroelectric systems with other existing systems to obtain maximum power production from the water resources.
A summary of power sales and revenues by projects is shown in table 10.
During fiscal year 1949, power was delivered to numerous major and minor users of power.
Major deliveries were made to 26 municipalities, 7 State government agencies, 52 rural electric cooperatives, 3 Federal agencies, 45 public authorities, 24 commercial and industrial users, and 37 privately owned utilities.
A summary by classification of customers for the 12 months ending June 30, 1949, is contained in table 11.
During the year, 80 contracts for delivery of power were executed.
These include 7 contracts with irrigation districts, 5 with other Federal bureaus and agencies, 2 with public power districts, 2 with State authorities, 17 with private utilities, 24 with rural electric cooperatives, 16 with municipalities, and 7 with other customers.
A number of these contracts were renewals of expiring contracts or revisions resulting from changed conditions.
The decrease in commercial and industrial customers shown in table 11, from 45 last year to 24 this year, resulted from consolidation of accounts.
They occurred principally on the Rio Grande project where 21 accounts were merged into 2 accounts.
The contract between'the Bureau and Montana-Dakota Utilities Co. was supplemented during the year to provide for service by the Bureau to additional preference customers, especially cooperatives in the Dakota system of the company.
The wheeling arrangement, now in effect between Montana-Dakota Utilities Co. and the Bureau, has been instrumental in providing electric service to cooperatives not directly connected to Bureau transmission facilities.
Similar wheeling arrangements are now under negotiation with other utilities in the Missouri River Basin area.
The Bureau of Reclamation, at the beginning of fiscal year 1949, had 114 contracts for delivery of power under negotiation.
These include 58 with rural electric cooperatives, 16 with private utilities, 15 with municipalities, 9 with irrigation districts, 4 with State authorities, 4 with Federal agencies and bureaus, and 8 with other customers.
A number of these are to renew existing contracts or to revise them to reflect changed conditions.
Included in the above summary of contracts under negotiation are contracts with 20 cooperatives and irrigation districts to be served through arrangement with the Montana-Dakota Utilities Co.
A large number of contracts under negotiation are for future power deliveries at such time as additional generating capacity now under construction is placed in operation.
Three events of major significance to the planning of water resource development occurred in the past fiscal year.
Complete agreement between the Bureau of Reclamation and the Corps of Engineers was reached on a coordinated plan of water resource development for the Columbia River Basin and upon principles and responsibilities to guide the accomplishment of this plan.
A compact between the States of the Upper Colorado River Basin on the division of their share of Colorado River water was consummated, thus clearing the way for development of specific plans for utilizing the water resources in the Upper Basin States.
The Bureau of Reclamation initiated a program of water resource development in Alaska.
All three of these events are ones that will lead to important water resource development programs over the next half-century or more.
Elsewhere the investigation and planning of water resource development proceeded along anticipated lines.
Each succeeding year, however, emphasizes that investigation and planning are becoming more and more involved.
During the first few decades of water development in the West, the inexpensive, easily developed projects were almost completely exhausted largely by privately financed development.
The remaining potentials are, in the main, long-range basin developments of exceeding complexity which only the Federal Government has the ability to finance.
A reduction in the funds appropriated for the planning program was made by the Congress in fiscal year 1948, and this reduced program was necessarily continued through fiscal year 1949 not only because of lack of ample funds but because of personnel and administrative restrictions placed on the Bureau by the Congress.
Good progress was made on those investigations which could be financed during the year.
The most significant development in basin planning during the fiscal year was the coordination of the plans of the Bureau of Reclamation and of the Corps of Engineers for the comprehensive development of the Columbia River Basin, formalized by the "Agreement on Principles and Responsibilities for the Comprehensive Plan of Development—Columbia River Basin" signed on April 11, 1949, by the Secretary of the Interior and the Commissioner of Reclamation and by the Secretary of the Army and the Chief of Engineers.
At the end of the year there was pending before the Congress legislation which would authorize a program to develop water and related resources of the Columbia River Basin in accordance with this agreement and with the recommendations of the “308 Review Report" of the Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army, and the "Report on Comprehensive Plan of Development of the Water and Related Resources of the Columbia River Basin" of the Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior.
The two reports supplement each other.
Together these reports contain both long-range plans for the ultimate complete control and conservation of the basin's water resources, and recommendations for authorization of an immediate program of construction as the next step towards full development.
The plans also provide for the integration of related programs of land and other resource improvements that are the primary responsibilities of other Federal and State agencies.
At the end of the fiscal year the report on the Central Valley Basin was under review by the Bureau of the Budget.
Later, upon completion of this review, the report was transmitted to the Congress.
A project planning report was completed on the Solano County project in California.
The project was authorized for construction by a finding of feasibility by the Secretary of the Interior.
Also, the enlargement of the power plant at Grand Coulee Dam of the Columbia Basin project in Washington to include additional power units R-7, R-8, and R-9 was authorized by a finding of feasibility by the Secretary in a planning report.
Project planning reports on The Dalles project, west unit in Oregon and the central Arizona project in Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah were submitted to the Congress by the Secretary with recommendations for favorable action on authorization of the projects.
Reports on the Snowflake and Chino Valley projects in Arizona were forwarded to the Congress also, but without recommendation for authorization at this time.
A similar report on the Emery County project in Utah was forwarded to the President.
At the end of the fiscal year, reports on the Lyman project in Wyoming, the Vermejo project in New Mexico and the Big Creek project in Texas, were under review by the affected States and other agencies.
Bitterroot Valley project, Mont.
Mountain Home project, Idaho.
Cambridge Bench project, Idaho.
Canby project, Oreg.
Upper Star Valley project, Wyoming, Idaho.
Council project, Idaho.
Crooked River project, Oreg.
Vale project, Bully Creek extension, Oreg.
Hells Canyon project, Idaho, Oreg.
A second important development in basin planning was the consummation of a compact between the States on the use of the waters of the Upper Colorado River.
This compact entered into by the States of Colorado, Utah, New Mexico, Wyoming, and Arizona was approved by the President on May 6, 1949, and became Public Law 37 of the Eighty-first Congress.
For years the lack of this Compact prevented the formulation of the comprehensive plan for the complete and effiient utilization of the waters of the Upper Colorado River.
With the situation with respect to water rights thus clarified, it is now possible to proceed with the planning for the comprehensive development of this basin.
A compact between the States of Colorado and Kansas on the Arkansas River was completed and was approved as Public Law 82, Eighty-first Congress, and another compact on the Pecos River was completed by the States of New Mexico and Texas and approved as Pubiic Law 91, Eighty-first Congress.
In the appropriation act for fiscal year 1949, the Congress made an initial appropriation of $150,000 to the Bureau of Reclamation for investigations in Alaska relating to water power resources as a basis for legislation.
Field investigations were started immediately and the Bureau completed a report on the Eklutna project which was transmitted to the President.
It also made a general preliminary reconnaissance and report on the water resources of the Territory of Alaska.
The Bureau is completing another report on the Lake Dorothy project, but so far only the surface has been scratched in investigating the possibilities of water resources development in the Territory.
The reconnaisance report points out that there has been virtually no organized effort on the part of any agency, public or private, to develop or stimulate expansion of industry, community life and agriculture in Alaska.
This report reveals that there is a need and that there are vast opportunities for development in the Territory.
For example, although only the major streams have been reconnoitered, already the Bureau's engineers have found hydroelectric power sites which could produce nearly 50 billion kilowatt-hours of energy annually.
This is equal to nearly one-fifth of the entire electric power production by utilities in the United States last year.
Development of the natural resources of Alaska is essential.
It will provide impetus for the industrial expansion and settlement of Alaska and in the ultimate sense, for the defense of the Territory by the prudent development of power, irrigation, and drainage projects.
However, before a public works program of any size could go ahead in Alaska, considerable investigation work will have to be undertaken and completed.
In addition to the normal hydrologic studies required for planning and operation of projects the Bureau of Reclamation participated with other Federal agencies through the Federal Inter-Agency River Basin Committee in publishing a revised edition of river basin maps showing hydrologic installations in the United States, an inventory of sediment sampling stations in the United States and quality of water stations in the 17 western States and the Proceedings of the Federal Inter-Agency Sedimentation Conference.
Sedimentation studies were made in connection with specific investigations, particularly in the Middle Loup River Basin in Nebraska, the Colorado River Basin in Arizona, Colorado and Utah; the Angostura unit and the Moorhead unit of the Missouri River Basin project, the North Platte project and the Lower Platte River Basin.
Sedimentation survevs were made of Guernsey, Altus, Tongue, Buffalo Bill, and Mason Reservoirs and Sheridan County Lake.
The survey of Lake Mead in cooperation with the Geological Survey and the Navy was completed.
These surveys provided valuable information needed to develop the means for attaining maximum efficiency in the operation of projects concerned and to aid in preparation of plans for projected work.
In the instance of Guernsey Reservoir on North Platte River, Wyo., for example, the survey disclosed that the storage capacity of the reservoir was reduced 33.41 percent by sedimentation representing the loss of 24,660 acre-feet, which at $25.48 per acre-foot of storage capacity means a loss of $628,336.80 against an investment of $1,881,036, or about 30 percent.
For Tongue Reservoir on the Tongue River, Wyo., the survey disclosed that sedimentation had reduced storage capacity 4.2 percent representing a loss of 3,071 acre-feet, which at $17.93 per acre-foot of storage capacity means a loss of $55,000 against an investment of $1,300,000 or in excess of 4 percent.
The research being conducted by the Army, Navy, and Weather Bureau on artificial precipitation was studied by the Bureau of Reclamation.
Liaison on this work with those agencies was established enabling the Bureau to keep abreast of the research of those agencies, and to be advised on the work to the extent that it may effect western water supplies.
As a result of negotiations between Canada and the United States, the two governments jointly sent a reference to the International Joint Commission requesting that a study and advisory findings be made of the present and future uses, and apportionments between the two countries, of certain international streams between the continental divide on the west to and including the Red River of the North on the east.
The International Engineering Boards with their Field Engineering Committee, which ineluded representatives of the Bureau of Reclamation, conducted field studies of available water supplies, the present water uses, and potential future water uses in the vicinity of the international boundary.
These determinations are required under the reference as one basis upon which an apportionment between the two countries of the waters under the reference may be recommended.
After an exhaustive inquiry by the Congress, a Senate Committee emphasized the importance of an early revision of the Bureau's accounting system and related procedures, and instructed the Comptroller General of the United States to work out with the Secretary of the Interior an improvement of the Bureau's accounting system.
In accordance with these instructions, representatives of the Bureau of Reclamation and the General Accounting Office have revised the Bureau's accounting system and related procedures.
The Bureau of Reclamation as a governmental agency is required to keep accounts to meet the accounting and reporting requirements of the Congress, the General Accounting Office, the Treasury, and the Bureau of the Budget.
As a producer and distributor of elećtric power, it is also required by law to keep accounts to meet the accounting and reporting requirements of the Federal Power Commission, which include annual financial statements covering each year's operations of all power projects.
To provide control of expenditures and application of funds for all activities through a coordinated system of accounting, programing, and budgetary reports.
To provide standard and uniform financial statements and reports to summarize the information which is required regularly by the Bureau's administrators for managerial purposes.
To provide for the recording of financial information in a consistent and uniform manner to make possible the compilation of data in such form as to be comparable with similar data for other periods and other projects.
To facilitate the determination of fidelity of persons administering public funds and properties.
Most of the principles used in commercial accounting are incorporated in the Bureau's system of accounts.
The Bureau, as a governmental ageney, is financed from appropriated funds and is required also to use many of the accounting principles developed for Government, particularly those that relate to budgetary procedures.
Certain other principles that are peculiar to the Bureau stem from reclamation laws.
The project is considered as the “accounting entity" or the level of operation for the maintenance of the books of accounts.
Each project is considered as a basic unit and accounts for its assets, liabilities, income, expenses, the amount appropriated to the project, and the investment of the Government and facility users.
A decentralized system of accounting has been established which results in independent accounts being kept by each project.
The control of funds is provided by means of branch office accounts maintained in the Commissioner's office and regional offices.
Properties are accounted for at original cost.
Cost accounts for operation and maintenance are on an “applied" or “consumed" basis.
Elements of such costs are assigned in the accounting period to which such costs are applicable regardless of the sources of such charges or the time when obligations are incurred or expenditures made.
A system of budgetary control is integrated with the general ledger accounts by the use of subaccounts and special accounting procedures.
The budgetary accounts reflect the unliquidated obligations, accrued expenditures, and the unobligated balances of appropriated funds.
The classification of accounts is uniform for programing, budgeting, accounting, and subsequent reporting.
Expenditures are accounted for on the accrual basis, i.
The system of accounts effectively distinguishes between capital and expense.
The following accounts have already been incorporated in the Bureau's new accounting system: General ledger accounts, plant in service accounts, construction work in progress accounts, allotment ledger accounts, electric operating income and expense accounts, and irrigation operation and maintenance accounts.
The general ledger accounts are the basis of the new accounting system, and include all of the control accounts required for the preparation of balance sheets and supporting schedules.
The general ledger accounts are so designed that any type of appropriation can be accounted for irrespective of whether the money is to be spent for construction, investigations, operation and maintenance, or other type of activities.
Fund control accounts are provided which interlock all offices (project, regional and Washington).
These are termed reciprocal accounts and conform to accepted principles of branchoffice accounting.
The Commissioner's fund-control accounts control the distribution of appropriated funds and repayments (refunds and reimbursements).
A record is kept of all unappropriated funds administered by the Bureau of Reclamation.
The accounts also provide the controls which are necessary with the Treasury Department and the Chief Disbursing Officer.
The Commissioner allocates the appropriated funds to the various regions for allotment by them to the projects and/or activities.
Funds for disbursements are transferred within the amounts allocated to the project and regional offices.
The regional fund control accounts control the distribution of allocated funds which are allotted to the projects and/or activities.
The accounts also reflect any unfunded balances due the projects under any appropriation or allotment.
The Commissioner's Office of Programs and Finance also maintains regional-type accounts for salaries and expenses, centralized project activities, investigations, and all other Bureau-wide appropriations except Missouri River Basin, rehabilitation and betterment, and the emergency fund.
Several types of general ledger accounts have been prescribed for the projects or Bureau activities, as follows: Project proprietary and fund accounts (for construction and operation and maintenance activities), Commissioner's Washington and Denver Offices and regional offices financed from direct salaries and expenses appropriation, Commissioner's Denver offices financed from transfers to the salaries and expenses appropriation, centralized project activities in regional offices, and investigations.
It was considered necessary to prescribe individual types of accounts for projects and activities because the project is the accounting entity.
Each accounts for its assets, liabilities, obligations and expenditures as well as reflects the Government's investment, income and expenses, and its general financial condition.
Several groups of subsidiary accounts are required which furnish detailed information.
The essential accounts prescribed are: Plant in service accounts: Multipurpose plant, irrigation plant, electric plant, municipal water, other plant; construction work in progress (cost accounts); clearing accounts; allotment accounts; operating income and expense accounts—electric; operating income and expense accounts-irrigation; and other.
Classification of expenditures (on an accrual basis) between capital and expense is important because it has a vital bearing on the financial statements, and eventually influences charges for water and power.
Accordingly, plant and property acquired, as well as additions and betterments, whether by construction or purchase and regardless of the source of funds are capitalized at actual cost to the Government and classified to the appropriate plant in service accounts on the basis of the physical characteristics.
Reclamation laws require that the investment in a project be allocated to the various purposes or functions authorized to be carried on by the project.
Such allocations are necessary for rate-making purposes, establishing repayment contracts, determining interest payable to the Government on power facilities, pay-out schedules and for the determination of the total reimbursable and nonreimbursable costs of the project.
To assure conformance of work in progress with the Commissioner's approved program and the intent of the Congress in appropriating funds, subsidiary construction cost accounts and a work-order system have been prescribed to accumulate cost data by identified and classes of properties.
Control is exercised over construction expenditures through the work-order system as major changes in the program must be approved by the Commissioner of the Bureau.
Clearing accounts have been prescribed to accomplish two important purposes: (1) to accumulate costs by activities which benefit several functions, features or units of a project and which must be distributed on the basis of benefits received by each, and (2) to accumulate costs which cannot be assigned to the appropriate funetion at the time the expenditure is incurred.
The allotment accounts are designed and maintained for one basic purpose, which is to make certain that the Bureau conforms with the Antideficiency Act.
Departments are prohibited from incurring obligations and spending more than has been appropriated.
All transactions involving expenditures or obligating the Bureau for future expenditures are recorded on a current basis.
The unencumbered and unobligated allotments, unliquidated obligations, and expended and unexpended balances of the allotments are also shown.
The operating income and expense accounts, electric, are designed to show the amount of money earned by the projects from furnishing electricity and services incidental thereto.
The expense accounts show the detailed cost of furnishing these services.
The classification of accounts conforms to the system prescribed by the Federal Power Commission.
The operating income and expense accounts, irrigation, are designed to show the different types of income from furnishing water under contracts and miscellaneous receipts incidental to irrigation operations.
The expense accounts show the detailed cost of furnishing the irrigation water.
The classification of accounts is set up on the same general principal as is provided for under electric-operating expenses.
Separate accounts are established for: (1) operation and maintenance charges financed by advances: (2) operations under section 9 (e) of the 1939 Reclamation Law where the annual rates for service is to return the cost of operation and maintenance and the construction costs over the period of the water contracts; and (3) for operations paid from Reclamation Fund appropriations and reimbursed by water users.
Other subsidiary accounts are established for such items as repayment contracts, contributions in aid of construction, and special deposits where the detail work involved justifies subsidiary accounts.
All financial and operating statements, including the fund statements, are prepared from the general ledger and related subsidiary accounts.
The basic financial statements and reports which will be submitted either monthly, semiannually, or annually are: Balance sheet, income and expense statements, construction work in progress statement, plant in service statements, report on status of appropriations, analysis of operating surplus or deficit, and sources and application of funds statement.
These statements constitute the source of all financial data.
Any other financial information shall be certified correct by the regional programs and finance officers.
The new accounting system has been completely installed in all projects of the Bureau of Reclamation as of June 30, 1949, with the exception of the work-order system, which has been partially installed on all major construction projects.
During the fiscal vear, a basic system was developed to control the programing, budgeting, aecounting, and reporting of Bureau activities.
The primary emphasis has been on construction activities; and, although much work remains to be done on many of the detail elements of the system, and on its complete application to investigations, operation and maintenance, rehabilitation and betterment, and other substantive activities, the essential system is now in operation.
During the early months of the year, key personnel of the Office of Programs and Finance, in collaboration with representatives of the General Accounting Office, the Bureau of the Budget, and the Treasury Department, conducted a series of trial installations of a new system in several field offices in region 1.
The offices were carefully selected to provide a representative cross-section of all types of Bureau activities.
The new program system covers control schedules, cost schedules, budget documents, and a system of program reports which reconcile with the financial records and accounts and provide complete integration of the budget documents with the program schedule and reports.
A preliminary draft of procedures for construction activities has been issued and will be used as a prototype for extending the system to all other activities.
Major segments of the accounting system have been printed in final Manual form which includes the completely integrated system of general ledger accounts, the procedure to control funds at all organizational levels, the allotment accounting system which will insure against the overobligation of funds and appropriations, integrated billing and collection procedure, and a complete system of financial statements and reports based on the new general ledger accounts.
With the co-operation of the Treasury Department, a modified disbursing procedure was developed, which eliminates the transmission of bulky documents to the Treasury Disbursing Offices, but retains all elements necessary for a thorough audit of disbursements by the General Accounting Office.
During the development of the new system, more than 50 forms and reports have been eliminated, and it is anticipated that at least 200 more will be eliminated by the time the new system is completed.
At the end of the year, work was in progress on the development of procurement and property accounting procedures, a simplified pay-roll and retirement accounting procedure, and the refinement and manualization of all of the program, budget, and reporting procedures.
Programing operations which provide for the proper coordination of all phases of the Bureau's activities into a sound construction program and the maintenance of the necessary administrative control to keep the program advancing along a prescribed path toward stated objectives was firmly entrenched during the year.
By the beginning of the fiscal year, a coordinated program and finance organization had been established throughout the Bureau and programing procedures, built up primarily around the control schedule, PF-2, and the annual project schedule, PF-3, had been promulgated and placed in service.
While these procedures and documents have proved extremely valuable, the programing personnel has devoted considerable effort during the fiscal year to refining and improving those procedures in the light of actual experience in their preparation and use for the development and control of the project programs and for budget presentations.
The instructions for the preparation of the various programing schedules have been revised to achieve greater uniformity in presentation, greater flexibility in programing so as to accommodate changing conditions and budgetary requirements, and more adequate presentation of the project content and scope.
In addition, special attention has been given to coordinating the programing procedures and operations with the revised accounting system of the Bureau.
Coordination of programing and budgeting has been achieved by avoidance of hairsplitting definitions of functions and jurisdiction and by maximizing the interchange of information between the two processes.
While the programing precedes budgeting in point of time and the processes have independent courses, requirements and timeseheduling, a close working relationship was maintained between the two functions to achieve a well coordinated operation for the development of sound realistic programs and the translation, in a limited amount of time, of those programs into budgetary forms.
The financing and programing problems arising from the continuation of construction on the remaining nearly completed Water Conservation and Utilization projects was examined.
Completion of some of these projects requires substantial additional expenditures and the remaining construction cannot be undertaken without additional authority, either because of provisions contained in the basic authorization relating to the total cost or because of the disproportionate repayment arrangements brought about by increased costs.
The regular and supplemental appropriations for 1949 of $266,763,- 964 were the largest ever received by the Bureau.
With an unused balance of $32,318,077 from the previous year, the money available for Reclamation totaled $298,982,041—the largest annual program in the history of the Bureau.
Due in large part to unexpected delays in the passage of supplemental appropriations amounting to over 20 million dollars (sueh appropriations being made available in the latter part of the fourth quarter), at the end of the fiscal year there was an unobligated 351½2 million dollars carried over into fiscal year 1950.
On the same basis, obligations for fiscal year 1949 totaled 264.5 million dollars, representing 88.5 pereent of work programed in 1949 compared with 88 percent accomplished in fiscal year 1948 and 82 percent for fiseal year 1947.
Certain restrictions in the 1949 Appropriation Act, as in 1948, handicapped the Bureau during the year in its construction program.
One restriction was the limitation placed on construction work by Government forces (“force account" work), whereby not to exceed 8 percent of the appropriation of any project could be so used.
Although most Reclamation work is done by contract with private construction firms who build according to Bureau design and under the supervision of Bureau engineers, some activities are outside the general contracting field, risks are great, and contractors either are not interested or feel that they must protect themselves by higher bids.
Another restriction was a limitation during the greater part of the fiscal year of $7,800,000 on design work for the projects performed by the Bureau's central design office at Denver.
While this limitation was increased to $9,250,000 in the last quarter of the year, it still had the effect of limiting service at a time when construction work was being accelerated.
It was necessary to continue a large part of the design work in the project offices where difficulty to recruit and retain experienced personnel was encountered.
A $50,000 restriction upon expenditures for General Offices publie informational services again materially impaired the ability of the Bureau to respond to increased requests for information from the Congress, the press, and the public, resulting from added interest caused by the expanded construction program.
The burden of this work fell to a great extent on an overtaxed technical staff and on officers responsible for the prosecution of the construction program, hampering performance of regular work for which they were responsible.
Restrictions limiting the amount which could be expended for personal services of all kinds to $48,000,000 and the number of employees in grades CAF-9 and P-3 and above to 3,500 were important factors in the Bureau's inability fully to execute the program scheduled.
The limitation for all personal services was increased to $54,500,000 in the last quarter of the year, but here again the relief came too late to have any real salutary effect on the Bureau's program, and as a result the unobligated balance carried over into 1950 was considerably increased.
Finally, a restrictive clause setting forth the qualifications required for persons holding the offices of Commissioner, Assistant Commissioner, and Regional Director resulted in the Commissioner and the Director of Region 2 serving without pay from January 31 to June 30.
Request for a supplemental appropriation to cover the salaries of these officials thus withheld has been submitted.
Reclamation construction work in the West was originally financed from the Reclamation fund, which consisted of money received from the sale of public land supplemented by small loans from the Treasury and, later, oil royalties.
In 1916, Congress began to make annual appropriations out of the fund for the work and the Bureau was required to budget its needs for the coming fiscal year's operations and justify the appropriation requested in the same manner as all other Government agencies.
Funds made available to the Bureau from its inception to date are shown in the following table.
From 1902 to 1915 the amounts shown were authorized by Secretarial action.
Subsequent amounts were appropriated by Congress.
The submission to the Senate and House Appropriations Committees of quarterly reports on the status of funds appropriated for construction was continued during fiseal year 1949, following the pattern developed in the previous year.
Similarly, recurring reports continued to be prepared at the project level to reflect current, cumulative, and anticipated contractors' earnings.
A modified system of reports, geared to the newly streamlined accounting system of the Bureau, took form as the year progressed.
The new reports, aiming particularly at a more immediate comparison of program and progress, serve as a specifice instrument in management control.
By June 30, most projects had submitted test runs in compliance with revised procedures then approved.
Fiscal year 1950 submissions are to be prepared under the modified reports system as progressively developed.
Special monthly tabulations provided a means for close surveillance during the year of prospective year-end carry-over of unobligated funds and of unliquidated obligations.
Program attainments could thereby be more accurately gaged and encouraged, and planning emphasis more precisely directed.
In accordance with provisions in the Interior Department Appropriation Act of 1949, the amounts of accrued contractors' earnings retained as hold-backs became unavailable for obligation for any purpose, no matter when payments of such withheld percentages were to be made.
To give effect to the legislation, hold-backs were deposited in special accounts.
To meet administrative and operating needs for frequently used, single-source statistical data, a set of four ready-reference books was compiled, consisting of (1) a volume entitled “Bureau of Reclamation Appropriation Acts and Allotments," containing exact copies of all appropriation acts relating to the Bureau from its establishment in 1902 to 1949; (2) a volume entitled "Bureau of Reclamation Project Feasibilities and Authorizations," presenting project findings of feasibility and authorizations for projects during this period; (3) a volume entitled “Bureau of Reclamation Public Notices," consisting of a collection of notices issued; and (4) a volume entitled “Bureau of Reclamation Project Finance Data" in tabular form, exhibiting basic statistical finance data on each project progressed by the Bureau during its existence through fiscal year 1949.
The restrictions imposed by the 1949 Appropriation Act which limited expenditures for personal services to $48,000,000 and the number of personnel in grades P-3, CAF-9, and above to 3,500, was administered by means of allocations, controls, and reports.
The dollar limitation necessitated the reduction in personnel from a total of 16,862 full-time employees in July 1948 to a total of 13,002 by January 1949— a reduetion of 3,860 representing 23 percent.
This low level of employment continued under the limitation into May 1949.
With relief given by the First Deficiency Appropriation Act of 1949 which, among other items, revised the personal-services dollar limitation to exclude Public Law 900 and trust and contributed funds, recovery in total full-time employment in June reached 15,401 at the year end.
Throughout the year employment in grades P-3, CAF-9, and above was maintained within the limitation of 3,500 positions in this category.
The consolidated statement by projects of construction cost of irrigation and power works, other items reimbursable with construction, and deductions for fiscal year 1949, similar in presentation to that appearing on pages 88-91 of the 1948 Annual Report of the Secretary, has been omitted pending completion of revision of the Bureau's accounting system.
The Office of the Comptroller continued on an expanded basis the consultative and advisory assistance to the Commissioner and his top staff; the review and approval of proposed accounting procedures and other system elements; and the performance of independent financial audits of Bureau projects, water users' associations, contract settlements, and other features of Bureau operations.
In the field of policy development and advisory assistance, this Office has plaved a conspicuous role in problems of municipal finance and management, special studies of the interagency agreements, analysis and interpretation of external audit reports, and problems relating to the effect of legislative developments.
The over-all program of water users' audits reflected substantial progress.
All urgent requests for audit and advisory assistance adjunctive thereto were filled.
This work involved removal of a backlog of several vears.
Auditing policies and procedures for this activity were improved for more significant results both from a practical and technical standpoint.
In terms of satisfaction of Bureau requirements and Comptroller's office objective, the fiscal year 1949 marked the first really concrete accomplishments in the important program of project financial auditing.
Auditors were equipped with specific performance standards and job instructions.
Audits of major projects were undertaken for the first time.
While intensity of audit activity varied as between regions, at least one project in each region was covered.
The financial audits were adjusted by the installations of the Bureau's new accounting system which were concentrated largely in the 1949 fiseal year.
It was considered desirable to audit following account conversions, and since the audit program had been initially constructed around the old account structure, a substantial burden of training and reprogramming was required.
On the basis of more representative evaluation factors provided by this year's performance by the Office of the Comptroller, technical instructions are being amplified, more rigid time performance requirements are being instituted, and organizational changes aimed at maximum accomplishment are being directed.
Several bills of far-reaching significance to present and future water and power users on Reclamation projects were introduced in the Congress during the fiscal year.
One of the bills of most importance to the Bureau's program to be enacted by the first session of the Eighty-first Congress is Public Law 37 (S. 790), granting the consent of the United States to the Upper Colorado River Basin Compact.
The compact makes an equitable division among the States of Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, Utah, and, Wyoming, of the waters of the Colorado River System, the use of which was apportioned to the Upper Basin by the Colorado River Compact of 1922.
There was also enacted Public Law 82 (H. R. 4151), granting the consent of the United States to the Arkansas River Compact, which relates to the use of the waters of the Arkansas River by the States of Colorado and Kansas, and Publie Law 91 (H. R. 3334), granting the consent of the Congress to the Pecos River Compact, which provides a division of the waters of the Pecos River between New Mexico and Texas.
All three measures were reported on favorably by the Department.
Another bill of vital interest to the Bureau to be enacted is Publie Law 56 (H. R. 4152), the first omnibus amendatory repayment contract measure to be passed by the Congress.
This measure authorizes the execution by the Secretary of the Interior of amendatory repayment contracts negotiated, pursuant to section 7 of the Reclamation Project Act of 1939, with the Bitter Root irrigation district, the Shasta View irrigation district, the Okanogan irrigation district, the Willwood irrigation district, the Uncompahgre Valley Water Users' Association, and the Kittitas reclamation district.
There is now pending House bill 5184, which would authorize the Secretary to execute amendatory repayment contracts negotiated under section 7 of the Reclamation Project Act of 1939 with the Belle Fourche irrigation district, the Deaver irrigation district, the Westland irrigation district, the Stanfield irrigation district, the Vale Oregon irrigation district, and the Prosser irrigation district.
Favorable action by the Congress on this bill is anticipated.
Public Law 132 (S. 55) provides the necessary authorization to permit the Bureau of Reclamation to complete the construction of the irrigation facilities of the Eden project, Wyoming, as originally authorized by the President on September 18, 1940, as a Great Plains project, with such modifications as the Secretary may find will result in greater engineering and economic feasibility.
The enactment of Public Law 102 (S. 690) authorizes the delivery of water to the Yuma auxiliary project through the irrigation system of the Yuma Mesa division of the Gila project, a reduction in project lands by excluding lands which cannot successfully be irrigated under present conditions, and the effecting of related physical and financial adjustments.
In addition to the public laws set forth above, a number of private bills arising out of Bureau activities were enacted for various purposes.
Several measures introduced in Congress were still pending as of the close of the fiscal year.
They are discussed briefly because of their importance, inasmuch as their enactment would make basic changes in the reclamation laws and the Bureau's program.
They have received extensive consideration in the Office of the Chief Counsel and other branches of the Bureau.
A measure having greatest interest to the Bureau is House bill 1770, which would provide for certain revisions in section 9 of the Reclamation Project Act of 1939.
One objective of this bill is to give statutory recognition to the fact that multipurpose Federal Reclamation projects frequently serve various purposes in addition to those now covered by law (principally, irrigation and the production of hydroelectric power), and to provide that the whole cost of facilities which serve these additional purposes need not be borne by the water users and consumers of electric power.
This objective would be achieved by writing into the Reclamation Project Act of 1939 authority to make nonreimbursable allocations of capital and operation and maintenance costs to flood control, navigation, fish and wildlife propagation, recreation, general salinity control, sediment control, the improvement of public transportation, protection of the public health, promotion of the national defense, and the fulfillment of international obligations.
Only the first three of these items are now provided for by statute and, as to them, present law covers only allocations of capital costs.
The second objective of the bill is to afford the basis for an improved contract relationship between the Bureau of Reclamation and its irrigation water users.
The consolidation of the Parker Dam Power project and the Davis Dam project was proposed in House bill 2984.
This bill would permit economies and increased efficiency in the construction, operation, maintenance, and administration of these projects.
House bill 1694 would authorize the repayment of rehabilitation and betterment costs to be deferred in those cases where current financing of such work is beyond the repayment ability of the water users.
House bill 4403 would authorize the Secretary of the Interior to develop, administer, and dispose of the recreational facilities within reclamation, flood-control, power, and other Federal reservoir projects under his jurisdiction.
Similar legislation applicable only to facilities on the Colorado-Big Thompson project is proposed in House bill 5134.
The development of certain works in the American River Basin, California, as a part of the Central Valley project would be authorized by House bill 165.
In addition, this bill would provide that, after construction is completed, Folsom Dam and Reservoir would be transferred by the Corps of Engineers to the Bureau of Reclamation for operation and maintenance.
Also of importance is House bill 940, the Alaska development bill, which, among other things, would authorize the construction of the Eklutna power project near Anchorage.
Several project authorization bills were pending, but had not been acted upon finally at the close of the fiscal year.
There would be restored to the Secretary of the Interior, if Senate bill 1606 is enacted, the determination of the validity of titles to lands acquired in the administration of the reclamation laws.
In 1946, the Attorney General held that the final determination of title validity under existing law must be made by the Department of Justice.
A favorable report was made by the Interior Department on House bill 2514, which would enable the Secretary of Agriculture, through the Farmers Home Administration, to extend financial assistance to entrymen on Federal reclamation projects.
Among the bills pending in Congress in which the Bureau of Reclamation is interested and on which unfavorable reports have been made are House bill 915, intended to authorize the Department of Agriculture to investigate and report on projects for the reclamation of lands by drainage; that portion of House bill 5472, the Omnibus Flood Control and Rivers and Harbors bill, which relates to the construction of the Grand Prairie reclamation project, Arkansas, by the Corps of Engineers, and Senate bill 33, which would create a National Water Conservation Authority to study the conservation, development, and utilization of the Nation's water resources.
The Bureau was concerned with extensive litigation involving important legal principles affecting its operations.
Four additional actions were filed against the United States in the Court of·Claims during this fiscal year to receive compensation for damages alleged to have been sustained by the plaintiffs as a result of the construction and operation of Friant Dam, Central Valley project, California.
This brings the number of such cases to 52, in which over $2,000,000 in damages is sought.
The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari to review the judgments entered by the Court of Claims and heard arguments in the case entitled Gerlach Live Stock Company v. United States, and five related cases (102 C. Cls. 392; 76 F. Supp. 87, 99).
The Supreme Court subsequently decided to have these cases reargued at its next term.
In addition, suits are pending in the United States District Courts for the Southern District of California and for the District of Columbia which seek to enjoin the United States from diverting and transporting waters of the San Joaquin River to lands outside the watershed of that river or from entering into contracts for the sale of water of the San Joaquin River.
An action was filed by the United States in the United States District Court for the District of Colorado against the Northern Colorado water conservancy district, the city and county of Denver, and others.
The principal purposes of the suit are to quiet the United States title in the waters of the Blue River required to operate Green Mountain Reservoir of the Colorado-Big Thompson project and to obtain a judicial construction of the meaning and effect of certain portions of Senate Document 80, Seventy-fifth Congress.
An answer filed by the Public Service Co. of Colorado challenges the statutory authority of the Secretary of the Interior and the constitutional authority of the United States to construct transmission lines.
There are still pending the cases entitled Fine Sheep Co. v. United States, Ira R. Ure et al. v. United States, Ira R. Ure v. United States, and Scheff White et al. v. United States, and consolidated cases, instituted in the United States District Court for the District of Oregon pursuant to the Federal Tort Claims Act.
These cases include 191 actions for alleged damage to crops by reason of a failure to deliver water and two actions for alleged damage caused by flooding resulting from a break which occurred in the North Canal of the Owyhee project.
Assistance was given the Department of Justice in the conduct of the trial of these cases and the preparation of legal briefs and arguments.
An action entitled Washington Water Power Co. v. United States was instituted in the United States Court of Claims to recover for damages allegedly caused to the plaintiff's Little Falls power plant on the Spokane River in the State of Washington by reason of the filling of the Franklin D. Roosevelt Reservoir, Columbia Basin project.
In the case of United States v. Alpine Land and Reservoir Company, which has been pending for more than 20 years in the United Štates District Court for the District of Nevada, a preliminary determination and adjudication and a temporary restraining order was entered providing for the distribution of the waters of the Carson River in Nevada.
Assistance was given representatives of the Department of Justice in two cases pending before the United States District Court for the District of Utah.
These actions are entitled Provo Bench Canal and Irrigation Company et al. v. United States, which involves an appeal from a ruling of the State engineer affecting the water rights acquired by the United States for the Provo River project, Utah, and United States v. Lloyd, which was instituted by the Government to enjoin the operation of a fish-processing plant that was polluting the water stored in the Deer Creek Reservoir of the Provo River project.
The United States Circuit Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit affirmed a District Court decision against the United States in the declaratory judgment action entitled United States v. Pruden et al.
172 F. 2d 503).
This case was instituted to determine the rights of the United States under an Oklahoma statute granting a free rightof-way for canal purposes to the United States across State land in those instances where such lands were conveyed by the State without an express reservation in the deed of the right-of-way.
Possible means of bringing to a conclusion the case of Pioneer Irrigation District v. American Ditch Association et al., United States of America, Intervener, were explored with representatives of the Department of Justice.
This action, which has been pending for many years in the Seventh Judicial District Court of the State of Idaho, was instituted to determine the rights of the several parties to the waters of the Boise River.
A hearing was held before a commissioner appointed by the United States Court of Claims in the action entitled Columbia Basin Orchard et al. v. United States, which arose by reason of the alleged contamination by the United States of the source of water of the Columbia Basin orchard.
Two suits involving one prime contractor and one subcontractor, entitled David A. Richardson v. United States and Ralpħ G. Barnes v. United States, were filed in the Court of Claims pursuant to the War Hardship Claims Act on account of losses allegedly sustained under six contracts because of war conditions.
Legislation is pending which would authorize Distriet Courts to ascertain the amount of losses, if any, sustained by four contractors because of the Government's failure to furnish steel during the steel shortage of 1945 and 1946.
The Court of Claims ruled against the Government in the case Cotton Land Company et al. v. United States (109 C. Cls. 816).
This action was instituted to recover damages for the flooding and isolation of plaintiffs' lands allegedly resulting from the formation of a delta in the Colorado River which was caused by the construction and operation of Parker Dam.
The determination of the amount of damages is now pending.
A settlement was made and final judgment entered in the Court of Claims case entitled California Zinc Company, et al. v. United States (112 C. Cls. 577), involving a claim which resulted from the impounding of water in the Shasta Reservoir, Central Valley project.
Over 100 proceedings to acquire lands and rights-of-way by condemnation were instituted during the fiscal year.
Many of these cases involve the acquisition of two or more parcels of land.
The acceptability of proposed settlements, awards of commissioners appointed by the courts and of juries in many of these cases, and cases instituted previously were considered.
General.
Legal research, assistance, and draftmanship in connection with all phases of the Reclamation program has been carried on in the Office of the Chief Counsel.
Some of these matters include: Consideration of the effect of the 1944 Mexican Water Treaty on certain Bureau project operations; preparation of a draft of consolidated form of all major delegations of authority granted to the Bureau of Reclamation by the Secretary; preparation of general regulations relating to the opening of public lands on Federal reclamation projects; assistance to the Gila Valley power district and Mohawk municipal water conservation district in the liquidation of their indebtedness through composition proceedings which will permit the dissolution of these districts and the formation of a new district authorized to contract with the Government, in accordance with the provisions of the Act of July 30, 1947 (Public Law 272, 80th Cong., 1st sess.) : consideration of many questions arising out of limitations which were included in the appropriation act for this fiscal year; and negotiation and drafting of repayment contracts, amendatory repayment contracts, construction contracts, and power contracts, together with a consideration of the legal problems arising out of proposed provisions.
Many elaims against the United States were considered under a delegation to all Bureau Regional Counsel to administratively determine elaims up to $1,000 filed under the Federal Tort Claims Act and the claim items appearing in the annual appropriation acts.
The general work range included practically the entire field of Reclamation activity.
No changes were made in the Bureau's basic organization structure during the year.
Adjustments were made in the Denver and field design organizations and in the scope of certain district offices.
Plans were made toward full participation by the Bureau in the President's management improvement program (officially promulgated on July 29, 1949).
The Reclamation Manual, which will encompass all policy and procedural instructions, methods, and standards for carrying out the Bureau program, was substantially completed in initial form.
Substantial progress was also made in a revision of the preliminary material based on its application to operating conditions in the field.
Near the close of the fiscal year, a review of all forms used in the Bureau was initiated.
This forms program, together with the analysis and coordination of reports, will provide a system through which the regional personnel and the Commissioner's staff offices may jointly review and improve Bureau reports and forms, and the procedures governing their use.
The administrative review program was continued on a relatively limited seale, but with good results.
Selected functions of the Bureau were reviewed jointly by the branch or office having primary responsibility for the function and by management personnel, and plans and recommendations developed for the improvement of operations and the resolution of organizational problems.
Although still restricted by congressional limitations on the number of employees who could be engaged on personnel work, the Bureau personnel staffs have striven to achieve the objectives described in the Annual Report for 1948.
The large postwar void between the thin crust of old and,able career leaders on the top and the mass of new recruits on the bottom has been progressively narrowed.
Development and utilization programs upon which will depend the Bureau's success of 10 or 20 years from now have been initiated.
The total objectives of these plans is the development of practical means whereby management can attract and keep positions filled with competent people and have available a reserve of qualified employees selected and trained in advance for promotion or reassignment to new positions in accordance with anticipated scheduled replacements based on forecasts of future staffing needs.
This year brought more and more recognition and reliability to the fact that personnel administration is a direct responsibility of operating management.
At every possible level in the program, the available personnel staff devoted itself to assisting management in the establishment, development, and maintenance of a work force which would most effectively meet the Bureau's operational requirements.
The second year of Bureau-wide operation of the student engineer program marked its continuance as a well-organized and stable development plan.
Pilot programs for junior administrative trainees, apprenticeship training in the six basie crafts, and rotation of engineers in the beginning professional grades-have been started.
Based upon experience gained with these pilot operations, they will be extended to other regions, districts and projects where needed.
Other programs now under way on a pilot basis include the planning and programming of personnel requirements, the use of the construction engineer position as a guide for selecting and developing employees for more responsible assignments, and manpower scheduling for field-design offices.
Position classification to determine appropriate service and grades for positions under the Classification Act was geared to and focused upon creating understanding and effectively utilizing position classification for the benefit of better management.
Through inspection surveys and review of decentralized field operations it is planned to evaluate existing allocations and to develop policies and procedures to improve and standardize the conduct of this important responsibility of personnel management.
A collective-bargaining type of labor agreement affecting several hundred wage board employees has been initiated on one major Reclamation project.
Equitable hourly rates, based upon the principle of paying employees in accordance with local prevailing rates were kept current by the Bureau's wage boards.
Through its labor relations officers, salary and working conditions for approximately 18,000 contractors' employees were considered.
These officers are in close touch with local and national civic organizations, labor unions, contractors, and many others who concern themselves with this working force.
Continued operation of the Bureau's safety program resulted in a 25-percent reduction this year in the lost-time frequency rate under the rate established during 1948.
Safety inspections were performed on all Bureau operations and a safety educational program was conducted.
The Bureau continued to enjoy its hard-won prestige as a good place in which to work.
More than 12,500 people applied for examinations announced by the Bureau's Central Board of Civil Service Examiners.
As a result of these examinations, approximately 1,500 candidates obtained competitive civil service status appointments.
On June 30, 1949, the Bureau had on the rolls 15,653 employees; 12,074 of whom were under the Classification Act; 3,505 under the wage boards, and 74 on other types of appointments.
Of this number 7,896 were veterans.
Such incentives as rewards for superior accomplishment, and suggestions, paid off to 73 employees in the amount of $8,924, with Earle D. (Dusty) Rhoades, drilling superintendent of the Columbia River distriet, being awarded $1,000 for his "multiple packer" drilling device, which held promise of saving large sums of money in the construction of dams.
Three Fairchild, single-engine, four-place aircraft were procured from surplus and completely overhauled and modernized for use throughout the Bureau.
One of these airplanes was assigned to region VI, one to region VII, and one is awaiting assignment, and temporarily assigned to the Washington Office.
The Bureau's Lockheed Lodestar was flown approximately 300 hours during the year, and provided transportation for members of the Secretary's staff, as well as for Bureau officials.
This aircraft, as well as the two twin-engine Beechcraft, one of which is assigned to region VI and the other to region III, have been used for inspection work at Bureau projects, which could not have been accomplished except through this means of transportation.
In addition to providing a means of visual inspection of dam sites and all projects under construction, the aircraft have been used for making preliminary surveys of transmission lines, the surveillance of flood-water conditions, and for photograph work, ineluding some aerial survey work.
Two of the Bureau’s fleet of airplanes were lost in a fire at Amarillo.
Provisions have been included in the 1950 Appropriation Aet to procure replacements for these aircraft.
Work with reference to the decentralization of the Bureau’s procurement work has gone steadily forward during the year.
An agreement was consummated through the Secretary of Commerce to have allocated to the Bureau all steel needed to keep our construction program on schedule.
This steel allocation program was abandoned during the last quarter when the steel market broke and steel became generally available.
Had it not been for our participation in the steel allocation program, a number of our construction projects would have been delayed.
The very tight supply situation, with reference to aluminum conductor cable, large size insulators and certain types of pole line hardware, was overcome due to a tabulation of the entire Bureau needs for these commodities and a presentation of these requirements to the various sources of such materials.