During the 1979 fiscal year, the Labor Department continued its efforts to help working people and all Americans overcome the effects of the two major domestic problems of our times—unemployment and inflation.
This year, as in the past, the Department was in the forefront of programs and policies designed to help people find productive employment, insure their safety and health at the workplace, and guarantee them equitable treatment and equal employment opportunity on the job.
Even though 1979 was a year of government-wide fiscal restraint, the Labor Department expanded its programs and services through improved management, more efficient delivery systems, and strengthened provisions to prevent fraud and abuse.
During the year, the programs and policies of the Department were directed toward meeting the needs and priorities of the many and varied publics it serves including the poor, the disadvantaged and the unemployed.
To help formulate a comprehensive solution to this nation's most serious economic problem—inflation—this Administration brought together business, labor, and government leaders to forge a historic National Accord, giving the people most effected by economic policy a hand in developing programs to combat inflation and unemployment.
Throughout the decade, we have suffered inflation that resists every conventional solution.
We have endured two recessions, neither of which brought inflation down substantially, and mandatory wage and price controls, which only postponed inflationary increases and distorted the economy.
The key missing ingredient in our past inflation-fighting policies has been direct involvement by people with a vital stake in making the policies work.
The National Accord gives labor, management, government, and the public at large an important role in formulating and monitoring our economic stabilization policies.
Among the measures called for as part of this accord are additional jobs and training programs, public works programs, youth initiatives as well as other counter-recession programs to deal with any increased unemployment and to protect jobs if a recession deepens.
The full range of our domestic policies are now coordinated to reduce inflation and unemployment.
The National Accord gives us the unprecedented opportunity to show the world that Americans can work together—that we can set aside our differences—to reassert our world economic leadership.
Inflation has raged for a dozen years.
It has caused great suffering for those least able to bear it.
Solving the inflation problem will take years of self-restraint, cooperation, and patience—all equally shared.
The National Accord gives us the framework to fight inflation and work toward full employment at the same.
Throughout the 1979 fiscal year, we have moved toward that goal.
The Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA), reauthorized during the fiscal year, is an integral part of the Nátional Accord's overall anti-inflation and employment strategies.
To help make it more efficient and effective, the reauthorized CETA increased targeting and training services to the economically disadvantaged and concentrated on training and placing people in private-sector jobs.
To help insure that CETA funds went where they could do the most good, the Department also simplified administrative and paperwork requirements and strengthened provisions governing fraud and abuse.
The reauthorized CETA included a new Title VII emphasizing private-sector participation in the Department's employment and training programs.
This new private-sector initiative program, designed to fill a previously missing gap in the employment and training system, will spend $400 million annually to help industry train and employ the structurally unemployed and other disadvantaged people for jobs needed by our economy.
PICs are composed of business leaders, labor union leaders, and representatives of community-based organizations.
These councils can help persons involved in the CETA system understand and respond to the needs of local labor markets.
The Targeted Jobs Tax Credit program allows businesses to claim a credit on their income tax to cover additional cost of hiring disadvantaged workers from specified targeted groups.
These innovative new programs, along with the rest of the CETA system, are crucial for dealing with problems of inflation and unemployment.
Every trained worker in unsubsidized, productive employment is a producer, not a consumer of welfare or public assistance.
Also, trained workers help increase productivity and hold down future wage costs.
CETA, therefore, is an integral part of the full-employment strategy laid down in the Humphrey-Hawkins Act.
To help insure that CETA monies and funds for other Labor Department programs were properly used to help those for whom they were intended, the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) was established early in the fiscal year under the Inspector General Act of 1978.
During the year, OIG acted to prevent and detect fraud, abuse and waste in department programs and operations and conducted audits and investigations relating to the department's many programs.
OIG worked to develop strategic and systemic reviews so that potential problem areas could be identified and remedied before serious situations developed.
While the Department concentrated much of its effort during the year on putting people back to work, it improved the performance of its many other operations which enhanced the quality of worklife for all Americans.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) intensified its ongoing program to cut away unnecessary regulations that have nothing to do with worker safety and health and concentrated efforts on targeting limited resources on worksites where workers daily face serious and often irreversible injury and sickness.
1,500 to 2,000 potential carcinogens.
This policy, developed during the year and issued just after the fiscal year ended, will help OSHA issue standards and other vital regulations to protect workers from exposure to dangerous carcinogens in the workplace.
OSHA also issued a new standard for exposure to lead and was in the final stages of preparing a final standard for beryllium and for workers exposure to toxic substances and for access to their medical records.
Safety standards regulations continued to be streamlined and consolidated by OSHA in an ongoing effort to simplify its many safety rules and standards.
Over 900 safety provisions of OSHA's general industry standards were revoked and all regulations applying to construction were incorporated into a comprehensive booklet for easy use.
Issued for public comment were proposals which would remove much of the excessive wordage from both the fire-protection and electrical standards.
These old standards were being replaced by more flexible, simplified standards emphasizing performance rather than detailed instructions.
Other OSHA activities during the year included an expanded grants program to increase educational competence among various public, labor, business and university organizations; new emphasis on employee rights in the workplace; stronger efforts in technical support operations; closer liaison with the small business community, and greatly increased cooperation with other government regulatory agencies.
OSHA has come a long way in recent years.
And the Labor Department is guided by the principle that every worker has a fundamental right to a safe and healthful workplace.
The Department moved on a number of fronts to intensify its efforts to guarantee workers fair and equal treatment on the job.
The 1979 fiscal year was the first full year of the federal government's reorganized equal employment opportunity program which was consolidated within the Department's Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP).
OFCCP's staff grew from about 200 to over 1,300 during the year as it absorbed the compliance responsibilities formerly scattered among 11 other federal agencies.
Reforms in virtually every area of OFCCP's operations, enforcement and policy activities largely eliminated confusion and inconsistency often faced in the past by both federal contractors' affirmative action obligations for the program's covered employee groups including women, minorities, religious and ethnic groups, handicapped persons and veterans.
The Department's Wage and Hour Division initiated a special investigations program during the year targeted at industries and localities with high concentrations of undocumented workers.
More than 13,000 investigations were conducted and back wages of more than $24 million were found due to 165,000 workers.
The purpose of the program is to remove the economic incentive for employers to hire undocumented workers.
Preserving and strengthening existing labor laws also helps protect the job rights of workers.
Throughout the year, the Department continued working to protect collective bargaining and other rights guaranteed to workers.
A free and democratic labor movement can help insure that workers will be adequately represented in government and at the workplace.
The Department worked to improve the operation of the Davis-Bacon Act which was passed in 1931 to keep the government from using its vast economic powers to depress or inflate the wages and living standards of workers.
This philòsophy is as valid today as when the Act was first passed.
The prevailing wage principle is important to all workers and the Department is committed to administering the law so that it will be compatible with Congressional intent while providing equitable services to all the affected parties.
The role of women in the nation's workforce continued to grow during fiscal 1979 and the Department's Women's Bureau expanded its activities to promote the upward mobility and economic stability of working women.
The Bureau helped write the CETA regulations affecting women, particularly those to help overcome sex stereotyping of jobs.
It also developed plans for implementing the Women's Business Enterprise policy, established during the year by executive order to expand opportunities of women entrepreneurs for government contracts and loans.
In the field of international labor affairs, the Department's Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB) participated in the interagency activities leading to the conclusion of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations and the passage of its implementing legislation.
As a member of the Interagency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance, ILAB expanded its activities in the area of workers' rights.
The Department worked with the State Department and other agencies to focus international attention on the human rights of workers and worker organizations.
The trade adjustment assistance program, designed to aid workers adversely affected by increased imports was improved and expanded.
During the year the Department's Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB) conducted investigations and reached decisions on 2,214 worker petitions and approximately 103,000 workers were certified as eligible to apply for adjustment assistance.
Through these and many other programs, the Labor Department's wide-ranging activities continued to touch the lives of all Americans.
As we enter the decade of the 1980s, our nation faces many challenges which may require some fundamental changes in the way we live and work.
The solutions to these problems will arise, however, from traditional and time-tested methods of cooperation and communication.
Working "to improve, promote and develop the welfare of the wage earners of the United States," the Labor Department in fiscal 1979 continued to fulfill its basic mission of helping people improve their lives.
Reauthorization and implementation of the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA) in October 1978 highlighted activities of the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) during FY 1979.
Major features of the 1978 amendments to CETA included increased targeting of services to the economically disadvantaged, greater emphasis on training as opposed to public service employment, simplified administrative and paperwork requirements and strengthened provisions governing fraud and abuse.
Features of the new CETA included a new Title VII emphaszing private sector participation in employment and training, authorization of a number of welfare demonstration projects, and extension of the Youth Employment Demonstration Program, begun in 1977 as part of the President's economic stimulus program.
As part of ETA's continuing efforts to reduce youth unemployment, the Job Corps was expanded significantly and new programs were implemented under the Youth Employment and Training Programs, the Youth Community Conservation and Improvement Projects, the Youth Incentive Entitlement Pilot Projects, and the Young Adult Conservation Corps.
As in the past, ETA also administered the program providing summer jobs for unemployed youth.
The public employment service received almost 9.5 million job openings from employers.
Placements in unsubsidized employment were up by 2.3 percent—to 2.6 million; and the average hourly wage of those placed in jobs during the first nine months of FY 1979 rose to $3.69 or 10 percent greater than the corresponding period of 1978.
Improvement efficiency and timeliness of the Unemployment Insurance payment system and a strengthened program for preventing fraud was a major focus of the Unemployment Insurance Service during FY 1979.
Other accomplishments included increased activities involving payments to workers who became unemployed as a result of the Nation's trade policies or natural disasters.
A number of ETA outreach and public information programs made available training and employment assistance to hard to reach veterans; the Work Incentive (WIN) Program aimed at persons receiving Aid to Families with Dependent Children helped 300,000 persons obtain employment with a resulting savings in welfare payments estimated at $600 million in FY 1979; and major initiatives were undertaken in the apprenticeship field including increased apprenticeship opportunities for women, expansion of apprenticeship to new industries and occupations, and improved linkages with other training efforts.
A variety of research and evaluation studies were done including a number of evaluation studies directed at understanding the CETA programs nationwide, particularly outcomes information of participants through a continuous longitudinal survey; research issues aimed at developing a better understanding of the labor market; employment and unemployment programs; and analytical studies examining alternative strategies for linking CETA programs and the business community.
Community Employment Programs encompass the activities of 460 State and local prime sponsor organizations which receive Federal grants under several titles of CETA to provide employment and training services at the local level.
In FY 1979, approximately 1.2 million persons participated in programs administered by prime sponsors, under Title II, A, B and C, at a cost of about $1.8 billion.
During the year approximately 875,000 persons terminated from these programs.
Of this number about 72 percent were in a positive status at their termination including 388,000 placed in jobs and 240,000 who returned to school or entered further training.
Of the persons enrolled in these programs 50 percent were enrolled in classroom training, 14 percent in on-the-job training, 35 percent in work experience activity and 1 percent in Public Sector Employment.
In FY 1979, a total of 560,000 service years were provided in public service jobs under Titles II-D and VI at a cost of approximately $5 billion.
Approximately 1.2 million persons were employed in these jobs at some time during the year.
The 1978 amendments to CETA significantly changed the public service employment (PSE) emphasis of the programs.
PSE under Title II-D was clearly identified as employment for the structurally unemployed while Title VI PSE was clearly identified as employment for the cyclically unemployed.
The Fiscal Year 1979 appropriations reflected the revised emphasis of the programs, and called for reducing the Title VI enrollment levels while increasing the Title II-D enrollment levels.
As a result of extensive efforts put forth by the entire CETA system, the major restructuring of enrollment between the titles was accomplished in the span of a few months.
Title II-D enrollment was increased from 112,000 to almost 280,000 while Title VI was reduced from 496,000 to under 358,000 thereby demonstrating the ability of the system to effectively and efficiently adjust to changing conditions.
Changes made in the reauthorization of CETA presented major administrative problems.
The amended Act called for the issuance, by May 15, 1979, of all applicable regulations and necessary application materials.
All required documents were issued by the statutory deadline.
These included: Grant Funding Instructions; Grant Review Guidelines; and Forms Preparation Handbook.
Extensive revisions in the regulations providing direction to the program were required by the changes in the CETA law.
The increased emphasis on targeting services to those most in need required revision of eligibility criteria based on income and employment status.
Operationally, it required special attention to designing jobs and training programs to accomodate lower skilled persons.
Provisions establishing average annual wage rates for PSE jobs required the development of wage indexes for the various areas.
It also required sponsors to make major adjustments in the design of PSE jobs to reflect the lower wages.
Other new requirements such as the limit on length of CETA participation have had significant effects on the administration and operation of CETA programs.
ETA, in FY 1979, undertook a major program to improve the management capabilities of prime sponsors and to guard against fraud.
ETA's Office of Investigations and Compliance has instituted a schedule for conducting comprehensive on-site reviews of sponsor programs which will cover some 50 sponsors each year.
In addition, a new Office of Management Assistance was established within ETA to provide assistance to prime sponsors in improving the management of employment and training programs.
In FY 1979 ETA emphasized preparation for unsubsidized jobs and increased the participation of the private sector in the design and operation of employment and training programs through the Private Sector Initiatives Program.
Under the new Title VII private sector involvement in CETA increased and more CETA clientele obtained private sector unsubsidized employment.
Title VII creates Private Industry Councils, (PICs), of which a majority of the membership must be from the private business community.
PICs and prime sponsors work together to jointly develop the Title VII plan and the PIC may actually operate the Title VII program.
During FY 1979, PICs were established by almost all prime sponsors and funds totaling $75 million were allocated to prime sponsors to support the new program.
In developing the Administration's Welfare Reform initiative.
There are variations from site to site, but all are following a basic design which encompasses job search assistance, training including OJT in the private sector, and placement in subsidized jobs when other employment is not available.
The 12 operative sites have successfully developed the necessary linkages with such programs as the State Employment Security Agencies, the Work Incentive Program and the State Welfare Agencies to implement the Work and Training Opportunities Act.
Unique to EOPP are the arrangements made to provide the necessary supportive services required to enhance the employability of the program participant.
These services include but are not limited to child care and transportation.
Contracts have been negotiated with organizations (e.g., Community Based Organizations, Employment Service) for the delivery of specific services.
A comprehensive research and evaluation effort has been developed to track the pilot projects.
Studies will assess the impact on project participants and the local labor market.
In addition, an extensive management information system is being developed and special surveys will be conducted to measure the impacts on the communities.
In FY 1979, approximately $19 million was spent for the Welfare Reform initiative.
All of the program accomplishments to date, as well as those expected in the future, are steps taken towards achieving the major objective of the program—that of finding permanent unsubsidized jobs for participants and eliminating their dependency on cash assistance and other welfare benefits.
In FY 1979, ETA continued its efforts to reduce youth unemployment by further expanding the Job Corps and implementing the new programs authorized by the Youth Employment and Demonstration Projects Act of 1977.
These new programs include the Youth Employment and Training Programs (YETP), the Youth Community Conservation and Improvement Projects (YCCIP), the Youth Incentive Entitlement Pilot Projects (YIEPP) and the Young Adult Conservation Corps (YACC).
In addition, ETA administered the program providing summer jobs for unemployed youth.
In FY 1979, an estimated 400,000 youth participated in YETP programs.
The majority of participants were enrolled in "career employment,"which combines supervised employment in work experience or OJT activity with supportive services such as counseling and career information.
A review of YETP terminations indicates a positive termination rate of 77 percent, with 57 percent of the youth returning to or continuing their education and 20 percent youth entering employment.
An increasing number of youth are improving their educational credentials by obtaining (GED) high school equivalency credit.
Six percent of total youth achieved GED credit in the second quarter and 12 percent achieved credit in the third quarter.
The Youth Community Conservation and Improvement Project (YCCIP) is designed to provide youth experiencing severe difficulty in obtaining employment with well supervised work in projects which are carried out in specific neighborhoods resulting in tangible benefits and community improvements.
A review of a national sample of planned projects indicates that the majority of project activities are concentrated in the areas of house repair, weatherization and community betterment (nature trails, park improvements, etc.).
The balance of the projects are divided between social services, conservation and beautification activities.
An estimated 40,000 youth age 16 to 19 served in the YCCIP program in FY 1979.
Over 86 percent of all enrollees were from an economically disadvantaged family although there are no family income level eligibility requirements.
The majority of youth were enrolled in supervised work experience activities and 50 percent of all terminated youth experience positive results with 21 percent of the youth entering employment.
The average length of participation was 4 months.
The Youth Incentive Entitlement Pilot Projects (YIEPP) have been established in 17 urban and rural target areas across the Nation.
Each project provides jobs to 16 through 19-year olds who live in a prescribed area, meet poverty income limits, and agree to pursue their high school diplomas and to maintain minimal job and academic standards.
YIEPP grants are supplemented by funds from local Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA) programs.
The entitlement program includes a large-scale research effort to evaluate the program's effectiveness.
Through June of 1979, over 55,799 economically disadvantaged youth have enrolled in YIEPP projects to work part-time or full-time in order to remain in or return to school.
Total cost to date is about $102 million in local and CETA funds.
The 1979 Summer Youth Employment Program (SYEP) provided employment for approximately 9000,000 economically disadvantaged youth during the summer months.
The program generally provides 26 hours of employment per week over a nine week period during the summer.
Major efforts were made to improve the quality of work experience by strengthening the regulations and by extensive monitoring.
In FY 1979, Job Corps continued to open new facilities and expand existing centers to double its capacity from 22,000 to 44,000.
During FY 1979, the capacity of its centers was increased from 26,000 to almost 34,000.
The number of centers has been increased from 60 at the start of the build-up to 89 at the end of the fiscal year.
Job Corps also undertook a large controlled educational improvement effort to improve the guality of the education and training services offered at its centers.
The effort includes a new reading program, computer assisted instructional systems, video supported educational programs, competency based instructional systems and new approaches to teaching work skills.
National programs continued to provide training and other employment related services to groups experiencing particularly severe disadvantages in the labor market.
Special programs, generally conducted by national organizations provided services targeted on Indians and other Native Americans, Migrant and Seasonal Farmworkers, older persons, women and other special groups.
The Senior Community Service Employment Program provides grants to national organizations and State governments to develop part-time jobs in community work for economically disadvantaged persons aged 55 and older.
In FY 1979, over 47,500 older persons were provided employment through the program at a cost of $220.6 million.
The Native American Employment and Training Program provides grants to Indian tribes, other Native American communities, and various organizations to support a wide variety of training and employment services to Native Americans.
About 65,000 persons were served by these programs in FY 1979, an increase of some 20 percent over the previous year.
In terms of services, classroom training was provided for almost 13,000 persons, 5,000 were placed in on-the-job training, 31,000 were in work experience positions and 5,000 were provided public employment jobs.
In FY 1979, funding of over $73 million was provided for these programs.
The Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker Programs provide a wide range of services ranging from job training to college tuition programs and emergency relief to farmworkers who work in agriculture on a seasonal basis.
In FY 1979 these programs allocated over $80 million to 50 nonprofit organizations, 7 State governments, and several city and county governments.
Grants were also awarded to universities and other groups to conduct college assistance programs and to provide technical assistance.
Services provided during the year included classroom training for 22,000, on-the-job training for 5,000 and work experience opportunities for 5,000.
A total of almost 200,000 people received some type of assistance through the program during the year, such as nutritional services, health and medical care and emergency assistance.
Other activities under the National Programs included the Apprenticeship Outreach program which placed almost 13,000 minority members and women as apprentices or journeymen.
The National On-the-Job Training Program provided on-site job training for approximately 17,000 persons.
The HIRE program, targeted on veterans, provided training for over 34,000 veterans in cooperation with the National Alliance of Business.
Finally, the National Programs funded a wide variety of Community-Based Organizations, national trade associations, international labor unions andother national organizations to provide support to employment and training activities.
The public employment service (ES) continued the high level of performance achieved in FY 1978.
Placements for FY 1979 totalled 4.5 million individuals, essentially the same as FY 1978, despite a sharp drop in the number of subsidized jobs available through CETA.
Placements in unsubsidized employment were up by 2.3 percent, to 2.6 million as compared to the previous year.
As compared to the earlier period, the applicant caseload increased by 60,000 to a total of 15.5 million.
The reduction in subsidized placements between FY 1978 and FY 1979 reflects the unusually large number of PSE openings available in FY 1978 because of the President's Economic Stimulus Program.
Compared to the year preceding the PSE build-up, the FY 1979 subsidized placements represent a 47 percent increase, reflecting the closer ES/CETA linkages developed in recent years.
During FY 1979, almost 9.5 million job openings were received from employers.
Some 6.8 million openings were filled, an increase of 1.8 percent over the earlier period.
The placement rate, which measures placements as a percentage of new and renewal applications was about the same in Fy 1979 as the previous year at 29 percent.
Although the placement ratesof serveral target groups experienced a decline in FY 1979, apparently due to the reduction in the availability of unsubsidized jobs, they continue to have rates above that for all applicants.
Thus the placement rate for the economically disadvantaged was 34 percent, for minority youth 39 percent and 51 percent for migrant and seasonal farmworkers.
The average wage of applicants placed continued its upward trend in FY 1979.
The average hourly wage of those placed the fiscal year was $3.69 as compared to $3.36 for the corresponding period in FY 1978.
In terms of services provided to applicants, there were significant increases in a number of key areas.
Thus, job development contacts were up by 18 percent, the number of applicants tested increased by 8 percent and the number of applicants counseled was up by almost 2 percent.
In FY 1979 the ES continued a wide range of efforts designed to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of its services.
An extensive program of evaluation, research and demonstration has been undertaken to develop ways of improving operating programs.
These include a management review of services to veterans, a study to improve the validation of ES data systems and an evaluation of the impact of employer relocations activities in the ES.
The ES continues to provide support to a wide range of related programs including CETA, WIN, and the Food Stamp program.
TJTC allows employers to claim a credit based on the wages paid during calendar years 1979 and 1980 to an employee who is a member of any one of seven target groups, the largest of which is economically disadvantaged youths 18-24.
The worker must be certified as eligible if the employer is to claim the credit.
The Revenue Act gave the Department major responsibilities for administering and publicizing TJTC; most of this responsibility is lodged within ETA/USES.
At the State and local levels, the State Employment Security Agencies (SESAs), manage the delivery system and coordinate the agencies which issue vouchers to eligible workers.
The SESAs also issue certifications to employers once they have hired eligible workers.
The TJTC delivery system was in full operation by May 1979 and by the end of FY 1979 had issued nearly 90,000 vouchers to eligible workers and certified 37,000 workers who had actually been hired.
During FY 1980, the Department estimates that over 200,000 additional hires will be certified for the credit.
The Veterans Employment Service supervises veterans programs of the Department of Labor.
Under the Vietnam Era Veterans Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974, the Secretary of Labor established standards of compliance for services provided veterans by SESAs.
The number of SESAs out of compliance in Fiscal Year 1979 decreased from 11 to 4.
The Veterans Employment Service developed and implemented a number of outreach and public information programs during Fiscal Year 1979 to make available training and employment ssistance to hard to reach veterans, particularly disabled and Vietnam veterans.
Outreach and employability projects were funded with the Community Services Administration (CSA), the National Council of Churches, the National Black Veterans Organization, and the Urban League.
Other efforts included a project to test a model instructional program for training community based veterans organizations, and a project to provide outreach and employment assistance to visually impaired veterans.
In addition, 32 State Employment Service staff received support in Veterans Assistance Centers operated by the Veterans Administration.
First payment promptness continues to be a high priority goal for UIS.
In FY 1979, the standard of making 87 percent of intrastate first payment within 14/21 days was met.
Ninety-five percent of such claims were payed within 35 days.
To Help reduce fraud, an Internal Security Handbook and an Overpayment Collection Handbook were developed and distributed in FY 1979.
In addition, an Automated Model Recovery System was developed for use by State agencies.
Steps were also taken to improve the quality of employer audits.
To prepare for an increase in workload should be economy enter a downturn, a Recession Planning Survey was conducted in 12 SESAs to assess their prepareness to handle any potential increase in program activity.
Most States are presently in a better position to handle an increasse in workload than they were during the 1974-75 recession.
All SESAs developed plans to respond to an increase in workloads in FY 1980.
Substantial payments were made to workers whose unemployment resulted from the Nation's trade policies or natural disasters.
During FY 1979, approximately 135,000 workers received first payments of trade readjustment allowances (TRA), and approximately $259 million was paid.
This dollar amount is in addition to any unemployment insurance payments that these workers received.
Under the Disaster Unemployment Assistance (DUA) program, 42 major disasters— including Hurricanes David and Frederic—were declared in 28 States.
This number represents the largest number of major disasters in any fiscal year since the program began.
Based on the activity reports received for these disasters through Sept. 30, 1979, over 14,000 individuals received over $3.1 million in DUA payments.
Under the Redwood Employee Protection Program (REPP), weekly layoff and severance benefit payments increased to $11,334,017.74.
As of Sept. 30, 1979, 1,056 persons have received 30,098 weekly benefit payments totalling $5,452,700.12.
This is an average weekly payment of $181.16.
Job search allowances totalling $1,455.16 were approved for 12 persons while relocation allowances totalling $63,555.47 were approved for 36 individuals.
Training was approved for 69 persons.
Congress extended the National Commission on Unemployment Compensation until June 30, 1980.
The Commission held 18 meetings in various parts of the country during 1979, most of which included public hearings.
Two interim reports were issued in FY 1979 and the Commission will publish additional interim reports prior to its final report.
The purpose of the Work Incentive Program (WIN) is to enable persons receiving Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) to become self-supporting.
In FY 1979, over 900,000 persons were registered by the program and over 200,000 were enrolled in at least one component.
During the year, approximately 300,000 persons obtained employment through the WIN program.
Over half of those obtaining employment earned wages high enough to enable them to leave AFDC.
Annualized grant reductions as a result of the employment were estimated at $600 million in FY 1979.
It is estimated that each dollar expended by the WIN program resulted in $1.51 in welfare grant reductions.
Salaries of persons placed averaged $3.52 in FY 1979 an increase of $.21 over the previous year.
FY 1979 was a year of significant accomplishments for apprenticeship in terms of the number of apprentices in training and progress toward such major goals as increasing apprenticeship opportunities for women, expanding the concept of apprenticeship to wider areas of industry and improving linkages to other training efforts.
In 1978, the latest period for which data are available, a record number of 405,000 persons received training in apprenticeship programs covering a wide range of highly skilled occupations.
During the year over 130,000 new apprentices entered training.
A major focus of apprenticeship in recent years has been on opening apprenticeship opportunities to women.
In 1978, a record 3.1 percent of all apprentices were women, a significant increase from the .7 percent of 1973.
Special activities in support of achieving the goal of increasing women apprentices included over 1,700 special presentations involving some 68,000 persons to encourage and develop apprenticeship for women.
Special efforts have also continued on behalf of minorities; the latest data indicate that 18 percent of all apprentices are from minority groups.
Significant progress was made to link apprenticeship with other training efforts.
BAT staff members were assigned to work with each CETA prime sponsor to develop cooperative relationships between apprenticeship activities and the CETA programs.
ETA worked to link welfare reform pilot programs with apprenticeship opportunities for welfare recipients.
BAT actively supported the new CETA Private Industry Councils (PICs) authorized by Title VII of CETA, with 170 BAT staff members serving as members or consultants to PICs.
Substantial progress was made in FY 1979 in expanding apprenticeship to new industries and occupations.
A special program to provide apprenticeship in the military services registered a record 9,500 apprentices.
During the year 23 National Apprenticeship Standards were registered with a variety of organizations including federal correction institutions, Indian reservations and Federal agencies.
Eleven occupations were newly approved as apprenticeable during the year.
Special efforts to develop apprenticeship in energy related occupations resulted in the training of over 18,000 apprentices in occupations involving nuclear energy, solar energy, biomass, and weatherization.
In FY 1979 BAT continued a New Initiatives in Apprenticeship program to promote apprenticeship across a broader range of industries and occupations.
The Multi-trades program designed to provide administrative assistance to small apprenticeship programs in a defined geographic area reported cumulative apprentices numbering 1,017.
The Apprenticeship School Linkage projects designed to move high school youth into apprenticeship opportunities reported cumulative apprentices of 1,327.
Selected Industry Campaign programs reported 13,004 cumulative apprentices.
Legislative activities on CETA, evaluative studies to understand CETA programs nationwide and studies of prime sponsors highlighted policy, evaluation and research during fiscal 1979.
Work on the CETA reauthorization was completed in October 1978, when the President signed the bill into law.
The reauthorization extended most CETA programs for 4 years, more sharply targeted CETA programs, authorized a new private sector initiative program, and contained features to protect the system against fraud and abuse.
Also enacted late in the Second Session of the 95th Congress was legislation to extend the Senior Community Service Employment Program (Comprehensive Older Americans Act Amendments of 1978) and to establish the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit Program (Revenue Act of 1978).
A number of major evaluation studies were directed primarily to improving the understanding of CETA programs nationwide.
Much of the information available on CETA has been distilled from the Continuous Longitudinal Manpower Survey (CLMS) of a national sample of enrollees who entered CETA decentralized programs in Fiscal Years 1976 or 1977 (two follow-up reports currently available).
The study seeks information about the chief characteristics of enrollees in various CETA components as well as their employment experience prior to entering the program.
A second major study by the National Academy of Sciences assesses the development and caliber of the new CETA system in its formative years, emphasizing how local sponsors met the challenge of decentralization and coped with the required rapid expansion of PSE under CETA in response to an economic downturn.
In addition to this NAS project, researchers from the Brookings Institution were also involved in a study of CETA-PSE to estimate the extent of substitution or the actual net employment creation resulting from those programs.
Other evaluations focused on efforts by CETA sponsors to generate more private sector involvement in CETA projects, including both the STIP (Skill Training Improvement Program) and HIRE-II Program (Help through Industry Retraining and Employment) and the more recent efforts initiated under the new CETA Title VII Private Sector Initiative Program (PSIP).
Other CETA programs evaluated in fiscal 1979 included the Job Corps and the new youth programs established by the Youth Employment and Demonstration Projects Act of 1977.
Non CETA evaluation efforts looked at apprenticeship programs, the Employment Service and Federal contract compliance activities.
A wide array of research studies were aimed at developing a better understanding of the labor market, employment and unemployment problems, and various employment and training programs.
An ongoing research project is examining the experience and general applicability of public service employment (PSE) in selected labor markets of the rural south, while a recently completed study assessed the feasibility of large-scale countercyclical job creation.
Other studies in the past year have examined ways to link CETA programs and the business community; conducted an institutional analysis of the Work Incentive (WIN) Program to determine the most important characteristics of successful WIN projects; explored the potential benefits to workers and management in shared work; relocation of unemployed workers; supported work; and other special programs directed to particular target groups; and carried out special studies to improve the operations of the Employment Service and Unemployment Insurance System.
A significant portion of fiscal 1979 research efforts addressed broad labor market issues rather than specific programmatic concerns.
The ongoing National Longitudinal Surveys (NLS), initiated in 1966, have provided a wealth of information on employment, unemployment, the mobility of workers, and other labor market experiences for four population segments at critical transition stages in working life.
In FY 1979, ETA emphasized reducing fraud and mismanagement within employment and training programs.
The Office of Investigation and Compliance (OI&C) conducted monitoring reviews of 24 prime sponsors in FY 1979 and plans to conduct 50 review during FY 1980 and each year thereafter.
A monitoring procedure was designed and used that sampled these three major activities that have the greatest potential for fraud and program abuse—financial management, program management and equal employment opportunity.
A follow-up on compliants has become an ever increasing area of importance in the administration of ETA programs.
Recorded complaints which averaged 250 per year during the 1974-77 period have increased to an average of 1250 for FY 1979 and 80.
The proportion of complaints involving equal employment opportunity (EEO) problems has been declining in recent years.
While EEO problems accounted for the majority of compaints in earlier years, they declined to 40 percent of all complaints in FY 1978 and to 30 percent in FY 1979.
The 1978 CETA amendments established fixed time periods for resolution of all complaints, 60 days at the local level and 120 days at the Federal level.
A system for measuring compliance with the mandated time periods is being developed and a Field Memorandum will soon be issued to put the system in place throughout ETA.
The latest effort to assess the current level of compliance indicated that the average age of open or nonresolved complaints has dropped from 8.5 months at the end of FY 1978 to 5.5 months as of August 17, 1979.
As newly authorized activities to increase private sector involvement in hiring and training the disadvantaged were started, ETA's Office of Information concentrated on supplying information about these activities and helping regional and State staffs improve their information capabilities.
Materials on the Private Sector Initiative Program and the targeted jobs tax credit included magazine articles later reprinted and widely distributed as separate publications, speeches, program fact sheets, and a brochure.
As part of continuing efforts to inform consumers, two leaflets on the targeted jobs and Work Incentive (WIN) tax credits were produced, and a tax credit leaflet was issued in a compilation of 23 updated consumer information sheets.
Among the information products on CETA were magazine articles reprinted for use at news conferences, a slide show, and "Dateline CETA,"a planned series giving brief accounts of how CETA programs across the country are improving the skills and earnings of their participants.
In addition, workshops and meetings gave CETA and State employment service staffs training and assistance in carrying out public information activities, and the monthly"ETA Interchange"'reported on ETA activities and concerns.
Youth services were the subject of two illustrated magazine-style brochures, and research findings on youth employment problems and program outcomes were reported in R&D monographs.
In addition, a special summer edition of "Occupations in Demand"supplied information for young jobseekers.
Major occupational publications were '"Career Opportunities in the Electric Power and Gas Utilities Industries'’and the "Health Careers Guidebook,"providing detailed current information about these fields, and the"Guide for Occupational Exploration,"giving a comprehensive overview of career opportunities. Other publications were the annual "Employment and Training Report of the President'' and "Research and Development Projects,"'plus general and technical materials on the Job Service, Work Incentive Program, apprenticeship, and unemployment insurance.
News releases reported on the entire range of ETA activities, and exhibits brought employment and training information to a number of national conventions.
Other products were speeches, columns and articles for outside publications, and responses to requests from members of Congress, media representatives, and the public.
National concern about the economy—unemployment, the high rates of inflation, and poor productivity performance—focused increased attention on Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) data during the 1979 fiscal year.
In addition to producing its regular statistical series, the Bureau moved ahead with several new activities.
With a major revision of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) completed and successfully introduced, the Bureau began revising and expanding several other major statistical programs, including the industrial price program.
Data collection for 34 new industries and development of improved and expanded price indexes for others began during the year.
The Bureau also began developing plans for a complete review of the establishment survey of employment, hours, and earnings, a review expected to lead to a multi-year revision of this Federal-State cooperative program.
Other major revision activities are under way for the Family Budget program and for a Continuing Consumer Expenditure Survey.
During the year, the Bureau expanded its Current Population Survey, allowing the tabulation of expanded and improved data for subnational geographic areas and permitting initiation of a data series for monitoring the earnings trends for various population groups on a quarterly basis.
The Bureau expanded its data collection and coverage for the international price program; for the Professional, Administrative, Technical, and Clerical Pay survey; for Federal Government productivity measures; for the Employment Cost Index; and for the Supplementary Data System developed for occupational safety and health statistics.
The Bureau also provided support to the National Commission on Employment and Unemployment Statistics and to the Panel to Review Productivity Statistics of the National Academy of Sciences and began reviewing the recommendations of these groups.
The prices and living conditions program is the principal source of information concerning price trends in the U.S. economy.
Its statistical output is an essential element in analyzing price behavior and trends, in interpreting price movements in relation to other economic changes, and in formulating and evaluating economic policy.
The price statistics produced by this program are widely used in the private sector as escalators in a wide variety of collective bargaining agreements, sales and purchase contracts, rental contracts and a variety of other contractual arrangements.
The prices and living conditions program produces two of the country's foremost economic indicators, the Consumer Price Index (CPI) and the Producer Price Index (PPI).
The CPI program is the principal source of information concerning trends in consumer prices in the United States.
During the 1979 fiscal year, the BLS continued the monthly production and publication of the two CPI's which were introduced at the completion of the recent CPI Revision—the CPI-U covering All Urban Consumers and the CPI-W covering Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers.
Through the first 6 months of the fiscal year, the BLS had responded to more than 300,000 recorded requests for data produced by the CPI program.
With additional funds provided by the Congress in the 1977 fiscal year, an ongoing program to update systematically the sample of retail stores and other establishments in which prices are obtained for the CPI was completed.
This new program, designed to update the entire CPI outlet sample over a 5-year period, provides current information on the places where consumers shop, establishing a previously unavailable means of maintaining the CPI outlet sample over time.
In addition to this new program, work on developing CPI's for Fairbanks, Alaska, was completed.
Publication of indexes for this area began in May 1979.
Finally, a new program was introduced to provide average price information for gasoline and fuels and utilities, both nationally and for selected local areas.
The BLS Industrial Price Program is the principal source of information on prices received by producers of the Nation's goods and services.
In 1979, in addition to producing and publishing the monthly Producer Price Index (PPI) press release and related data, the major new program to revise and improve the PPI was expanded.
By the end of the fiscal year, data collection had begun for 34 industries in the PPI Revision program.
Improved and expanded price indexes were also published for rail freight beginning with January 1979.
In addition, the jewelry portion of the existing indexes was substantially expanded, improving an area that had long been a weakness among the consumer durable goods indexes.
In the International Price Program, export price indexes are published that account for 60 percent of the value of U.S. commodity exports.
Additional import price indexes were published in the past year, increasing the value of imports covered by the program to 37 percent compared with 25 percent last year.
This program provides the only direct measure of price movements for the foreign trade sector of the U.S. economy.
Estimates of autumn 1978 costs of the four-person family budgets were prepared and published in April 1979 and the retired couple's budget in August 1979.
A committee of experts was appointed by the University of Wisconsin Institute for Research on Poverty, under contract to the BLS, to assist in planning a major revision of the Family Budget program.
A preliminary report from this committee is due in January 1980.
Efforts to launch the Continuing Consumer Expenditure Survey by the fall of 1979 continued throughout the fiscal year.
The results of a 1978 pretest of the survey questionnaire were evaluated and all start-up activities necessary to launch the survey by October 1979 were completed.
This major new program will provide the basis for future updating or revision of the Family Budget and Consumer Price Index programs and, in addition, will provide a previously unavailable source of current information on consumer expenditures.
Analysis of the labor force situation, especially in terms of joblessness among various demographic groups and economic sectors, took a number of forms.
The level of public debate concerning the validity of current concepts underlying the labor force data was also intensified, as the Congressionally mandated National Commission on Employment and Unemployment Statistics completed its work and issued its final report on Labor Day 1979.
The Bureau actively supported the Commission's independent examination of the concepts, methods, and collection procedures underlying labor force data.
On request, the Bureau prepared a large number of special tabulations, primarily drawing on unpublished data sources, and provided technical review and assistance on drafts prepared by the Commission staff.
The final Commission report made many specific recommendations concerning labor force concepts and measurement procedures but, by and large, was supportive of Bureau projects and planned improvements.
The Bureau continued to sharpen and improve its labor force data by conducting research on the conceptual and methodological aspects of current labor market measures.
In addition to the actual testing of alternative interview procedures, plans were made to introduce a test of alternative questions in January 1980.
One important goal was to test the new questions that would be used to measure labor market discouragement under the procedures recommended by the Commission.
The Bureau produced several articles and reports focusing on labor force developments and trends among various demographic groups.
In connection with the International Year of the Child, the Bureau's staff prepared several analytical articles focusing on children, youths, and on working mothers.
Other research articles focused on such topical issues as job search activities and subsequent labor force activities of persons outside the labor force and the extent of unemployment among food stamp and AFDC recipients.
The Bureau stepped up its efforts to provide regular information on labor force developments among women and racial and ethnic minorities.
It initiated several projects and expanded its publication program with regard to labor force statistics on persons of Hispanic origin.
In response to an increasing demand for more information on this group, the Bureau has introduced on an annual basis several new tables on the occupation and industry of employed Hispanics and on the status of Hispanics outside of the labor force, including information on discouraged workers.
The new data implement provisions of Public Law 94-311, which requires the Department of Labor to improve and expand the collection, analysis, and publication of unemployment data on Hispanics.
In addition to expanding the range of published data, the Bureau prepared a comprehensive analytical article profiling Hispanics in the work force.
In order to monitor more closely the earnings trends for the various population groups—men, women, blacks, whites, Hispanics, etc.
The data are to be published quarterly, with the first release covering the second calendar quarter of 1979.
Over the past year, the Bureau has continued to improve its data processing capabilities for managing both published and unpublished data from the Current Population Survey.
The unpublished, individual record data were used as the basis for a number of in-depth analyses of labor force behavior.
Cost savings and, even more significant, time savings were achieved by further advances in computerized data base management and table production for the Bureau's employment situation press release and other data publications on the labor force.
The statistics on State and local area employment and unemployment continued to receive attention.
These data are the principal element in the allocation formulae used to distribute several billion dollars of Federal funds to States and other jurisdictions each year.
A major expansion of the Current Population Survey (CPS) was begun to provide annual average data for 30 Standard Metropolitan Statistical Areas (SMSA's), 10 central cities, and the balances of States and of SMSA's.
These data are required by the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA), as amended.
The establishment payroll survey data were adjusted to March 1978 employment benchmark levels in line with usual practice.
Based on recommendations from the National Commission on Employment and Unemployment Statistics (NCEUS), the Bureau is considering the development of a complete review of the establishment surveys of employment, hours, and earnings that would lead to plans for a multi-year revision of this Federal-State cooperative program.
The review would include methods of sampling, estimation, and data processing capabilities.
As required by CETA, wage indexes were calculated for over 3,000 counties and 450 prime sponsors to help determine the maximum allowable wage for public service employees involved in CETA programs.
Efforts continued toward publication of the 1980-81 edition of the Occupational Outlook Handbook.
Pilot tests were conducted by several State Employment Security Agencies during the 1979 fiscal year to test the feasibility of collecting data on job vacancies in conjunction with labor turnover statistics from establishments.
In 1979, the Bureau developed national estimates of occupational employment byindustry for manufacturing industries.
Data were collected from employers during 1979 by the 45 State Employment Security Agencies (SESA's) cooperating in the Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) Survey.
Data for the remaining States were collected by the Bureau.
The OES survey is conducted on a three-year cycle, with approximately one-third of the economy surveyed each year.
At the end of the 1979 survey cycle, national estimates were available for all nonmanufacturing industries for up to 1,500 occupations.
NCEUS conducted a review of all programs in the Office.
The Secretary of Labor will make his recommendations to Congress during 1980.
Wage and industrial relations programs made significant improvements in the quantity, quality, and timeliness of data produced.
Major improvements included more detailed data on wage movements in the Employment Cost Index; continued reduction in the publication lag for wage surveys; and initial development of an employee benefits data base for use in a total compensation comparability approach to Federal pay.
In cooperation with the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), BLS launched a major effort to collect and analyze a large body of data on private industry employee benefits.
The data will be used by OPM to evaluate and compare employee compensation in private industry and the Federal government.
Employment Cost Index (ECI) tabulations were expanded to provide for a separate series for workers in finance, insurance and real estate and for indexes in addition to the regular percent change information.
The scope of the ECI was extended by including Alaska and Hawaii in the national sample.
Quarterly collection of fringe benefit data was brought on cycle with wage data collection.
The data processing system to produce total compensation tabulations was made operational and initial tabulation of total compensation statistics for the 1977 base and subsequent periods began.
First publication of data on total compensation is scheduled for the 1980 fiscal year.
A survey designed to provide data collection units for State and local governments was completed.
Sample selection and initiation of data collection for governments are planned for 1980.
Government data is scheduled to be incorporated into the EC1 the following year.
Data processing improvements were instituted in 1979; the most significant enhancement was the capability for direct regional screening and editing of data through a link between the Departmental Computer Center and the National Institutes of Health data centers.
This has speeded up data processing considerably.
In addition, systems work was completed to produce a form showing the current benefit information provided by respondents, thus facilitating the collection of changes in benefit data.
The BLS conducted approximately 100 area wage surveys and 150 special industry studies for the Employment Standards Administration to use in administering the Service Contract Act.
In two of the areas (Wichita Falls and Mobile-Pensacola), the scope of the survey was expanded to include Federal, State, and local governments on a test basis.
At the request of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, a similar study including State and local governments was conducted in Brevard County, Florida.
The Bureau's regular program of area wage surveys in 70 areas was enhanced by adding statistical data on occupational wage relationships within establishments.
In addition, data collection was completed in four survey areas where the industrial and occupational scopes were expanded.
These test surveys, requested by OPM, are connected with proposed compensation reform legislation that would require that General Schedule (GS) salaries reflect local pay.
Considerable planning for future survey activities relating to local GS pay policy was also completed in fiscal year 1979.
Work continued to upgrade the analytical approaches to industry wage studies using regression techniques, variance analyses, and the occupational pay matrix.
In addition, a chartbook highlighting occupational pay structures and pay determinants was issued in late 1979.
Three new occupations were included in the annual survey of professional, administrative, technical, and clerical pay (PATC).
The occupational expansion was at the request of the President's pay agent as part of a series of changes in the Federal pay setting process.
Data on employee paid leave in the private sector were collected for the first time in 1979.
The PATC survey was the vehicle for collection of this information requested by OPM for their new total compensation comparability project.
New studies continued to be added to the Industry Wage Survey program: Millwork and upholstered furniture in the 1979 fiscal vear and savings/loan associations and electrical transmission equipment in 1980.
Combining two or more related industry studies into one study through "survey umbrellas,"initiated two years ago, has resulted in reducing data collection costs as well as providing a broader base for analyzing industry sectors.
A series of studies continued to provide data on the economic effects of the Fair Labor Standards Act.
A nationwide study relating to May 1978 was completed, providing data on the frequency distribution by average hourly earnings and weekly hours of work of private industry employees classified by age, sex, and the Fair Labor Standards Act coverage status of the firms for which they work.
A two-part study covering May 1979 was started to meet the needs of the Minimum Wage Study Commission.
The first part will produce national data on employee earnings and hours in private industry comparable with those for May 1978.
The second part will measure changes in employee earnings and hours and in the incidence of employee benefits from May 1978 to May 1979 in a panel of establishments that participated in the May 1978 survey.
In recognition of the growing importance of collective bargaining in the public sector, the Bureau expanded its coverage in Current Wage Developments of labormanagement agreements involving State and local governmental units.
In addition, the Bureau began to collect information needed to price key public sector labor agreements.
Resources for these activities were made available by dropping the Wage Developments in Manufacturing survey, whose usefulness diminished with the development of the more comprehensive Employment Cost Index.
In the industrial relations area, a comprehensive bulletin based on an analysis of major agreements, Wage-Incentive,, Production-Standard, and Time-Study Provisions, was issued, and a similar study, Employer Pay for Various Union Activities neared completion.
Collective bargaining reports were issued prior to 1979 contract expirations in the following industries: rubber, electrical machinery, meat products, and motor vehicles.
A detailed report, Work Stoppages in Government, 1977, was published as was a release for all stoppages in the economy in 1978.
Work on the 1979 Directory of National Unions and Employee Associations, to be issued in early 1980, [is] progressed on schedule.
A study, Earnings and Other Characteristics of Organized Workers, generated widespread interest because, among other features, it contained for the first time data on workers of Hispanic origin.
A Bargaining Calendar for 1980 will be issued early in the 1980 fiscal year, to be preceded by an article on this subject in an issue of the Monthly Labor Review.
BLS continued to strengthen and expand its program of research in productivity and technology.
It analyzed factors contributing to the productivity slowdown, including the impact of capital formation, demographic changes in the labor force and, in the manufacturing sector, energy impacts.
Productivity measures for fluid milk, folding paperboard boxes, and soaps and detergents were added to the list of industries for which measures are published.
About 88 separate productivity measures are now published in the manufacturing, mining, transportation, trade, communication, and service sectors of the economy.
An updated bibliography on productivity was completed.
The series on productivity in the Federal government was refined and expanded to cover 347 organizations, up 28 from last year.
Indexes for 1967-78 fiscal years were completed for 28 functional groupings of Federal agencies representing 65 percent of the Federal civilian work force.
Trends in manufacturing productivity and labor costs for 11 countries were updated during the year, and estimates of the comparative levels of compensation of wage earners in 31 countries were compiled.
In addition, international comparisons of labor force, employment, and unemployment in nine industrial countries were updated.
These measures provide insights into the changing competitive position of the United States.
Studies were made of the employment implications of automation and other technological changes.
BLS also prepared reports appraising the impact of major technological changes on productivity, employment, and occupational requirements over the next 10 years on five major American industries.
The Bureau completed surveys on labor and material requirements for Federal office buildings and public housing.
Surveys were begun for hospitals and shopping centers and retail stores.
These studies measure the total labor and material requirements as well as the occupational distribution of the types of construction to serve as a basis for estimating the labor generating effects of construction programs.
The introduction in Congress of several amendments to the Occupational Safety and Health Act, which would exempt small and/or'safe''employers from most safety and health regulations based on data from the 1977 Annual Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses was of major importance to the Occupational Safety and Health Statistics (OSHS) program.
The BLS assisted Congressional staffs and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration by submitting data on the number of employees and establishments potentially excluded by the proposed legislation.
The amendments were still under debate at the end of the year.
For the first time, information on the object or event which resulted in on-the-job deaths was obtained in the 1979 Annual Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses.
Each employer reporting a fatality was recontacted when necessary for a brief description of the fatality.
The added detail will provide a new dimension on work-related fatalities, particularly as to patterns by industry classification.
Results on 1978 fatalities as well as non-fatal injury and illness survey data were published in a news release.
A press release is issued late in the year following the year of reference.
Detailed injury and illness statistics become available a year later in two formats—a summary and bulletin.
In 1979, detailed data for 1977 were published.
States participating in the program release data on a similar schedule, and BLS publishes a summary of State statistics.
The national and State statistics records are designed to provide guidance to OSHA in carrying out provisions of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, in policy formulation and oversight information, and in specific information for employers, workers, and others involved in injury and illness prevention.
To further assist employers, Guides to Evaluating Your Firm's Injury and Illness Experience were published.
About 100,000 of these guides, designed to meet the needs of specific industry divisions, were prepared with the most recent data and distributed to employers during the year.
Reporting by States of injury and illness data based on workers'compensation first reports of injury under the Supplementary Data System (SDS) has produced a massive body of information on detailed characteristics associated with the accident event.
This information, which supplements the industry-specific trend data derived from the annual survey, is transmitted to the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) for use in meeting their respective program responsibilities.
1978 fiscal year.
In 1979, a wealth of SDS data dating back to 1976 was compiled and received from participating States; by September 30, 1979, data were available from 26 States for 1976, 29 States for 1977, and 6 States for 1978.
State standard tabulations and records of individual cases are made available to accident preventionists and researchers through the National Technical Information Service.
Special announcements are made to inform potential users of the availability of SDS information.
Several analytic presentations based on SDS data have appeared in the Monthly Labor Review.
Analytic work is expected to be greatly expanded during the 1980 fiscal year.
State agencies are encouraged and assisted in providing data and in expanding analysis of the State data.
Recordkeeping activities in 1979 were largely restricted to the maintenance of high quality standards by providing technical assistance to employers on questions regarding recordability and through dissemination of published materials on recordkeeping.
Much of this work is coordinated with the BLS regional offices.
No major revision of the recordkeeping system was introduced in 1979.
In the 1980 fiscal year, refresher courses regarding recordkeeping will be given to employers through the various State Grant Agencies.
OSHS continued its Work Injury Reports (WIR) survey program in order to obtain detailed accident information directly from injured employees, information not available from either the annual survey or the SDS.
Four studies were completed in the 1979 fiscal year, relating to ladder, scaffold, welding, and power saw accidents.
In 1979, surveys began of injuries involving the head, foot, face, or eye to determine the use of personal protective equipment.
Proposed subjects for study in FY 1980 include injuries related to lockout, overexertion, mechanical materials handling, foundries, and machinery.
The OSH Act requires statistical programs to meet Federal and State needs, encourages the participation of States in the programs, and authorizes grants to provide half the funding of State costs.
Recordkeeping, annual survey, SDS, and the WIR surveys of injured employees all are carried out with the participation of State agencies.
21 in the WIR.
In the special projects area, the State of Wisconsin completed its comprehensive study for BLS of State information sources on occupational disease to assess the potential for integrating them into a prototype reporting network to monitor the reliability of current occupational disease measures.
Other activities aimed at improved usefulness of occupational injury and illness data included participation in committee work in the National Safety Council-sponsored National Program to Improve Occupational Injury Information; in working with OSHA and NIOSH to establish a surveillance effort of workęr exposure to health hazards; and in the Department of Labor study of occupational disease in the United States, with special focus on respiratory diseases.
In addition, a job-listing with definitions of duties based on selected environmental criteria, prepared for the BLS by the U.S. Employment Service, was made available to the public through the National Technical Information Service.
Projections of the economy are prepared on a regular basis to determine both potential economic growth and future job requirements and output by industry under different assumptions.
A system of models has been developed to make medium- to long-range projections of demand, output, and employment under alternative assumptions about Federal government policies and other factors.
The Office also prepares current summaries of the principal economic indicators and provides a monthly summary and analysis of short-term economic forecasts.
In the past year, the Office published a set of industry employment projections to 1980, 1985, and 1990.
These projections reflect specific assumptions about labor force growth, unemployment, productivity changes, energy use, and changes in business and personal taxes.
Two alternative cases were examined, one showing a moderate rate of growth in labor force and of decline in unemployment and the other showing a more rapid rate of growth in labor force and of decline in unemployment.
To make these projections, an industry level data base and several past-year input-output tables were re-estimated, and most econometric models were updated and revised.
The Economic Growth system models were also updated, expanded, and provided with more sophisticated computer programs.
These projections are presented in a bulletin, Employment Projections for the 1980's.
Other work in the past year included a project for the Department of Energy to develop a capital-labor model to analyze capital formation problems and their impact on labor productivity trends at the industry level.
Also, a model and data base were developed for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to study the industry effects of research and development on productivity.
A capital stocks data base was developed for the BLS input-output industry sectors, and a bulletin describing the system was completed and will be published early next year.
The Office also participated in an assessment of the potential effects of a teamsters strike.
Publications produced during the year, in addition to the descriptions of the 1990 projections, were Time Series Data for Input-Output Industries and a Monthly Labor Review article, "An Evaluation of the BLS Projections of 1975 Production and Employment''.
During the 1979 fiscal year, the Bureau of Labor Statistics continued tis efforts to improve managerial and administrative processes.
Efforts continued to expand career opportunities for women and members of minority groups, to improve the utilization of Bureau employees, and to improve the Bureau performance.
The Bureau resurveyed most of the national organizations and the field as a part of its employee utilization program.
Discussions are currently underway to determine how this effort can be integrated into the ongoing management process.
In the area of training, a number of programs were developed to meet the career development needs of Bureau employees.
For example, a correspondence manual was developed for use by Bureau secretaries; an orientation soundslide show was developed to acquaint new employees with the Bureau; automatic-data-processing training was expanded to meet a growing need; and an Upward Mobility program was developed to train clerical employees to become Computer Technicians.
A Bureau space standards manual was developed and put into use which provide an important management tool for establishing an equitable series of space planning and utilization standards for use in the allocation and redesign of office space.
Continued emphasis was placed on introducing and empanding functional automation in such administrative areas as personnel, budget, procurement, and training.
During this period, the Bureau implemented an Automated Correspondence Control System to manage the Commissioner's and other high priority correspondence.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) stepped up its pace in almost all aspects of job safety and health promotion and improvement as it intensified its "common sense" approach to ridding the American workplace of hazards.
A vigorous tempo was maintained in health and safety standards development, and in a wide range of activities including enforcement and compliance, education and training, information, worker rights, aid to small business and intergovernmental relations.
As the year ended, OSHA was on the eve of issuing a general policy to deal with one of the most important challenges it faces—the protection of workers exposed to toxic carcinogenic substances.
At present the estimate is that one in every five Americans will die from cancer, more than 1,000 people daily, and government reports say that as much as 20 to 40 percent of all these cancer cases may be work-related.
The purpose of the new generic cancer policy is to set forth a framework for identifying, classifying and regulating 1,500 to 2,000 potential carcinogens currently present in the American workplace.
The policy aims at increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of the agency's cancer-controlling efforts by replacing the current case-by-case approach for regulating theses substances.
Public response to OSHA's proposal on this policy far exceeded expectations.
Public hearing testimony and written comment on the proposal totalled more than a quarter million pages drawn from expert opinion and participation from various sectors of industry, organized labor, environmental and other public interest groups, and trade and professional organizations.
Just before the fiscal year ended, President Carter's Regulatory Council issued the first government-wide policy for controlling exposure to carcinogens.
This policy established an overall framework for all federal regulatory agencies having various areas of responsibility.
OSHA's cancer policy would be entirely compatible and consistent with the Council's policy, which aims at cooperative and complementary action by the various agencies through use of the same scientific bases for identifying carcinogens, assessing risk, setting regulatory priorities, and undertaking regulatory action.
Promulgation Nov. 13, 1978, of a new standard on worker exposure to lead with an effective date of March 1, 1979.
Certain portions of the standard on engineering controls and work practices were stayed pending judicial review by the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit, but as the year ended the main provisions of the standard were in effect.
Near completion of final standards on worker exposure to beryllium and worker access to toxic exposure monitoring and medical records, while standards for abrasive blasting and hexavalent chromium were readied for proposal in early 1980.
Publication of non-mandatory OSHA/NIOSH (National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health) guidelines covering 380 substances currently listed in 29 CFR 1910.1000 Tables Z-1, Z-2, and Z-3 while a proposed standard for all the substances was being considered.
Research on four alternative proposals for a generic standard for pesticides covering workers exposed during the manufacture and formulation processes.
Joint efforts with the Environmental Protection Agency for a proposed labelling standard.
Though no decision had been made on possible joint OSHA/EPA rulemaking, a proposal—either jointly or by OSHA alone—was expected in the spring.
Streamling'’and "consolidation" were two key words in the agency's major efforts during the year on safety standards development.
The fiscal year was less than a month old when OSHA revoked 928 provisions of its safety standards— provisions which were unneeded or unrelated to on-the-job protection but had been adopted wholesale from consensus standards when OSHA came into being.
The final revocation action eliminated about 10 per cent of the word volume of OSHA's general industry standards.
This was followed by the consolidation into one booklet of all OSHA general industry standards applying to the construction industry with the construction standards themselves.
This eliminated the need for those in the industry to refer constantly to two rather than one set of standards.
An ongoing review of the construction standards also is underway.
Meanwhile, streamlining, clarification and up-dating was well underway on two other major sets of OSHA standards—fire protection and electrical—which were selected for consideration on the basis of the large numbers of workers and workplaces affected.
A final rule on the fire protection proposal, which seeks to consolidate about 400 pages of regulations into 32, was expected during the early part of FY 1980.
It emphasizes performance standards, which allow employers maximum flexibility in protecting workers against fire hazards.
The proposed changes to the electrical standards, introduced near the end of the year, also emphasize performance standards and would reduce the mandatory standards from about 250,000 to 15,000 words.
The current standards set regulations by reference to the National Electric Code, which has provisions unrelated to job safety and health.
The language of the proposed electrical standards is being simplified to make it more easily understood by workers and employers.
OSHA continues to comb its regulations for those which can be streamlined or simplified without sacrificing any worker protection.
As the year ended, final standards were expected on servicing procedures for multi-piece wheel rims for truck, bus and similar sized tires; and for perimeter guarding of lowpitched roofs.
Proposals and final rules also were due during FY 1980 on walking and working surfaces for general industry, to be coordinated with those on ladders and scaffolds, and floor and wall openings for construction; marine terminals; confined spaces; tunnelling; lockout and tagout of powered machinery, and scientific/technical diving.
An advance notice of rulemaking, the first step for promulgating an OSHA standard, was expected early in FY 1980 for handling hazardous materials, but a proposed rule on this was not expected for more than a year.
As the fiscal year ended, court decisions which will have important bearing on OSHA's enforcement and compliance activities were awaited.
The U.S. Supreme Court is considering an appeal by OSHA of a lower court decision which vacated the agency's benzene standard, and will hear arguments on the right of workers to refuse hazardous work.
This latter case involved two lower court decisions, one by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit (Marshall v. Whirlpool Corporation) upholding that right, and the other by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit (Marshall v. Daniels Construction Company), which ruled that employees did not have the right to refuse to do a job regardless of any safety or health hazards.
Whirlpool has appealed the Sixth Circuit decision while OSHA is seeking clarification, since the Supreme Court earlier had refused a hearing of the agency's appeal on the Fifth Circuit case.
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit upheld OSHA's coke oven emissions standard, but word was awaited on whether the Supreme Court would accept a writ of certiorari from the petitioners.
Other litigation involved challenges to OSHA's cotton dust and lead standards in the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit; the cotton ginning standard before the Fifth Circuit, and the arsenic standard before the Ninth Circuit.
Before FY 1980 was less than a month old, the D.C. Circuit upheld the validity of the cotton dust standard.)
Following the Supreme Court's decision in the Barlow case during the previous fiscal year ruling that warrant requirements applied to OSHA inspections, OSHA issued guidelines to all its field offices on dealing with refusals of entry by employers.
During the year when 165,446 federal OSHA and state inspections were conducted 1,671 refusals of entry resulted.
This was slightly more than one per cent, confirming the Court's and OSHA's view that most businesses would agree to inspection without a warrant.
OSHA continued to act resolutely in dealing with serious violations.
Berwick Forge of Berwick, Pa., was cited for 33 alleged willful and 166 serious violations of the agency's safety and health regulations with proposed penalties totalling $340,200, the largest such penalty ever proposed by OSHA against a company.
Under the OSHAct, the agency may recommend cases for criminal prosecution if an employer willfully.
To date about 20 cases have been referred to the Justice Department for possible criminal prosecution— most of the them during this year.
In fiscal year 1979, federal OSHA inspected 57,937 workplaces for compliance with job safety and health standards.
Of these, 41.0 percent were general schedule (programmed inspections), 34.8 percent were in response to workers complaints, 4.0 percent were accident investigations, and 20.2 percent were follow-up inspections to see if previously cited serious violations had been corrected.
As a result of these inspections, a total of 128,544 violations of job safety and health standards were alleged.
Of these, 42,673 were for serious, willful or repeat violations with resulting proposed penalties totaling $21,143,449; there were a total of 85,871 alleged violations of all other types, with proposed penalties totaling $243,702.
Figures for FY 1978 and FY 1979 revealed that a large portion (37 and 32 percent of the totals) of OSHA's citations were for alleged serious, willful, and repeat violations whereas only 14 percent fell into these categories in FY 1977.
In FY 1979, the agency also instituted new procedures for screening and evaluating worker safety and health complaints, which enable OSHA's field personnel to concentrate their attention on the most acute workplace hazards.
Though all worker complaints will receive proper attention, the new procedures will eliminate those less serious and reduce the backlog of such cases.
During the year, the Office of Field Coordination and Experimental Programs issued a new industrial hygiene field operations manual updating instructions for the handling of health inspections and giving the latest interpretations of policies and standards.
The manual, which became effective June 4, was the result of a two-year review by OSHA area, regional and national office personnel who worked closely with NIOSH officials.
Extensive and intensive training sessions on the manual were held for OSHA's compliance safety and health officers (CSHO's).
The new manual also is to become part of the agency's subscription service to enable subscribers to keep up with any additional changes as they occur.
Fiscal considerations limited the on-board strength of CSHO's during the year even after the Presidential hiring freeze was lifted in January.
Thereafter, intensive recruiting efforts were resumed.
The fiscal year ended with a net increase of 21 CSHO's over the 1,560 on board at the start of the year.
However, as the year ended, the aency had 100 additional commitments for hiring in hand.
The Directorate of Technical Support provides scientific and engineering support for OSHA's standard-setting and compliance operations.
Initiated a joint cooperative effort with NIOSH and industry to study the health hazards associated with the petrochemical industry, and studied low-level radiation at an abandoned radium processing facility with NIOSH and the Department of Energy.
Issued a health hazard alert on previously unidentified occupational hazards of the chemical NIAX Catalyst ESN.
The latter has caused cancer in test animals.
Hired a senior level economist for its office of regulatory analysis.
In addition to regular economic and environmental studies, the office provides information and analyses on issues surrounding major standards such as those for cotton dust, benzene, and carcinogens.
Implemented a priority system to improve the efficiency of samples taken in the workplace by CSHO's and the analyses of those samples.
Increased access to technical data bases in its Technical Data Center, and offered direct field access to data bases in three regions.
A pilot project demonstrated the reducing of a large volume of legal records on standard development to microfiche, while an experimental program was developed for computerization of case file data on noise control.
The medical support unit established an occupational medicine residency program.
Staff in the medical unit was increased for support of OSHA's compliance and standards activities.
The agency stepped up its '"New Directions"'grants program to increase the educational competence in job safety and health matters among employee, business, educational, and non-profit organizations.
The agency awarded $6.4 million in grants in FY 1979 and announced that this would be increased to $13.3 million during FY 1980.
Of this latter amount, $2.3 million were new grants while $1l million were for strengthening programs awarded grants the previous year.
The grants for the next fiscal year make up about 6 percent of OSHA's budget whereas in 1976, only 0.7 percent of the agency's budget was for educational training.
During the last month of the fiscal year, OSHA held a national media seminar in Chicago to focus media attention on dangers in the workplace and the technology available to prevent occupational illnesses.
About 400 people, including 100 from daily newspapers, labor and industrial publications, and others attended the two-day session on the various issues raised by the question: '"Lost in the Workplace: Is There an Occupational Disease Epidemic?"
Guaranteeing and protecting worker rights was the basic theme in much of the agency's activities, particularly in health standards development for worker access to toxic exposure and medical records; labelling, and medical removal protection in the lead and cotton dust standards.
Worker rights obviously was the central issue in much of the litigation involving the agency such as the Whirlpool and Daniel cases.
The U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia upheld the right of workers to '"walkaround'pay while accompanying OSHA officials on an inspection.
In addition, agency steps to promote and enhance worker rights included publishing a series of booklets, pamphlets and posters on worker rights and on Section 11(c) of the Act which prohibits discrimination against a worker for exercising his or her rights under the Act.
In FY 1979, some 2,951 discrimination complaints were filed, about the same level as the 3,000 filed the previous year but roughly four times the 750 such complaints filed in 1975.
During the year the largest back pay awards (about $12,500 and $18,500 respectively including benefits and interest) were made to two D.C. workers in a court-ordered settlement of a Section 11(c) discrimination complaint.
An OSHA-funded on-site consultation service was available to employers in every state who want help in recognizing and correcting safety and health hazards.
The service is primarily targeted for smaller businesses and is completely separate from OSHA inspection efforts.
In the OSHA '"New Directions"'grant programs, the ability to serve small business remains a primary criterion for evaluating applications for the grants.
Much of the streamlining and rationalization of existing safety standards and recordkeeping requirements also are being carried out with the needs of small business very much in mind.
To establish still closer liaison with small business, the agency hired a special assistant for small business affairs.
The main job of the special assistant is to be the principal spokesperson for OSHA's efforts and policies as they affect small business while also being, in turn, the main conduit for the flow of ideas from the small business world into the agency.
OSHA participated in numerous cooperative and joint actions with other government agencies.
OSHA and NIOSH, the two federal agencies most concerned with assuring safe and healthful American workplaces, signed an agreement April 17 which detailed moves for working closer together in their respective research and regulatory functions.
Their coordinated and cooperative action cover priority setting, scheduling, contact representatives, technical assistance and support, information exchange, and policy discussions.
OSHA, along with the Employment Standards Administration and the Mine Safety and Health Administration, also participated in an intradepartmental body, the NIOSH Planning Group, which coordinates and sets priorities for research needs of the department to assist NIOSH in its planning.
OSHA, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Food and Drug Administration, the Consumer Product Safety Commission, and the Food Safety and Quality Service make up the Interagency Regulatory Liaison Group (IRLG), which was formed in 1977 to eliminate waste and duplication through cooperative efforts.
During the year, the IRLG completed a study on the "Scientific Basis for the Identification of Potential Carcinogens;" drafted guidelines for health testing; identified and set up special task groups for 27 toxic substances of concern to two or more agencies of the group; developed a referral program under which inspectors from one agency notify those of another when they find possible violations of the other agency's standards; drafted guidelines for epidemiological studies; and published booklets and other material on the IRLG itself.
In another example of interagency cooperation, OSHA participated in the National Toxicology Program, established in November, 1978, to coordinate research and testing of hazardous substances.
The NTP was established by agencies within HEW, but its executive committee includes the heads of OSHA, the EPA and CPSC, among others.
An agreement with MSHA clarifying areas of jurisdiction as well as detailing coordinated activities such as joint rulemaking, training, shared facilities and technical assistance.
A memorandum of understanding with the U.S. Army giving OSHA inspectors access to all of the Army's conventional ammunition plants run by private contractors.
Near completion of a system to establish state occupational safety and health staffing levels (so-called"benchmarks"') in response to a court order that all states with state plans have "fully effective"programs.
Development of a new executive order for job safety and health rules governing federal workers.
As the year ended, 24 states had their own job safety and health plans including Connecticut, whose plan covered only public sector employees.
Fiscal year 1979 was a time in which the Administration's overhauling and modernizing of the employment standards programs began to show improvement in management and procedure and reached new levels of program achievement.
New records were attained in ESA's Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP), Office of Workers' Compensation Programs (OWCP), and Wage and Hour Division.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) began the 1979 fiscal year with a complete reorganization, effective on October 8, 1978.OFCCP's staff of about 200 grew to over 1,300 employees in a nationwide network of 81 offices in 63 cities, when it absorbed the compliance responsibilities formerly scattered among 11 other federal agencies.
During the fiscal year, OFCCP embarked on an ambitious effort to bring its newly centralized enforcement of equal employment opportunity on federal contract work in line with more sophisticated and pressing workforce needs.
Reforms were initiated in virtually every area of the program's operations, enforcement and policy activities.
Confusion and inconsistency often faced in the past by both federal contractors and their employees were largely eliminated.
One of OFCCP's most important achievements through reorganization was the merging of enforcement activities affecting all of the program's covered employee groups— women, minorities, religious and ethnic groups, handicapped persons and veterans.
OFCCP compliance reviews now monitor all aspects of federal contractors' EEO and affirmative action obligations for these groups.
In FY 1979, OFCCP conducted more than 2,400 compliance reviews, with 5,400 predicted for FY 1980.
In addition, OFCCP closed over 1,550 investigations of complaints received from individuals.
Since consolidation, the program has strengthened its enforcement posture, becoming an effective EEO program.
During the past fiscal year, OFCCP conciliated disputes with over 175 employers and obtained almost $9.3 million in financial commitments to EEO and affirmative action.
Of this total, over $3.7 million was back pay awards for some 2,100 employees of federal contractors—including $3.4 million for women and minorities under Executive Order 11246 and $317,000 for handicapped persons and veterans under Section 503 of the 1973 Rehabilitation Act and Section 402 of the 1974 Vietnam Era Veterans’Readjustment Assistance Act.
In other areas of enforcement, OFCCP filed charges of EEO violations, in the form of administrative complaints, against 19 companies, including 16 which failed to comply with their obligations to hire and promote handicapped persons and veterans.
Four companies were also declared ineligible to do federal contract work.
One of these was the first to lose government business because of bias against a qualified handicapped worker.
Another was the largest—in terms of contract dollars—to lose its eligibility.
This latter contractor—Uniroyal—was debarred in June from more than $36 million in government business for refusing to cooperate with investigations of alleged race and sex bias at one of its facilities.
Later the company was reinstated after agreeing to a multi-million dollar settlement.
To reflect OFCCP's enlarged enforcement scope and responsibility, its entire regulatory framework was revamped in FY 1979 integrating all OFCCP programs.
In addition, OFCCP initiated a complete overhaul of its entire regulatory framework.
Among the first results of this long range project were new regulatory proposals designed to address certain "gray'areas of program operations.
In some cases the regulatory changes were proposed to codify existing policy.
In others the intent was to clear up confusion or misperception about program procedures.
In September 1979, OFCCP proposed a regulation outlining goals for minority workers in the construction industry.
For the first time, these requirements would apply to every federal construction contractor, no matter where located.
The actual goals, based on the ratio of minority population to total population, were computed for 285 metropolitan areas and 183 outlying areas which together comprise the entire United States.
Standards for similarly placing women into the construction industry were issued in final form in April 1978.
Other standards proposed during the year clarified conciliation agreements between employers and OFCCP, set up new expedited hearing procedures for firms facing program sanctions and suggested a short summary of affirmative action results to be completed annually by contractors.
In addition, OFCCP issued an all-new contract compliance manual in FY 1979—the most comprehensive and up-to-date guidebook yet developed for field compliance work.
The 470-page document was also offered for sale to the public through the U.S. Government Printing Office to encourage voluntary compliance by contractors and to provide information to other interested parties.
In the vear following consolidation, OFCCP expanded its efforts in uncovering instances of systemic discrimination in the workplace and developing broad remedies for those affected employee groups.
By the end of FY 1979, OFCCP field offices had conducted about 140 compliance reviews of contractors where affected classes of employees—those groups continuing to suffer the present effects of past discrimination—were identified.
OFCCP also settled a variety of these systemic problems—with major contractors such as Uniroyal, Chase Manhattan Bank, Consolidation Coal Co. and a large drug firm, Hoffmann-LaRoche.
All provided back pay relief to employees adversely affected.
Nevertheless, litigation continues in this complex area with a number of other firms, including Kerr Glass Manufacturing Co., of Indiana; Honeywell, Inc., of Minnesota; and Harris Bank and Trust Co., of Chicago.
Computerization also aided OFCCP's enforcement efforts in FY 1979.
New data systems, now under development, are compiling more complete information on the program's 250,000 federal contractors and subcontractors, and their combined employee workforce of close to 36 million persons.
With this background, OFCCP can profile an employer's EEO progress more completely and predict more accurately those facilities in need of review.
In FY 1979, OFCCP completely automated its huge correspondence operation, as well as its file of EEO complaints received from individuals across the country.
Also in progress at the close of FY 1979 was a new system for uniform checks of contract compliance in the $50 billion federal construction industry—long a difficult one to monitor because of its transient workforce.
In addition, OFCCP maintained its enforcement focus on several other key industries—including banking, insurance and energy—where future employment opportunities were expected and major EEO problems were found to exist.
Although OFCCP conducted an increased number of compliance reviews in these industries, it also worked closely with them to develop broad affirmative action formats.
Similar attempts were made with large, multi-facility corporations in the U.S.
The growing and changing responsibility of OFCCP after reorganization made training an important priority in FY 1979.
As the year progressed, the compliance staff began developing more complex and specific skills to deal with complicated and subtle issues of EEO.
Courses in handicapped and veterans EEO enforcement, Freedom of Information Act requests, advanced investigative skills, statistical analysis and cultural awareness training were developed.
OFCCP's training effort has enabled its entire staff—both in the field and the national office—to gain expertise in all facets of federal contract EEO and improve the professional quality of OFCCP relations with contractors and covered groups.
The program also shared its expertise with constituent groups, participating in a number of seminars and training conferences.
More of these educational efforts are planned for FY 1980.
Stringent quality control measures were also established by OFCCP in FY 1979, incuding uniform guidelines for employer compliance reviews and visits to field offices by headquarters staff.
In addition to this internal improvement, OFCCP upgraded its working relationship with other EEO agencies on the federal, state and local levels.
In particular, the program joined with the Labor Department's Employment and Training Administration (ETA) to link over 65 contractors' employment needs with federallyfunded training resources, many sponsored under the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA).
Such efforts provided job opportunities to women, minorities, handicapped persons and veterans in such industries as electronics, banking and maritime.
OFCCP's overall effort to reshape federal contractor EEO practices was further bolstered in 1979 by the Supreme Court's landmark decision in Weber v. Kaiser Aluminum.
In that important"reverse discrimination"' case, the Court upheld the concept of voluntary affirmative action where there is evidence of job bias in employment.
Persons covered by laws administered by the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs (OWCP) experienced dramatically improved delivery of services during FY '79. The major emphasis in the Federal Employees'Compensation Act (FECA) program was on improving the quality and timeliness of services to clients.
In terms of production, the speed of processing traumatic as well as non-traumatic injury claims was greatly improved.
Traumatic injury claims were processed 26 percent faster than they were in fiscal year 1978; nontraumatic injury claims were processed eight percent faster.
Comparable improvements occurred in other production categories such as the making of compensation payments and the making of medical payments during the period.
Other program accomplishments included: reducing the time needed for rehabilitation referrals; strengthening technical assistance to employing agency supervisors and compensation clerks throughout the federal government on their responsibilities under FECA; initiating research projects to develop standards and criteria for complex employment-related diseases, and providing comprehensive training to both new and senior claims examiners.
By the year's end, approximately 70 percent of the longterm status cases on the periodic roll had been reviewed nationwide.
This represents an increase of 13 percent over fiscal 1978, when 57 percent of the periodic roll was reviewed, and an actual improvement of 23 percent over the past fiscal year.
On-site field accountability reviews and an automated claims support system were two means of establishing FECA program accountability.
A joint rehabilitation pilot project with the U.S. Postal Service evaluated all former Postal Service employees receiving disability compensation benefits.
The project was designed to return as many of these employees as possible to suitable employment through a variety of rehabilitation services.
Based on the results of the pilot program, OWCP and the Postal Service began to design a national rehabilitation program to expand efforts to reemploy injured workers.
Administrative improvement and better service to claimants continued to be top priorities under the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers'Compensation Act program.
A comprehensive supervisory claims examiner training course was completed by all district office program heads.
Quality control standards and performance goals were established to promote efficiency in case processing and to expedite service to claimants.
In addition, on-site reviews and a comprehensive field reporting system have been established to obtain accountability for performance.
The entire longshore procedure manual was revised and distributed to all district offices.
The major objectives of the Division of Coal Mine Workers' Compensation during the year were expeditious processing of claims, institution of quality control standards, and the establishment of performance goals.
More efficient internal procedures were introduced to expedite claims handling and processing; a network of field offices was established; additional staff were hired to provide better service to claimants; and procedure manuals and forms were revised consistent with the new Black Lung Benefits Reform Act signed by the President in March 1978.
The administrative and legislative changes brought positive results.
Black lung benefits of $583.1 million authorized by the Department of Labor in fiscal year 1979 amounted to over seven times the total paid out in the previous 5 years-$78.8 million.
During the year from August 1978, when regulations implementing the new law became effective, through September 1979, the department processed 148,000 of the 337,000 claims filed following its enactment.
Decisions were made on 64,147 claims for monthly benefits, and 31,423 or 49 percent of them were approved for payment.
Another 23,500 claims approved by the Social Security Administration were put into payment status; and medical treatment benefits were awarded to 60,440 claimants.
By the end of the fiscal year, the department was making decisions on claims at the rate of almost 11,000 a month—up from just over 800 a year before.
Of the $583.1 million in benefits authorized during fiscal 1979, $9.9 million was for medical examination and treatment for miners with black lung disease.
As a result of the new legislation effective in 1978, all costs of the Labor Department's black lung program are borne by the coal industry.
A companion measure to the Black Lung Benefits Reform Act—the Black Lung Benefits Revenue Act—was enacted to set up a trust fund financed by a tax on all coal mined.
The proceeds of this trust fund are used to pay benefits in cases where the miner's coal mine employment terminated prior to Jan. 1, 1970, and in cases involving employment since that date where a responsible coal mine operator can be identified.
Where responsible mine operators are identified, they bear the cost of payments.
During fiscal year 1979 the Social Security Administration paid out $986,500,000 in federal funds to miners and survivors on claims filed with SSA before the Labor Department became responsible for the black lung program.
No payments for medical treatment were provided for miners under the SSA program, and the 1977 reform act made miners receiving their black lung benefits under the SSA program eligible to receive medical treatment payments through the Labor Department program.
Thirty-two field stations were established during the year to serve as extensions to ESA's black lung district offices, to provide direct assistance to individuals filing claims, and to furnish other information about the black lung program.
During fiscal year 1979, the Division of State Workers' Compensation Standards expanded its program of technical and other assistance to the states.
A series of conferences on workers compensation was developed and coordinated by Legis 50, the Center for Legislative Improvement.
Two such conferences were held to bring together on a regional basis state legislators, administrators and others interested in workers' compensation.
The conferences were designed to facilitate exchange of information and ideas about workers' compensation issues and to increase the interest of legislators and others in addressing problems within their jurisdictions.
The Division initiated a program to provide, at a state's request, on-site technical assistance on statistics and information systems design for states working to establish or improve statistical, management and operations information concerning their workers' compensation programs.
A similar program is conducted to assist state worker's compensation agencies with regard to their rehabilitation programs.
Several of these technical assistance trips were made to different states during the year.
Technical reports on a variety of subjects were prepared at the request of other federal agencies and Congressional staffs.
In addition, annual and special material was prepared for inclusion in the Monthly Labor Review publication; for issuance by the International Association of Industrial Accident Boards and Commissions; and for general distribution.
The Division began a review of the states' implementation of the 84 recommendations of the 1972 National Commission on State Workmen's Compensation Laws.
State adoption of the 19"essential recommendations'of this body is tracked by the Division.
The purpose of the review of these criteria for improving state programs is to broaden the goal of reform to include areas which have been shown to be critical since 1972 (such as administration, rehabilitation, and safety and health) which were a part of the 84 but not of the essential 19.
Act.
They disclosed that 426,000 workers had been employed in violation of the minimum wage provisions, involving $54 million in underpayments.
Violations of the overtime requirements of the act were disclosed involving almost $70 million found owed to 287,000 workers.
Employers agreed to pay over $28 million to 30,800 workers for minimum wage violations and over $45 million to 233,000 workers for overtime violations.
The major reason for the difference between the total money found due to employees and the amount employers agreed to restore was employers' failure to pay back wages in cases considered unsuitable for litigation by the department.
In these cases, complainants were advised of their rights under the FLSA to bring a private suit to collect the back wages due, plus an actual amount in liquidated damages, as well as attorneys' fees and court costs.
Wages recovered in private employee suits are not reflected in the Wage and Hour Division statistics.
In June 1978, the Wage and Hour Division initiated a program of investigations targeted at industries and localities thought to have high concentrations of undocumented workers.
The purpose of the program is to remove the economic incentive for employers to hire such workers, through the enforcement of the minimum wage and overtime provisions of the FLSA and similar laws.
During fiscal year 1979, 13,677 investigations were conducted under this special program.
Back wages of over $24 million were found due to 165,000 workers, and employers agreed to restore almost $13 million to 112,000 employees.
The 1977 amendments to the FLSA established a Minimum Wage Study Commission and, among other things, directed the commission to determine the overall level of noncompliance with the act.
At the request cf the Minimum Wage Study Commission, the Wage and Hour Division is undertaking a noncompliance survey to determine the level of non-compliance with the Fair Labor Standards Act.
Data collected from 16,000 investigations will be studied and analyzed by the commission and will also be used by the Wage and Hour Division for allocating resources.
Special Minimum Wages: The FLSA allows for the payment of lower minimum wages to certain workers so long as employers meet Labor Department criteria and obtain special certificates from the department.
The intent is to promote employment opportunities for handicapped workers, students and learners, among others.
During fiscal year 1979, approximately 700,000 workers were employed at the special lower minimums, about the same number as in the previous fiscal year.
Full-time students employed in retail or service establishments, agriculture and institutions of higher education, and handicapped persons employed in sheltered workshops continued to comprise about 98 percent of the workers employed at lower minimum wages.
Hearings were held on a petition filed by the National Federation of the Blind which seeks an end to the payment of subminimum wages for blind workers both in competitive industry or in sheltered workshops.
A final decision on the petition is pending.
Child Labor: During fiscal year 1979 the Wage and Hour Division found nearly 13,000 minors employed in violation of Fair Labor Standards Act provisions.
The number found working in nonagricultural occupations that had been declared hazardous by the Secretary of Labor increased from 3,674 in fiscal 1978 to 4,123 in fiscal 1979.
Amended regulations relating to pesticide standards for 10 and 11-year-old hand harvesters of short season crops were published under 29 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 575.5 (d)(1) to implement the 1977 amendment concerning the granting of waivers from the child labor provisions for the employment of these minors.
During the 1979 harvesting season, 109 applications were received from employers in Washington and Oregon; waivers were granted to 25 employers who met all the statutory requirements of the act and the regulations.
Continuing action in the courts will influence further setting of pesticide standards for the 1980 harvesting season.
In the meantime, the department is looking into the effects of the level and type of pesticides and other chemicals used on the health and well being of young hand harvesters.
Environmental Protection Agency, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and the Department of Agriculture and Health, Education and Welfare.
The panel will provide advice and assistance on the complex pesticide issue.
Also, an interagency agreement between DOL and EPA is being developed to pave the way for an effective pesticide protection program for young farmworkers.
Under the child labor civil money penalty provisions of the act, employers who violate the child labor provision may be fined up to $1,000 for each violation.
During fiscal year 1979 about $1.9 million was assessed under this provision for illegal employment of minors, the same amount as last year.
However, the number of employers who were assessed increased from 966 to 1,144,and the number of minors affected increased from 8,618 to 9,781.
In the case of Jerrico, Inc. v. U.S. Department of Labor et al, the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia held that the application of civil money penalties collected toward reimbursement of the costs of determining the violations and assessing and collecting such penalties was unconstitutional.
The department was enjoined from assessing and collecting such penalties against Jerrico, Inc.
The matter is on appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court.
The department is continuing to assess and collect civil money penalties pursuant to Section 16 (e) of child labor laws pending the Supreme Court's final determination of the constitutional issue.
The Work Experience and Career Exploration Program (WECEP) continued to aid 14 and 15-year-old minors in 20 states in their transition from school to work during fiscal year 1979.
Government Contract Labor Standards Laws: Back wages found due workers in fiscal year 1979 under government contract labor standards laws totaled a new all-time high of $11.3 million, exceeding the 1978 findings of $8.1 million by 39 percent.
The David-Bacon and related acts, the Service Contract Act, the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act, and the Walsh-Healey Public Contract Act all provide worker protection standards for employees on government contract work.
In addition to the 1979 record for back wages, corresponding increases were also recorded in the number of workers underpaid (approximately 30,000) and back wages which employers agreed to restore ($7.71 million).
Additional monies will be restored upon completion of administrative hearing or litigation actions.
These significant improvements reflect added emphasis by the department on the enforcement of the government contract labor standards laws.
A by-product of this increased enforcement activity has been the heightened public awareness of the rights of workers and the responsibilities of employers, which in turn has resulted in an increase in the number of complaints of violations of these statutes.
In addition, major revisions and updating of both the Davis-Bacon Act and Service Contract Act regulations (29 CFR Parts 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6) have been initiated.
Publication of the proposed regulations is scheduled for early in fiscal year 1980.
During the 1979 fiscal year, 14,534 prevailing wage and fringe benefits determinations were issued pursuant to the Davis-Bacon and related acts.
The law requires payment of prevailing wages and fringe benefits to employees of contractors and subcontractors engaged in federally financed or assisted construction projects.
Of the total determinations made by the Wage and Hour Division, 13,145 were project determinations and 1,389 were general determinations.
This compared with 16,116 project determinations and 1,406 general determinations in the previous year.
During fiscal year 1979 the number of counties covered by general decisions increased by 248.
This accounts in part for the decreased number of project decisions issued.
General determinations are published in the Federal Register for use by any contracting or assisting agency on an appropriate project.
In areas not covered by general determinations, project determinations are issued to the contracting agency upon request.
Under the Service Contract Act, prevailing wage and fringe benefits determinations were requested by federal agencies for 39,923 contracts, a five percent increase over the number requested the previous year.
Determinations setting wage and fringe benefit standards for a wide variety of job classifications were applied to 30,309 contracts or about 76 percent of all Federal service contracts awarded during the fiscal year.
Farm Labor Contractor Registration: (Public Law 93- 518, as amended, requires the Secretary of Labor to report on provisions of this act in the Annual Report of the Secretary).
The Wage and Hour Division contirued to place special emphasis on the identification and investigation of the most flagrant offenders of the Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act (FLCRA).
In line with this priority, required training sessions in FLCRA enforcement were conducted for over 1000 Wage and Hour compliance officers, with particular emphasis on housing, safety and health.
Migrants' housing received particular attention during the year, and inspection of housing for compliance with safety and health standards was a major priority.
So, too, was the provision of the act prohibiting the use of undocumented workers.
FLCRA is the only federal law prohibiting an employer (the farm labor contractor) from knowingly using undocumented or unauthorized alien workers.
The public central registry—containing the names and addresses of all registered farm labor contractors and farm labor contractor employees who act as agents of contractors—was published monthly by the Wage and Hour Division.
The division maintained a mailing list of subscribers, and registry information was also available through the Federal-State Employment Service.
Registration activity continued to show increases over the preceding year.
During the first nine months of calendar year 1979, 8,739 contractors were registered; members of their crews totaled 519,521.
The figures for all of calendar 1978 were 8,040 and 490,780.
In the first nine months of calendar year 1979, 98 certificate denials and revocations became final orders, up from 72 for all of 1978.
Five major cases were decided in the department's favor in the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals.
They involved Coastal Growers, Matilija Growers, S & F Growers and S.P. Growers (consolidated for purposes of appeal), and Point Sol Growers.
All five cases centered around the obligations under FLCRA of a growers' association which furnishes workers to its member growers, receiving from these growers an amount equal to its expenses.
The court ruled that reimbursement of expenses constitutes a fee under the act; that a "migrant worker," as defined by the act, need not be migratory; that growers' associations are not exempt under Section 3(b)(1) of the law; and that workers furnished to the associations' members are not supplied 'solely for (the association's) own operation.
The department's determination that the associations must register in accordance with FLCRA was thus upheld.
A total of 5,708 compliance actions were conducted in fiscal year 1979.
Of these, 608 arose from complaints.
Nearly 3.100 of the cases revealed violations.
Of the 145,070 crew members of investigated contractors, 2,243 were undocumented alien workers.
Most of the users'violations involved employing unregistered farm labor contractors or infraction of the recordkeeping requirements, while those of farm labor contractors and their employees were more diverse.
They involved such activities as failure to register; failure to post the terms and conditions of employment; failure to disclose to workers at the time of their recruitment the area of employment, the crops and operations on which they would be employed, wage rates, period of employment, information on transportation, housing and insurance (which the farm labor contractor is required to provide), and disclosure of any charges to be made by the contractor; employing undocumented aliens; and failure to provide proper vehicle insurance or providing unauthorized transportation.
Civil money penalties of over $1.3 were assessed against almost 800 individuals for violations of the act.
In other developments the division issued 10 new opinion letters interpreting various provisions of the act.
Discussions were also begun with the Commonwealth of Virginia, leading to that state joining with New Jersey and Florida in issuing certificates of registration and identification cards to contractors and employees based or operating therein.
The Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) consolidated new responsibilities mandated by the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977, which became effective March 1978.
Most regulations required by the Act have been issued or proposed, innovative training programs have been set in motion, and MSHA's penalty assessments program has been fully implemented.
Enforcement activities have been strengthened, and include a new "resident inspector' program, a special Program in Accident Reduction (PAR) and a vastly increased inspection program in metal and nonmetal mines.
New technological advances in mine safety and health were made, and MSHA broadened its work with labor, industry and the academic community to make the mining environment a safe and healthful place.
Coal Mine Safety and Health representatives, operating from 10 district offices, 14 subdistrict offices, and numerous field offices located throughout the major coal-producing States, conducted 71,880 inspections and investigations at 2,143 underground mines and 3,550 surface mines during FY 79.
These included 6,652 spot inspections at particularly hazardous underground mines.
The coal mine safety and health workforce numbered 1,830 at the end of FY 1979, of whom 1,420 were Authorized Representatives of the Secretary, including inspectors, district and subdistrict managers, engineers and specialists.
Another 40 were in training to become Authorized Representatives, and the remainder were support personnel.
MSHA inspectors issued 140,760 citations to coal mine operators during the fiscal year for violations encompassing virtually the entire range of safety and health conditions and practices.
Federal inspectors also issued 4,700 orders of withdrawal from coal mines or mine sections after finding imminent danger.
Orders of withdrawal were also issued for other reasons.)
Coal Mine Safety and Health has established several programs directing resources toward critical areas to improve miners' protection.
Technical and enforcement personnel evaluate mine operators' plans for roof control, ventilation, respirable dust, fire control, hearing conservation, and shaft sinking.
Impact''inspections by teams of inspectors provide a better total picture of safety and health conditions at a mine.
Resident inspectors are assigned to large, complex mines and very gassy mines with high injury incidence rates and low mine profile ratings.
Technical studies have shown the effectiveness of cabs and canopies on mobile equipment, of mounting sprays on auger miners, and of plugging abandoned oil and gas wells.
Coal mine operators have filed 150 petitions for modifications of safety standards with MSHA since Oct. 1, 1978.
Of these, 47 have been granted, denied or dismissed.
In addition, during the fiscal year MSHA eliminated a backlog of over 300 petitions transferred to MSHA from the Interior Department's Office of Hearings and Appeals as a result of the 1977 Act.
Coal Mine Safety and Health received 576 complaints of employers'discrimination against miners for exercising their rights under the 1977 Act.
Of 163 cases now active, MSHA determined that in 61 cases there were violations of the Act's discrimination provisions.
The Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission, before which MSHA files such cases, rendered 6 decisions in favor of miners.
In the first 11 months of the fiscal year, Coal Mine Safety and Health opened 138 other special investigations of civil or criminal violations of the Act, denial of entry, threats to inspectors, working in the face of closure orders, false reporting, miner transfers under section 203(b), and equipment misrepresentation.
During this period 88 civil or criminal cases were opened and nine cases were referred to the Department of Justice.
To help ensure equitable enforcement of safety and health regulations throughout the coal mining industry, Coal Mine Safety and Health began reviewing"unassessable''citations and orders, and informing field managers of enforcement issues that need to be brought to the attention of inspectors.
Metal and Nonmetal Mine Safety and Health, through its 6 district offices, 12 subdistrict offices and 71 field offices, conducted 18,200 regular inspections at roughly 850 underground metal, nonmetal and stone mines and about 14,000 surface mines, stone quarries, and sand and gravel pits.
During these inspections, 44,000 citations and orders were issued for violations of standards and for imminent danger conditions.
In addition to the regular inspections, metal and nonmetal inspectors also conducted 10,300 spot or compliance followup inspections during the year to check the abatement of hazards on which citations or orders were issued.
Two new activities related to noncoal mines, as a result of the 1977 Act, involved discrimination complaints filed by the miners and possible knowing and willful violation of standards by the operators.
During FY 79, 166 special investigations were initiated as a result of complaints of discrimination and 106 specialinvestigations were initiated on possible knowing or willful violation of standards.
As in past years, significant efforts were also devoted to accident investigations as well as the investigation of petitions for modification of safety standards submitted by individual mine operators.
The Program in Accident Reduction (PAR) continued in FY 1979 and was directed to about 60 mines.
The program is based on promoting good safety practices with emphasis on job safety analysis, accident prevention training, and safety awareness on the part of both management and labor.
Special health projects conducted in cooperation with the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) also continued.
Projects completed or in progress during the year include studies on exposure to diesel emissions and silica in underground mines, exposure to talc minerals, exposure to fibrous minerals, and the nature and extent of pulmonary diseases among cement workers.
A new memorandum of understanding with OSHA was signed, clarifying the areas of responsibility of the two agencies.
The more than 300 metal and nonmetal mine inspectors recruited in FY 78 completed the 12 week entry-level training at the National Mine Health and Safety Academy in Beckley, W.Va.
The number of qualified metal and nonmetal mine inspectors thus increased from a little over 300 at the beginning of FY 79 to nearly 600 at the end of the year.
The Office of Standards, Regulations and Variances, which coordinates MSHA's rulemaking process, completed standards and regulations mandated by the Act, and continued those rulemaking projects begun before the Act was passed.
Among the significant regulations promulgated in FY 1979 were those requiring each mine operator to have a health and safety training program for miners.
These regulations, mandated by the Act and published on October 13, 1978, specify the kinds of training required and the procedures for obtaining approval of training programs.
Regulations providing that mine rescue teams be available to each underground coal or noncoal mine for rescue and recovery work in the event of emergency are also required by the Act.
MSHAproposed rules governing mine rescue teams on January 5, 1979, conducted a series of public hearings in June and July and anticipates publication of the final rule early in FY 1980.
Another extremely important set of final regulations published in accordance with the Act converts the metal/nonmetal standards from advisory to mandatory status.
The original 229 advisory standards covered a wide range of health and safety issues in metal and nonmetal mining, many of which were both longstanding and difficult to resolve.
With assistance from an advisory committee and from virtually all segments of the mining community, MSHA made numerous changes in the advisory standards which eliminated overlap and unnecessary recordkeeping, updated outmoded standards, and clarified language.
The final 140 mandatory standards, published in August 1979, provide significant improvement in the safety protection afforded the nation's metal and nonmetal miners.
As required by the Act, MSHA prepared draft regulations pertaining to surface construction work on mine property.
Because the hazards faced by surface construction workers are similar, whether the work is performed on or off a mine site, and in order to minimize industry disruption, MSHA proposed to effectively adopt the construction standards promulgated by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA).
This will provide the additional benefit of having a single set of surface construction standards within the Department.
MSHA also published the following standards and regulations during FY 1979: proposed criteria by which MSHA would identify certain independent contractors under the Act; procedures and requirements for applying for, receiving, and administering state grants under the Act; recordkeeping and reporting requirements for radiation exposure in metal and nonmetal mines; prohibition of the kelly bar method of loading explosives in metal and nonmetal mines; and a revision of rules for self-rescue devices in underground coal mines which require self-rescuers to generate their own independent oxygen supplies.
The new devices will afford miners a much greater degree of protection than those previously required.
MSHA training centers conducted over 700 informational meetings to assist in the preparation of training plans required by the Act and provided clarification of the new regulations.
More than 20,000 training plans have been reviewed and approved.
To provide cooperative instructors for the industry, Education and Training provided a three-day instructor training course.
Over 5,000 people were trained in these classes.
Over 13,000 instructors were approved based on their past training and experience.
In FY 79 MSHA increased its funding to the State Grants program from $4,000,000 to $6,000,000.
The program works through State agencies and State and community colleges to train instructors, assist operators with training plans, and assist small operators in the actual instruction of courses required by the regulations.
During the year, 75,000 students were trained through the State Grants program.
MSHA films were shown to 24,000 audiences with an attendance of 600,000.
Over 3,300 copies of MSHA film prints were sold to the mining community.
Education and Training held 17 mine rescue contests in various parts of the country for coal, metal and nonmetal mines.
Interior to Labor.
The Academy, located on 70 acres in Beckley, W.Va.
In FY 79, Technical Support completed 7,000 approval actions on equipment used in the mining industry, processed 590,000 respirable coal mine dust samples, and approved 25 Office of Surface Mining blasting plans.
Technical Support's Health and Safety Analysis Center (HSAC) collected accident, injury and occupational illness data to facilitate program analysis and to predict areas of increased occupational hazards.
A feasibility study and application development of machine-mounted respirable dust monitors were continued.
Commercially available devices from four manufacturers and an electronic package to warn mining machine operators of high concentrations of respirable dust are being evaluated in actual mining operation.
Over 83,000 samples of airborne contaminants were analyzed to determine compliance with health standards, approximately 1,900 instruments were calibrated, and over 280 in-mine investigations of safety and health hazards were completed.
Ventilation systems in nine mines were analyzed using investigative studies with laboratory and computer evaluation.
Technical Support recommended approval of 75 mine waste impoundment plans and 30 devices for use in lieu of canopies.
Technological advances were made in the development of automated temporary roof support systems, and in the nondestructive evaluation of wire rope used in haulage of workers and materials.
Progress was made in the use of satellite and aerial photography and in imagery analysis to detect geological features on the earths surface that could cause ground failures in the mine and could seriously impact on mine planning and development.
A statistical procedure to forecast an estimate of injuries and fatalities was developed and is being evaluated for validity.
Additional technical assistance was provided in training and in developing standards and regulations.
Research efforts with the Bureau of Mines and the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) have been unified and are more effective in providing new technology to the mining industry.
A special effort was made in FY 79 to reduce the time delay between occurence of violation and issuance of regular assessment.
Initial assessments under the formula system were made within 17 days of receipt of the violation in the Office of Assessments.
The special assessment unit was fully staffed and extensive on-the-job training was provided.
The unit emphasized thorough collection of facts for violations receiving special assessments and issuing penalties consistent with these facts.
The assessment conference program continued to resolve most assessments.
The conference provides an opportunity for the mine operator and the representative of miners to discuss violations and related initial penalties with assessment personnel.
In virtually all cases where a conference was requested, MSHA responded by holding a conference and entering its findings within 30 days.
Approximately 85 percent of all assessments were paid at the conference level, thus greatly reducing the number of assessments referred to the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission for formal hearing.
During the year, 180,200 violations were assessed a total of $28.7 million.
Conferences were held on over 24,000 cases, and collections amounted to $21 million.
Reduced paperwork, faster processing of regulations, and increased emphasis on enforcement highlighted administration of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, (ERISA) which continued to be a major priority of the Labor-Management Services Administration during the 1979 fiscal year.
Administrative improvements in the program reflected President Carter's government-wide efforts to streamline Federal regulatory programs and reduce paperwork.
Suits filed by the Department as part of stepped-up ERISA enforcement resulted in Federal courts ordering more than $25 million to be restored or otherwise preserved for pension plan participants.
Enforcement of the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA) required LMSA to handle almost 4,600 cases of delinquent or deficient reports.
More than 900 other LMRDA investigations also were completed during the year, including 275 involving union elections.
Some 52,600 reports from active labor organizations were on file under LMRDA.
The Department's interest in the construction industry and its importance to the nation's economy resulted in establishment of an Office of Construction Industry Services as a separate division within LMSA.
The number of area Construction Coordinating Committees operated by LMSA was expanded to five with the establishment of committees in Boston and Denver.
Joint labor-management committees in the airlines and steel industries were given staff support by LMSA and a new program of employee protections was initiated under the Airlines Deregulation Act.
A major change in the agency's labor-management relations activities occurred in January when the nw Federal Labor Relations Authority took over primary responsibility for overseeing labor relations in the Federal Government.
More than 2,000 new cases were opened for veterans and members of military reserve units who needed LMSA's help in exercising reemployment and other job rights granted them by law.
Some 240,000 new veterans—a 20 percent increase from Fiscal Year 1978—were given information and assistance at military separation centers on their reemployment rights.
On the international scene, LMSA continued its close association with the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
The agency took a lead role in planning the future program of the OECD Working Party on Industrial Relations and prepared a report on significant recent changes in labor relations in the U.S. An LMSA delegation headed by the Assistant Secretary participated in a four-day conference between the Department and the Israel Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs that resulted in an agreement by the two nations to carry out a series of joint projects and exchanges of information on labor-management relations and other topics of mutual interest.
Faster processing of new regulations and a sharp reduction in the backlog of requests for exemptions from the prohibited transactions provisions of the law marked administration of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) in Fiscal Year 1979.
These administrative improvements resulted primarily from the President's Reogranization Plan No. 4, which was put into effect early in the year to reduce overlapping jurisdiction between the Departments of Labor and Treasury.
The plan assigned specific primary jurisdictions to each of the Departments.
The plan also directs both agencies to cooperate with the Office of Management and Budget in preparing a report to Congress on the impact of the reorganization.
The report is due early in 1980.
Enforcement activities also were significantly strengthened.
More than $25 million was ordered by federal courts to be restored or otherwise preserved for plan participants during the year as a result of suits filed by the Department under ERISA.
Protection of these plan assets is the initial result of an order issued early in the year by the Office of Pension and Welfare Benefit Programs (PWBP) directing field investigators to concentrate their efforts on significant fiduciary cases.
Paperwork requirements for pension plans were reduced substantially during the year.
The Plan Description Form EBS-1 was eliminated; a proposal was published to require a full report from small plans only once every three years; decreased reporting by employers who offer coverage by Health Maintenance Organizations was proposed; reporting of insurance coverage information was simplified; and a proposal to reduce reporting for apprenticeship plans was published.
Changes were made in the content, style, and format of the summary annual report (SAR) which every plan is required to furnish to each of its participants.
The proposed revisions are designed to make the report easier to understand and more useful to plan participants and beneficiaries.
A major regulatory action was completed when the socalled prudence regulation clarifying the investment duties of a fiduciary of an employee benefit plan was published in the Federal Register on June 22, 1979.
Regulatory proposals also were published to clarify ERISA fiduciary provisions concerning acquisitions, sales or leases or property and the definition of what will be regarded as'"plan assets''under ERISA.
During the first nine months of calendar year 1979, PWBP ruled on 505 requests for exemptions from the prohibited transactions provisions of ERISA.
Rulings were issued on only 180 exemption applications in all of calendar year 1978.
Continuing emphasis was placed on the production and distribution of publications and other educational material to inform the public about ERISA and their rights under it.
Several publications were issued in Spanish.
Of special interest was a brochure entitled'Know Your Pension Plan"'designed to help people understand the provisions of their individual pension plans.
There were 52,566 active labor organizations with reports on file under the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA) as of Sept. 30, 1979.
In addition to 4,584 cases involving delinquent and deficient reports, LMSA completed 924 other LMRDA investigations during the year, including 275 involving union elections.
The Department instituted 50 civil actions under the Act in Federal District Courts, including 44 involving union elections and 2 to compel the filing of reports by unions and others.
Thirty-eight individuals were charged with criminal violations of the LMRDA in indictments, criminal informations, or pre-trial diversions.
Thirty-one persons, including some indicted in previous years, were convicted of LMRDA violations or agreed to pre-trial diversion of their cases.
LMRDA charges against 2 others were dismissed.
LMSA received annual financial reports from 3,005 active labor organizations of Federal government employees.
These reports are required under the Standards of Conduct provisions of Section 7120 of the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978 which, on January 11, 1979, superseded similar provisions in Section 18 of Executive Order 11491.
LMSA completed 529 Standards of Conduct investigations during the year, including 20 involving Federal employee union elections and 475 involving delinquent and deficient reports.
An Election Advisory Unit (EAU) was established within LMSA in early 1978 to advise and assist national and international unions in the conduct of their officer elections as specified under the LMRDA.
Since October 1978, the EAU has provided pre-election assistance to 38 unions, representing about five and a half million members, that have held or are scheduled to hold national and international officer elections in 1979-80.
EAU is preparing to assist at least 40 of the 70 additional national and international unions that have officer elections scheduled for 1980.
The EAU has also processed more than 150 written and telephone inquiries from national and international union officials and has participated in over 30 technical assistance conferences requested by union officers and representatives.
The Labor Department continued its policy of encouraging resolution of labor-management disputes with a minimum of direct participation.
This policy was followed in negotiations in the railroad, petroleum refining, trucking, rubber, electrical products, meatpacking, automobile and farm implement manufacturing industries.
Labor-management committees in the airlines industry and in the steel industry were given staff support.
Early warning'’reports covering negotiations which could affect the national interest were provided to the Secretary and other key government officials.