Despite mounting and in some ways unprecedented economic and social pressures, the Department of Labor this year fulfilled its original mandate: "to foster, promote and develop the welfare of the wage earners of the United States."
Indeed, the activities of 1980 culminated the Administration's efforts to be both socially responsive and fiscally responsible.
Our guiding management principle has been to simplify our programs and to concentrate our resources and efforts.
From a symbolic standpoint, the most appropriate moment came in April when the Department headquarters building was named after the nation's fourth Secretary of Labor, Frances Perkins.
Secretary Perkins, the first woman Cabinet official in the nation's history, was the guiding force behind some of this country's most progressive actions on behalf of American workers: the minimum wage, Social Security, child labor provisions, and safety and health protection, among others.
Her ideals remain the ideals of the Department.
In 1980, however, the struggle to promote and protect the interests of this nation's workers was far from symbolic.
A worsening economic climate around the world did not leave America untouched.
The energy dependence of this country was the chief culprit threatening employment, wages, and the protective programs for American workers.
Efforts by the Administration could not offset all these threats—but still, basic rights were relentlessly protected, and humane, effective and progressive policies were introduced or maintained to deal with the economic pressures.
While the future of some of these programs and policies was left in doubt as the year ended, I believe their basic thrust will of necessity continue to be regarded as a blueprint for a stronger America.
No responsibility of the Department was more important than effective administration and management, because this reflected upon the credibility of all Department efforts.
Improved management information systems and evaluation systems made Department activities both more responsive and more effective.
One of the most important management activities continued to be meeting the challenge of the Civil Service Reform Act.
In that regard, a highlight was the full implementation of the Department's Senior Executive Service (SES), which provided for a single personnel system to manage the personnel requirements of DOL senior executives, including performance standards development, performance appraisal, compensation, and executive development.
No right is more valued or vital to workers than the right to bargain collectively.
In truth, collective bargaining is as essential to the country as it is to union members.
Collective bargaining is good business—it improves management in terms of communication, training and participation, and can have a definitive impact on productivity.
Most importantly, you cannot have a free and democratic society without a free and democratic labor movement.
In collective bargaining negotiations and disputes, the Labor Department followed a general policy of keeping direct government involvement at the lowest possible level.
The policy of restricting government's role to the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service was maintained even when concern over wage-price guidelines resulted in pressure to escalate federal involvement to a higher level.
The Department sought to encourage and assist development of cooperative or tripartite approaches to dealing with problems that go beyond the bargaining table, and such arrangements have been developed in the steel, coal, automobile, and airline industries.
The nation's first comprehensive steel policy was developed this year with the assistance of the Steel Tripartite Committee.
While most of the tripartite arrangements are still in an early stage, some results have been evident, such as the improved climate in labor-management relations in the coal industry as 1980 ended.
The Department's support for cooperative approaches was not limited to the national level, either, as local construction coordinating committees continued their efforts to improve productivity and workers' income while holding down inflationary pressures in the construction industry.
No responsibility of the Department is more important than the creation of jobs and job training opportunities.
One of the most laudable achievements of the Department has been to expand these programs to focus them more on specific needs, and to improve their efficiency.
In a period of economic austerity, these programs were nonetheless extended to reach the poorest and most disadvantaged in our society.
Whereas in CETA's earliest years, the economically disadvantaged made up only 45 percent of the total enrollment, that figure was expected to be above 90 percent as 1980 ended.
Moreover, these programs were much more experimental and flexible, reaching people whose needs previously had been neglected.
A variety of new programs aided special target groups with particular disadvantages in the labor market, such as older workers, welfare eligibles, young workers who needed education, training, work experience and other services, displaced homemakers who suddenly faced the prospect of entering the labor market after years of being outside it, and workers who needed a variety of labor market services because they had been displaced by economic dislocation.
Particularly important in these efforts was the Private Sector Initiatives Program, which emphasized private sector participation in employment and training programs.
By the end of 1980, all of the 470 CETA prime sponsors had completed the establishment of Private Industry Councils.
These PICs, with the assistance of such innovations as the targeted job tax credit, gave new hope to the structurally unemployed.
Although welfare reform legislation was not enacted in Congress, the Department's activities under the Employment Opportunities Pilot Program were noteworthy.
Launched in 15 areas throughout the country, this pilot program tested various approaches to developing employment and training alternatives to welfare dependency among the employable poor.
The findings from these diverse programs should make it possible to develop an effective program on a national scale.
In another area, the Department sought to assure all Americans their right to dignity and equality in the workplace through the activities of the Employment Standards Administration.
Millions of Americans continued to benefit from annual raises in the minimum wage, which was to reach $3.35 an hour beginning January 1, 1981.
In addition, the Department restored millions of dollars in income to workers for violation of the Fair Labor Standards Act.
The Employers of Undocumented Workers Program combatted the exploitation of illegal aliens, and since its beginning in 1978 had found $54.7 million in back wages due to 345,000 workers.
There was an increased enforcement activity in all government contract areas as well.
In carrying out its equal employment opportunity responsibilities, which since 1978 had included all federal EEO enforcement activities, the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs targeted such white collar industries as banking, insurance and electronics, while also giving high priority to enforcement in the coal mining industry, a major blue-collar industry employing few women or minorities.
The Department's activities under the Davis-Bacon Act, meanwhile, assured construction workers that they would be justly paid.
Increases in enforcement time spent and back wages recovered were augmented by improvement of the information-gathering systems, and more comprehensive training for those carrying out the program.
The dominant feature of the Department's occupational safety and health activities continued to be its emphasis on "common sense priorities."Those priorities included getting serious about serious dangers, simplifying regulations and eliminating unnecessary rules, and helping America's small businesses save money and lives.
OSHA's 'New Directions" program continued to provide support for occupational safety and health education grants to private groups in order to help educate workers and managers to workplace safety and health hazards.
Perhaps the most important accomplishment of OSHA in 1980 was the issuance of the nation's first comprehensive policy to identify and regulate cancer-causing substances in the workplace.
As one of the initial steps in implementing that standard, OSHA issued a 'candidates list'' of substances for further scientific review as potential carcinogens.
Another major OSHA regulation promulgated this year permitted worker access to employer-maintained medical and toxic exposure records.
The standard added no new recordkeeping requirements, but outlined conditions under which employer records were to be maintained and made available to employees, their representatives, and OSHA.
The Mine Safety and Health Administration, created in the Labor Department by legislation in 1978, continued its efforts to protect miners.
MSHA's coal mine safety and health efforts included over 50,000 inspections and accident investigations each year from 1978 through 1980, with an average of 120,000 citations written each year.
In addition, special programs were instituted to find, control or eliminate critical safety and health hazards in coal mines.
The program was increasingly successful at reducing and controlling the level of respirable dust, the cause of black lung.
Activities at mines other than coal mines also increased under Metal and Nonmetal Mine Safety and Health regulatory enforcement functions.
Fatalities showed a marked decrease since MSHA's inception.
The number of inspectors and inspections increased.
An assistance program pointed out potentially hazardous conditions and practices to mine operators.
The increased importance of women in the American workplace—by October 1980, they numbered more than 45.2 million, or 43 percent of the labor force—was reflected by the growing activities of the Women's Bureau, which was made an independent agency in the Office of the Secretary in 1977.
The Women's Bureau stepped up its efforts to promote job and training opportunities for women, and to eliminate occupational segregation, a main cause of the earnings gap between men and women.
In conjunction with the Employment and Training Administration, the Bureau carried out several research and demonstration projects to identify ways of assisting women with labor market disadvantages.
These projects included information and referral and job training programs for both rural and urban low-income women, nontraditional job exploration, training and work experiences in school-to-work transition projects for young women, and a variety of projects that placed emphasis on the special needs of black, Hispanic, Asian Pacific American and American Indian women, among others.
The Bureau also continued its work in developing apprenticeship programs for women in federal and state prisons.
The Bureau's international activities this year were highlighted by its participation in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OCED) High-Level Conference on the Employment of Women, the World Conference on the United Nations Decade for Women, and the 66th session of the International Labor Organization.
Accurate statistical information became increasingly important as the economic fluctuations this year affected more and more workers.
In addition to carrying out its regular responsibilities, the Bureau of Labor Statistics in 1980 expanded its Employment Cost Index to measure relative changes in total compensation (wages and salaries plus employee benefits).
Under development for several years, the expanded index was scheduled to cover state and local government workers as well as the farming and household sectors.
International labor affairs continued to have a deservedly high priority within the Department in 1980.
Among the subjects receiving attention were: the impact of foreign direct investment and international transfer of technology on U.S.
Those varied concerns illustrated the fact that we live in an increasingly interdependent world.
They also illustrated that an emphasis on international human rights and workers rights is essential, because the undermining of such rights in other countries has a direct effect on the United States.
The emphasis on worker rights paved the way to the correction of problems within the International Labor Organization, problems that had led to the U.S. withdrawal from that body in 1977.
As a result of improvements since our withdrawal, the U.S. rejoined the ILO this year.
Closer involvement between the federal government and American worker and employer organizations on ILO issues was fostered by the formation of the President's Committee on the ILO, established in June 1980.
Of special importance was the Department-to-Ministry program.
These efforts illustrated the value of the comparative method—how we can better understand our mutuality of interests, and how we can learn from each other.
Workers benefit from these exchanges, but countries do as well.
Furthermore, we established valuable relations and understandings that go beyond the normal diplomatic channels.
It was not that long ago when worker rights in this country were minimal or nonexistent, and government involvement was limited.
The harsh consequences of the industrial revolution changed that.
Over the years, we have established and strengthened safeguards to protect the legitimate interests of American workers.
Workers are now assured that they will not be unfairly discriminated against on the basis of their race, religion, national origin, sex or race.
Basic wage standards have been provided.
Income and other protections have been enacted to assist the unemployed, the poor, our retired citizens, and those who experience work-related medical problems.
We not attempt to protect workers against the perils of occupational diseases and injuries.
We provide opportunities for job training and public service work for those who are unemployed.
We have enacted a variety of laws to assure fair treatment for those with special needs.
We have every reason to be proud of what we have done.
It has not been easy.
We have not achieved perfection, but we have succeeded in establishing a system which has maintained the confidence of most of our citizens.
In my view, this confidence is one of the enduring strengths of the American system.
The Labor Department has played a key role in this development.
Its responsibilities are far greater that they originally were, and are ever-changing, but the mission has remained the same: to assist the progress of our nation's greatest resource, its workers.
For the sake of our country, that mission must never change.
As the country's 16th Secretary of Labor, I'm proud to have played a role in that effort.
During fiscal year 1980, the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) pursued its attack on unemployment primarily through employment and training programs dealing with structural unemployment.
To an increasing extent, Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA) funds were allocated to activities such as occupational training, remedial education, counseling, temporary work experience, and transitional public service employment for the structurally unemployed.
The problem of unemployed youth commanded special attention; efforts were also made to increase private sector hiring of members of target groups; and employment and training programs responsive to such national priorities as energy policy were funded.
Fiscal 1980 was the first full fiscal year during which the CETA amendments of 1978 were in effect and major administrative policies and procedures were developed to assure full implementation of the new requirements.
The reauthorized CETA called for establishing a specific office to provide management and technical assistance to program delivery agents.
The Office of Management Assistance (OMA) was created to administer ETA's management assistance and training activities, now operating with a $15 million budget.
Ongoing activities include operation of a network of national and regional training centers; the maintenance of a clearinghouse on technical assistance and training (TAT) materials; and a series of TAT contracts designed to enhance prime sponsor efficiency.
OMA also developed a new Management Assistance and Training System (MATS) incorporating both a 5-year plan and an annualized delivery plan to enable ETA to respond promptly to the needs of CETA prime sponsors and other agencies.
New procedures dealt with prime sponsor compliance with annual average wage provisions for public service employment (PSE); limitations placed on the length of CETA participation; CETA training in lower wage industries under specific conditions; and improved management of CETA programs to prevent fraud and abuse.
In the Private Sector Initiative Program (PSIP), Private Industry Councils (PIC's) were established by all prime sponsors.
By the end of the third quarter of fiscal 1980, there were 21,402 enrollees in these programs.
More than half of the PIC's were participating in the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit (TJTC) program.
The Employment Opportunities Pilot Project (EOPP), part of the Administration's welfare reform initiative, had enrolled over 18,000 persons by the end of fiscal 1980, and about 4,000 former welfare recipients were employed in unsubsidized private sector jobs.
ETA continued to provide work experience and training to youth through programs authorized by the Youth Employment and Demonstration Projects Act of 1977.
Over 72 percent of the young people in the Youth Employment and Training Program (YETP) left the program in fiscal 1980 positively.
The Youth Community Conservation and Improvement Projects (YCCIP) enrolled 33,273 youth in the first 9 months of the year; 60.8 percent of them were high school dropouts.
Job Corps centers increased from 60 to 90.
Over 5,000 corpsmembers participated in an experimental educational improvement effort that includes new tutorial teaching methods, computer-assisted instruction, and a special reading program.
National programs continued to provide services to such targeted groups as Indians and other native Americans, migrant and seasonal farmworkers, older persons, women, and other special groups.
Employment Service (ES) data for 1980 show that placement of individual applicants declined 11.2 percent and multiple placements fell to 10.5 percent.
The declines for women, minorities, and unemployment insurance claimants, however, were less severe that the overall rate.
Efficiency improved with nearly 600,000 more placements made in fiscal 1980 than during the previous recessionary period in 1975, with the same staffing levels.
In April 1980, TJTC was extended through Dec. 31, 1981.
The Veterans Employment Service (VES) developed and implemented a number of outreach and public information programs during fiscal 1980, directed particularly to disabled and Vietnam-era veterans.
The Disabled Veterans Outreach Program of 1977 continued its successful operation through the State Job Service offices.
Increasing unemployment caused States to trigger-on extended unemployment benefits.
First payment promptness was a high priority goal for the Unemployment Insurance Service (UIS) and SESA's.
UI trust funds solvency improved and outstanding loans to the Federal Unemployment Account were reduced from $5.1 billion to $4.6 billion by fiscal year end, with more repayments scheduled by the beginning of calendar 1981.
Approximately 530,000 workers received first payment of trade readjustment allowances.
Disaster Unemployment Assistance-dispersed over $3.8 million to disaster victims.
More than 230,000 registrants of the Work Incentive (WIN) program obtained unsubsidized employment.
About 23,000 had previously been Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) applicants.
Their employment meant that their family did not have to become dependent on AFDC.
For the first time in its history, the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training adopted a comprehensive 5-year program and management plan.
Under this plan, the apprenticeship concept of training will be expanded into industries and occupations that have not traditionally been strong in apprenticeship training.
In fiscal 1980, a record 420,000 persons received apprenticeship.
Top priority is being given to developing apprenticeship opportunities for women and minorities.
The Office of Policy, Evaluation, and Research focused on legislation on CETA, evaluation studies of CETA impacts and operations, and basic research into both labor market operations and program operation.
Legislative attention was devoted to reauthorizing portions of CETA, veterans' rehabilitation and education, and extended unemployment compensation.
In the area of equal employment opportunity and special review, a monitoring procedure was designed and is being used in the reviews that sample the three major activities having the greatest potential for fraud and program abuse—financial management, program management, and equal opportunity (EO).
In fiscal 1980, EO complaints dropped to 30 percent of all complaints.
Community Employment Programs were provided by 473 State and local prime sponsor organizations that received funds under several titles of CETA for employment and training services at the local level.
In fiscal year 1980, some 1.3 million persons participated in programs administered by the prime sponsors at a cost of about $1.9 billion.
During the year, approximately 900,000 persons terminated from these programs.
Of this number 419,000 were placed in jobs and 265,000 returned to school or entered further training.
Of the persons enrolled in the programs, 45 percent were enrolled in classroom training, 11 percent in on-the-job training, 35 percent in work experience, and 9 percent in other activities.
A total of 383,000 service years were provided in public service jobs at a cost of approximately $3.7 billion.
Approximately 770,000 persons were employed in public service employment (PSE) jobs at some time during the year.
Once again significant changes occurred in the PSE programs, and once again the system responded effectively and efficiently.
During fiscal 1980 a budget revision submitted to the Congress in March provided for the deferral of some $203 million in fiscal 1980 title VI funds.
The deferral funds are to be used for program operations during fiscal 1981.
In addition, the budget revision called for reducing the title VI enrollments by some 50,000 participants.
Both of these requirements were achieved.
Procedures to determine prime sponsor compliance with the annual average wage provisions for PSE jobs were developed.
Reviews performed on a quarterly basis by Federal staff served as indicators of the effectiveness of new program designs which were often made necessary by the law's requirement.
Where potential problem areas were identified, corrective action was devised according to departmental guidelines.
The extent of the prime sponsor's reasonable effort to comply and the existence of extenuating circumstances were taken into account in the formulation of the plans.
During the year, procedures to monitor and enforce other new program requirements, such as the set-aside of a portion of funds to train and provide services to PSE participants, were developed and implemented in a similar fashion.
Limitations were placed on the length of CETA participation and detailed administrative policies and procedures were created.
Guidelines on how the limitations were to be applied as well as suggested models for keeping track of the length of participation were refined, including procedures for requesting subsequent PSE waivers.
The provision in the new legislation allowing CETA training in lower wage industries only under specific conditions has necessitated a departmental prior approval process for such programs.
The process is intended to assure that only those programs are funded that would result in stable employment and economic self-sufficiency for the participants.
To improve the management and administration of CETA progams and to prevent fraud and abuse, the reauthorized legislation requires prime sponsors to establish independent monitoring units (IMU's).
Administrative guidelines were issued to insure that the IMU was an independent unit engaging in a comprehensive monitoring effort.
The guidelines further stressed that the results of such monitoring be thoroughly reviewed and corrective action be promptly taken.
During fiscal 1980, all CETA prime sponsors established Private Industry Councils (PIC's) and were planning and/or implementing programs.
With the $75 million allocated in fiscal 1979, total funding availability for fiscal 1980 was $400 million.
In the early months of fiscal 1980, the private sector was actively involved in learning about CETA and in designing various plans of action.
As the year unfolded, increasing numbers of PIC's began expending funds as programs became operational.
By the end of the third quarter, virtually all PIC's had become involved in programs that had enrollees on board.
New enrollments more than tripled from the first to the second quarter; cumulative enrollments more than doubled from the second to the third quarter.
A cumulative total of 32,460 participants had been enrolled, with a total of 21,402 participants on board.
Cumulative outlays for fiscal 1979 and 1980 through August stood at more than $110 million, continuing the upward trend of the previous quarters.
More than half of the PIC's became actively involved in specific economic development activity, and an even greater proportion were participating in the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit program (TJTC).
Because the program was designed with a maximum amount of flexibility, the speed and direction of growth was limited only by the options of the local PIC's and prime sponsors.
Nationally, the use of employment generating services and upgrading and retraining programs increased.
In response to local requests, regulations were clarified to permit greater use of these programs.
Active involvement on the parts of the National Alliance of Business (NAB), the Human Resource Development Institute (HRDI) of the AFL-CIO, public interest groups, and national trade associations have greatly contributed to the successful beginning of this public-private partnership.
Each of these organizations has participated in marketing the program by providing print media, conferences, and training sessions.
The NAB, under contract with the Department of Labor, is operating a PSIP Clearinghouse which provides program information for those actively involved in the program.
Classroom training makes up the largest percentage of program activities.
On-the-job training accounts for 15.9 percent of the expenditures; other activities, services to participants, and work experience account for 15.5, 9.7, and 3.5 percent respectively.
As part of the Administration's welfare reform initiative, the Department of Labor continued the Employment Opportunities Pilot Project (EOPP) during fiscal 1980.
These demonstration projects are designed to furnish new policy and program experience for use in providing job and training opportunities to persons on welfare or near-welfare levels.
The program includes an intensive 5- to 8-week job search activity (largely through"job clubs') providing assistance and supportive services for finding jobs in the private sector and a work and training component for those participants unable to find employment during the initial job search period.
The latter employability development component may include classroom training, public service employment, work experience, on-the-job training, remedial training and general supportive services for a maximum 52-week period.
By the end of fiscal 1980, the program had enrolled over 18,000 clients—about 75 percent females—with monthly enrollments running about 2,000.
After less than a year, about 4.000 welfare recipients were employed in unsubsidized private sector jobs.
A preliminary finding has shown that of those enrolled in the initial job search component, about 40 percent are usually successful in finding jobs without using additional program services available through the work and training component.
While the demonstrations are focused primarily on a specific target group—low-income heads of family—the findings of the demonstration research are expected to be useful in improving the administration of the entire employment and training delivery system as well as in providing for the implementation of a welfare reform program.
The welfare reform demonstration sites were selected as representative of important variations in population characteristics, industrial structure, unemployment rates, wage levels, degree of urbanization, and transfer program characteristics.
The program also developed necessary service delivery linkages with the State Employment Security Agencies (SESA's), the Work Incentive (WIN) program, State welfare agencies, and specialized community-based organizations.
A comprehensive research and evaluation effort has been developed to track the pilot projects.
Studies will assess the impact on project participants and the local labor market.
As part of the program, an innovative, remote access Management Information System (MIS) has been designed and installed in all sites.
This system enables local program administrators and the Department of Labor to obtain current information on all program activities and outcomes.
ETA continued to provide work experience and training opportunities to youth through programs authorized by the Youth Employment and Demonstration Projects Act of 1977.
These programs are designed to address the structural unemployment problems of young persons—particularly those who are disadvantaged—and to assist them in securing unsubsidized employment in the public and private sectors of the economy.
The major programs under the act include the Youth Employment and Training Program (YETP), the Youth Community Conservation and Improvement Projects (YCCIP), the Summer Youth Employment Program (SYEP), the Youth Incentive Entitlement Pilot Project (YIEPP), the Young Adult Conservation Corps (YACC) (administered jointly with the Department of Agriculture), and Job Corps.
Although data on all programs are available only through June 30, 1980, enrollments ran well above planned levels.
In YETP, the total number of participants at the end of June was 328,779, 65 percent of whom were in school.
The primary focus of this program is to provide work experience and onthe-job training, coupled with counseling and occcupational/career information to make youth employable.
Of those who left the program during the year, 72.9 percent terminated positively, the majority returning to or continuing their education or entering unsubsidized employment.
Designed to provide youth aged 16 through 19 who have severe difficulties in obtaining employment with work and training in projects that benefit the community, YCCIP enrolled 33,273 youth in the first nine months of fiscal 1980, 60.8 percent of whom were high school dropouts.
Approximately 20 percent of the youth obtained jobs and 14 percent went into more advanced training.
An additional nine percent either returned to school or acquired a general equivalency diploma.
Estimated enrollment figures for the Summer Youth Employment Program (SYEP) show that over one million youth participated in this nine-week work experience program.
SYEP is continually being improved through closer supervision, firmer worksite agreements, and more frequent monitoring.
ETA's Office of Youth Programs also began a demonstration project, known as the Consolidated Youth Employment Program (CYEP), which combines the principal features of YETP, YCCIP, and SYEP in a single year-round program.
It will offer youth a progression of services tailored to their individual needs and competencies.
In fiscal 1980, eight CYEP prime sponsors participated, serving 8,395 youth.
Five additional prime sponsors will take part in this effort in fiscal 1981.
The CYEP concept joins the resources of education, labor, and social service agencies with existing employment and training services to enhance the job prospects of youth.
The broad range of coordinated activities embodied in CYEP is the first step toward the new initiatives proposed by the Congress in the Youth Act of 1980.
The Youth Incentive Entitlement Pilot Projects (YIEPP) guarantees a minimum-wage, part-time job during the school year and a full-time one during the summer to young people aged 16 to 19 from low-income families.
The youth must remain in or return to school, and, in order to obtain and keep a job, they must also maintain locally established standards for performance and attendance both in school and at work.
The entitlement demonstration is conducted in seven large cities or sections of cities and in 10 smaller ones across the country and has served 83,556 youth since its inception in 1978.
Because the program focuses on the long-term effect of the relationship between schooling and a job in increasing youth's employability, the final research reports will not be released until 1981 and 1982.
However, preliminary findings indicate that entitlement led to a 90.2 percent increase in the employment rate of disadvantaged youth in the demonstration sites.
Its effects were particularly strong for those who did not have jobs before joining the program.
The rates at which dropouts returned to school increased by 62.5 percent.
The program has reduced the propensity of youth already in school to drop out of school.
YIEPP has also spawned the growth and expansion of alternative school programs, particularly in the larger sites, to attract and serve returning school dropouts.
Participating youth named job satisfaction as their greatest reason for remaining in the program.
The demonstration will be phasing out during fiscal 1981 but it is expected that prime sponsors will incorporate the principles of YIEPP in other youth programs.
During fiscal 1980, Job Corps expanded the capacity of its centers from 34,000 to almost 40,000.
The number of centers has been increased from 60 to 90.
Over 5,000 corpsmembers are participating in an experimental educational improvement effort that includes new tutorial teaching methods, computer-assisted instruction, and a special reading program showing a one-year gain in reading levels for every 4.7 months in the program.
Job Corps will also be working with university faculties in two sites in fiscal 1981 to identify corpsmembers who have learning disabilities such as dyslexia and to develop remedial strategies to improve their learning potential.
National programs continued to provide training and other employment-related services to groups experiencing particularly severe disadvantages in the labor market.
Special programs, generally conducted by national organizations, provided services targeted on Indians and other native Americans, migrant and seasonal farmworkers, older persons, women, and other special groups.
The Senior Community Service Employment Program provides grants to national organizations and State governments to develop part-time jobs in community work for economically disadvantaged persons aged 55 and older.
In fiscal 1980, over 52,250 older persons were provided employment through the program at a cost of $258.3 million.
The Native American Employment and Training Program provides grants to Indian tribes, other native American communities, and various organizations to support a wide variety of training and employment services.
About 53,000 persons were served by these programs in fiscal 1980; classroom training was provided for almost 11,000 persons, 4,000 were placed in on-the-job training, 25,000 were in work experience positions and 4,000 were provided public employment service jobs at a cost of over $78 million.
The Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker Programs provide services ranging from job training to emergency relief to service for seasonal farmworkers.
In fiscal 1980, these programs allocated over $80 million to 48 nonprofit organizations and to six State and local governments.
Grants were also awarded to other groups to conduct demonstration programs, to provide technical assistance, and to perform evaluations.
Services provided during the year included classroom training for 22,000, on-the-job training for 5,000, and work experience opportunities for 5,000.
During the year, a total of almost 200,000 people received through the program some type of assistance such as nutritional services, health and medical care, and emergency assistance.
Other activities under the national programs included the Targeted Outreach Program, which placed almost 14,000 minority members and women as apprentices or journeymen.
The National On-the-Job Training Program provided on-site job training for approximately 20,900 persons.
The Help Through Industry Retraining and Employment (HIRE) program, targeted to veterans, provided training for over 10,000 veterans in cooperation with the National Alliance of Business.
Finally, the national programs funded a wide variety of community-based organizations, national trade associations, international labor unions, and other national organizations to support employment and training activities.
The slowly developing recession of 1979-80 had a pronounced effect on the public employment service (ES) activities in fiscal 1980.
While fiscal 1979 brought a leveling off of ES key indicators, the fiscal 1980 data clearly show the effects of the economic downturn in significant reversals of gains achieved in recent years.
Openings received from employers fell 13.4 percent from the fiscal 1979 level; placements of individual applicants declined 11.2 percent to 4,029,033 in fiscal 1980.
Placement transactions which include multiple placements of individuals were down 10.5 percent to 6,046,051 in fiscal 1980).
Hardest hit among placements were the permanent job placements (150 plus days duration), which declined almost 13 percent from the previous year.
New applications and renewals in fiscal 1980 were up 9.4 percent over the previous year and totaled nearly 17 million.
Marginal gains were achieved in the provision of some of the basic services to applicants.
In fiscal 1980 counseling of applicants was up 4.1 percent over the previous year and testing was up 0.8 percent.
Job development contacts were up 7.0 percent.
The placement rate, which measures placements as a percentage of new and renewal applications, declined to 23.5 percent compared with the 29 percent rate of fiscal 1979.
Although there were declines in the placement rates of several target groups, the declines for women, minorities, and unemployment insurance (UI) claimants were less severe than the overall rate.
These same target groups showed significant wage gains in fiscal 1980.
Women placed in jobs paying over $4.00 per hour increased 27.4 percent; the number of minorities placed in jobs over $4.00 per hour, was up 7.5 percent, and the number of UI claimants earning more than $4.00 increased by 6.3 percent.
The average wage for placements made during fiscal 1980 was $3.99, up 8.1 percent from 1979.
The numbers of applicants placed in subsidized employment (CETA-public service employment) continued to decline as it has each year from the peak enrollment levels.
In fiscal 1980, 411,000 applicants were placed in subsidized employment.
Substantial increases in efficiency and effectiveness continued in fiscal 1980.
Placement figures during the previous recessionary period in fiscal 1975 show 3,138,000 applicants placed 129 per staff year worked under the grants to States funding; with exactly the same staffing levels as fiscal 1975, nearly 500,000 more placements were made in fiscal 1980, and the placements per staff year worked were 182 (an increase of 41.1 percent).
The ES continued to provide support to a wide range of related programs including CETA, WIN, and Food Stamps.
During fiscal 1980, the ES also continued its major role in implementing the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit (TJTC) program, authorized by the Revenue Act of 1978.
The Targeted Jobs Tax Credit program allows employers to claim a tax credit based on the wages paid during calendar years 1979 and 1980 to an employee who is a member of any one of seven target groups, the largest of which is economically disadvantaged youth aged 18 to 24.
The Revenue Act gave the Departments of Labor and Treasury joint responsibility for administering and publicizing TJTC; most of the departments' responsibility is ETA/ES.
At the State and local levels, the State Employment Security Agencies (SESA's) manage the delivery system and coordinate the agencies which issue vouchers to eligible workers.
The SESA's are responsible for the issuance of certifications to employers once they have hired workers eligible under this program.
By Sept. 30, 1980, SESA's issued 305,723 certifications, exceeding by 55,723 the goal of 250,000 certifications set for fiscal 1980.
The success of the program during fiscal 1980 was the result partly of the expanded publicity efforts taken by the department, the State, and local agencies, and to the effort on the part of SESA's to integrate the TJTC activity into their placement function.
On April 2, 1980, the President signed a Technical Corrections Act of 1979 which extended the duration of TJTC through Dec. 31, 1981.
The department estimates that during fiscal 1981, 300,000 additional certifications will be issued to employers across the country.
The Veterans Employment Service (VES) monitors ETA's veterans' programs.
Each year the Secretary of Labor establishes certain standards of compliance for services provided to veterans by each State employment service agency.
The number of State employment service agencies out of compliance with these standards in fiscal 1980 increased only slightly.
The VES developed and implemented a number of outreach and public information programs during fiscal 1980 to make available training and employment assistance to hard-to-reach veterans, particularly disabled and Vietnam-era veterans.
Some of these programs were implemented by contracting with national organizations such as the National Urban League, American G.I. Forum, National Council of Churches, and the Blinded Veterans Association.
Additionally, the VES worked closely with the newly established White House Veterans' Coordinating Committee to develop and provide funding for the veterans' outreach and community services projects in 12 major urban areas.
Other efforts include the Targeted Technical Assistance Program designed to assist CETA prime sponsors in developing local communitybased programs to meet the unique readjustment needs of disabled and Vietnam-era veterans.
Also, the Disabled Veterans Outreach Program, announced as a special Presidential initiative in 1977 to provide employment and training assistance primarily for disabled veterans, continued its successful operation administered through the State Job Service offices during fiscal 1980.
The Unemployment Insurance Service (UIS) in fiscal 1980 emphasized the areas of program quality, productivity of operations, internal security, and trust fund solvency.
During fiscal 1980, 25 million initial claims were filed in the SESA's.
One hundred fifty-four million weeks of unemployment were claimed and $12.5 billion was paid out in benefits to almost nine million recipients.
First payment promptness continued to be a high priority goal for UIS and the SESA's.
Thirty-nine SESA's were able to pay at least 87 percent of their initial claims within 14 to 21 days of the week ending date of the first compensable week.
Ninety-six percent of first payments were made within 35 days of the week ending date of the first compensable week.
Increasing unemployment caused States to trigger "on" extended benefits.
Twenty States were paying extended benefits in July 1980 when the program was triggered on nationally by an insured unemployment rate of 4.5 percent.
States continued to respond promptly to the increased workloads.
To improve productivity, SESA's were asked to review manual and automated processes and to modify such processes, where appropriate, not only to improve their proficiency but also to enhance the controls and security of UI operations.
SESA's were asked to review and evaluate support activities on a continuing basis to insure maximum staff utilization.
Internal security continued to be an area of major UIS concern.
An internal security review outline was developed and will soon be distributed for use in assessing the adequacy of SESA internal security.
The review will be completed by regional office and SESA staff in all States during fiscal 1981.
Progress was made during the year with respect to solvency of UI trust funds.
At the beginning of fiscal 1980, 17 States owed $5.1 billion to the Federal Unemployment account.
New York, Michigan, and Minnesota were able to repay their entire loans before Jan. 1, 1980.
Other States took substantive action to permit the Secretary of Labor to defer imposition of reduction in offset credit in Federal unemployment taxes.
Only Pennsylvania and Delaware failed to meet the requirements for deferral; thus, their employers were subject to a 0.3 percent reduction in offset credit on 1979 wages.
Some States had to increase their indebtedness during the year.
Other States that did not have outstanding loans at the beginning of the calendar year had to obtain loans.
Through substantive State effort, however, the outstanding loans to the Federal Unemployment Account have been reduced to $4.6 billion by year end, and two States intend to repay their entire loans before the beginning of calendar year 1981.
Approximately 530,000 workers received first payments of trade readjustment allowances (TRA); approximately $1.6 billion was paid.
This dollar amount is in addition to any unemployment insurance payments these workers received.
Under the Disaster Unemployment Assistance (DUA) program in fiscal 1980, 27 major disasters—including the volcanic eruption of Mount St. Helens covering the entire state of Washington—were declared in 19 States.
This is a considerable decrease from the record number of 42 declared in fiscal 1979.
Also, for the first time, DUA was made available and was paid for a declared emergency that occurred in Maine, owing to fish poisoning and red tide.
Based on the activity reports received for these disasters through Sept. 30, 1980, over 16,000 individuals received over $3.8 million in DUA payments.
Under the Redwood Employee Protection Program (REPP) $23,800,042.57 has been paid to affected workers since the beginning of the program.
As of Sept. 27, 1980, 2,041 workers received $14,382,940.21 in weekly payments and 769 workers received $9,417,102.36 in severance payments.
Job search allowances amounting to $10,403.93 were paid to 61 workers; 84 workers and their families relocated to other areas in the country and were paid $190,702.47 in relocation allowances.
The National Commission on Unemployment Compensation, which was first established in February 1978, completed its work and was dissolved on Sept. 30, 1980.
A detailed summary of Commission policy was published on June 30, 1980.
The final report of the Commission is expected by the end of 1980.
The Work Incentive (WIN) program, in fiscal 1980, registered about one million persons.
During the year, more than 280,000 WIN registrants obtained unsubsidized employment.
About one in 10 was an AFDC applicant whose employment meant that the applicant and his or her family did not have to become dependent on AFDC.
About half of the newly employed workers earned enough at job entry to leave the AFDC rolls; the others continued to receive some assistance, but at a reduced level.
State welfare agencies estimated welfare grant reductions of $603 million, on an annualized basis, in fiscal 1980, as the result of WIN registrants' employment.
Fiscal year 1980 marked another year of accomplishment for apprenticeship in terms of the number of apprentices in training and the progress made toward such major goals as extending apprenticeship to wider areas of industry and improving linkages to other training efforts.
A most significant and far-reaching project was the development by the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, for the first time in its history, of a comprehensive five-year program and management plan.
This plan, establishing priorities for Bureau activities for the period 1980-84, sets forth goals for each of the next five years.
The plan represents the most comprehensive consideration of the national apprenticeships program, its goals and its future, ever undertaken.
Major efforts are being made to expand the apprenticeship concept of training into industries and occupations that have not traditionally been strong in apprenticeship.
It is estimated that in fiscal 1980, 420,000 persons, a record number, received training in apprenticeship programs covering a wide range of highly skilled occupations.
During the year an estimated 125,000 new apprentices entered training.
Apprenticeship in recent years has focused on opening apprenticeship opportunities to women and minorities.
The Bureau, in cooperation with the Women's Bureau, is promoting and developing increased opportunities for women in apprenticeship.
A record 3.6 percent of all apprentices were women, a significant increase from the 0.7 percent of 1973.
A factor in the increase of women is the use of slide and script presentations as well as requirements for BAT staff to meet with women's groups.
Since January 1979, over 2,000 such presentations have been made, with over 83,000 people attending.
Six public service announcements for television, directed primarily to women, have been produced and were tested in 10 locations.
On the local level, numerous magazine and newspaper articles have been written stressing the advantages and opportunities to women of entering the skilled trades through apprenticeship.
Data on special efforts on behalf of minorities indicate that 17 percent of all apprentices are from minority groups.
Significant progress was also made during the year in linking apprenticeship with other training efforts.
To promote apprenticeship opportunities for welfare recipients, BAT worked with ETA's Office of Welfare Reform.
Twelve apprenticeship liaison representatives were hired in nine separate locations to work closely with Bureau staff members to increase apprenticeship efforts for those receiving welfare.
BAT continued to promote linkages with CETA activities as staff members worked with CETA prime sponsors, assisting them in developing cooperative relationships with apprenticeship programs.
Staff throughout the country have been asked to become members or consultants on the CETA Private Industry Councils (PIC's).
Apprenticeship programs expanded during fiscal 1980.
The military services registered over 16,000 apprentices.
During the year, 35 National Apprenticeship Standards were registered or revised for organizations such as Federal correctional institutions, international unions, and management associations.
Thirteen occupations were newly approved as apprenticeable.
In energy-related fields over 19,000 apprentices were trained in occupations in nuclear energy, solar energy, and mining.
In fiscal year 1980, BAT's New Initiatives in Apprenticeship program promoted apprenticeship across a broader range of industries and occupations.
The multitrades program designed to provide administrative assistance to small apprenticeship programs in a defined geographic area reported cumulative apprentices of 3,028.
The Apprenticeship School Linkage projects, designed to move high school youth into apprenticeship opportunities, listed cumulative total of 1,872 apprentices.
For the Industry Campaign programs, a cumulative total of 17,184 apprentices was reported.
Legislation on CETA, evaluation studies probing CETA impacts and operations, and basic research into both labor market operations and program operations highlighted policy, evaluation and research during fiscal 1980.
Major legislative attention during fiscal 1980 was devoted to reauthorizing portions of CETA; legislative activity also affected veterans and extended unemployment compensation.
By the end of the fiscal year, bills revising and extending the Title IV youth programs (H.R. 6711) and title VII private sector programs (H.R. 6796) had passed the House and were pending action in the Senate.
A bill to extend unemployment compensation for 10 weeks during the current period of high unemployment had passed both Houses and was in conference committee as the fiscal year ended.
The Veterans' Rehabilitation and Education Amendments of 1980 were signed into law on October 17, creating the position of Assistant Secretary for Veterans' Employment and consolidating and clarifying definitions of veterans for department programs.
Notable evaluation activities during the year included the development of methods to use data from the Continuous Longitudinal Manpower Survey (CLMS) to estimate earnings gains of various types of participants in the decentralized CETA programs.
Early estimates indicate substantial net gains particularly for women, minorities, and other participants with unstable or limited preprogram employment.
An evaluation by the National Academy of Sciences of initial effects of the CETA reauthorization amendments of 1978 found that the major intended effects—tighter targeting of public service employment (PSE) to the structurally unemployed and greater control against possible abuse—were being achieved, but that there were adverse side effects of downgrading of types of PSE jobs and services and increased administrative burdens for the CETA system.
Evaluation of the Job Corps program's impact, by Mathematica Policy Research, found that participants did substantially better after the program, on employment, earnings, and other benefit measures, than comparable groups of nonparticipants, and that the dollar value of economic benefits to society exceeds the program's costs.
To guide departmental policy, research studies were initiated in such areas as developing policies to improve the unemployment/inflation tradeoff; expanding the use of Supported Work techniques; improving the management of employment and training programs; and examining the economic returns of intensive versus extensive training programs.
Numerous projects provided research on program operations.
These projects included several case studies of public job creation in rural areas and a study of the use of community-based organizations (CBO's) in CETA.
A study of CETA prime sponsors analyzed the decisionmaking process, data used in program operations, and the roles of planning councils, local service deliverers, and community groups.
In the employment security area, research was directed at developing a performance-based funding formula for the Employment Service; a completed study illuminated disincentive effects of the recent Federal extended unemployment benefits program.
Research in the WIN program explored the effects of different services for long-term unemployed fathers.
A significant portion of fiscal 1980 research efforts addressed broad, long-term social and economic issues.
The National Longitudinal Surveys, initiated in 1966, continue to provide information on four population segments at critical transition stages in working life.
An additional survey, focused on minority youth, is underway.
Other studies in the past year examined employment of special target groups including women and Hispanics; others explored such areas as occupational licensing and immigration.
Numbers of small grant research studies were initiated by historically black colleges.
In fiscal 1979, ETA emphasized reducing fraud and mismanagement within employment and training programs.
The Office of Investigation and Compliance (OI&C) conducted monitoring reviews of 24 prime sponsors in fiscal 1979 and planned to conduct 50 reviews during fiscal 1980 and each year thereafter.
However, because of severely restricted travel funds only 14 reviews were completed during fiscal 1980.
A monitoring procedure was designed and is being used that samples the three major activities having the greatest potential for fraud and program abuse—financial management, program management, and equal opportunity.
The processing of complaints has become increasingly important in the administration of ETA programs.
Recorded complaints at the Federal level, which averaged 250 per year during the 1974-77 period, increased to 950 during fiscal 1980.
The proportion of complaints involving equal opportunity (EO) problems has dipped in recent years.
While problems accounted for the majority of complaints in earlier years, they declined to 40 percent of all complaints in fiscal 1978 and to 30 percent in fiscal years 1979 and 1980.
The 1978 CETA Amendments established fixed time periods for resolution of all complaints—60 days at the local level and 120 days at the Federal level.
A system for measuring compliance with the mandated time periods is being developed and will soon be in place throughout ETA.
The latest effort to assess the current level of compliance indicated that the average age of open or nonresolved complaints had dropped from 8.5 months at the end of fiscal 1978 to 5.5 months in fiscal 1979 and to 4.2 months in fiscal 1980.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) continued to be the focus of much public, and official, attention during FY 1980.
During the year, recession, inflation, unemployment and productivity were major issues.
In the employment and unemployment area, the Bureau published new data and analyses oriented toward the social issues of persons' labor market status.
BLS initiated a news release relating earnings to the labor force status of individuals in family groups.
This new series permits analysis of employment, unemployment, and earnings of individuals to the families in which they live.
The Bureau also expanded and improved data on Hispanic and other minority workers and on veterans.
Rising inflation triggered criticism of the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
Critics who felt that payments escalated by the CPI were too low were joined by those who argued that the index was too high.
Most of the criticism focused on the housing component.
To help the critics understand the index, and to inform the public, the Bureau developed and published experimental homeownership measures, a special report on CPI issues, speeches and interviews, and articles.
BLS continued its analytical work in the field of productivity, publishing several papers on the factors contributing to the productivity slowdown in the United States and the implications for cost and price movements.
The Bureau also made progress in introducing new wage and earnings data and in explaining the differences among the many existing series.
The Employment Cost Index included for the first time compensation as well as wages and salaries.
Management initiatives centered around (1) clarification of lines of authority within BLS, (2) management information, and (3) implementation of Civil Service Reform.
Recognition of the authority of program managers for final decision making and accountability is taking place.
The bureau initiated the first step in developing a system of management inforination by developing a reporting system for all labor hours coded by particular program and task.
BLS moved further toward implementing Civil Service Reform by instituting a system for the merit pay program.
National attention remained focused on the employment situation.
BLS analysis included special studies on workers' earnings, duration of unemployment, the prevalence of worksharing arrangements, trends in worktime, and regional job growth.
The analysis covered the specific situation for various worker groups, including youth, older workers, women, minorities, and veterans, as well as timely analyses of the overall employment situation in the calendar year 1979 and the first half of 1980.
The prominent activities of the Office of Current Employment Analysis were in three broad areas: The analysis of labor force developments, the expansion of available data, and methodological research as a follow-up to the work of the National Commission on Employment and Unemployment Statistics.
Analyses of the labor force situation focused on specific situations, such as trends in worktime, veterans' employment, and the duration of unemployment, as well as the economy as a whole.
The Office initiated two new quarterly publications; one monitors earnings trends for various population groups and the other highlights current data on minority workers.
The testing of new questions to measure labor market discouragement was one of the methodological developments.
The Office began regular publication of quarterly earnings data derived through the Current Population Survey.
In addition to providing more timely information than was previously available on the earnings of the various demographic groups (black workers vs. white workers, for example), the new quarterly series sheds some important new light on the earnings situation for the various types of American families.
That is, it provides separate data on the combined earnings of husbands and wives, on the earnings of women who maintain their own families, and on the earnings available to families with unemployed members.
The Bureau stepped up its efforts to provide information on racial and ethnic minorities.
Seasonally adjusted labor force data for persons of Hispanic origin were introduced into the monthly Employment Situation press release.
This permits valid analysis of month-to-month changes among Hispanic workers and more accurate comparisons of their situation with that of other groups.
The staff introduced a new quarterly publication, Employment in Perspective: Minority Workers, during the year in order to highlight current developments among blacks and Hispanics.
The Bureau reviewed the recommendations made by the National Commission on Employment and Unemployment Statistics (NCEUS) in its final report issued in September 1979.
The legislation establishing the Commission charged the Secretary of Labor with the responsibility for responding to these recommendations, and the Bureau provided the technical expertise and assistance required for this task.
To implement the many recommendations of the NCEUS, work began on an eventual annual report on labor market related economic hardship.
The Bureau also collaborated with other agencies in planning and designing special surveys focusing on occupational mobility and job tenure.
Partially in response to the recommendation of the NCEUS, alternative labor force questions were tested in Phase II of the Methods Development Survey (MDS) beginning in January 1980.
The staff developed new questions to identify and measure discouraged workers more objectively and to identify usual as well as actual hours worked by the employed.
They also designed test questions to collect monthly data on the school enrollment status of persons 16 to 24 years of age, to modify the measurement of full- and parttime jobseeking, and to determine the feasibility of collecting additional information on the characteristics of persons out of the labor force.
Phase I of the MDS, which was completed in late 1979, had focused on the testing of alternative interview procedures.
Over the past year, the Bureau introduced major improvements into its procedures for seasonal adjustment of labor force data and has continued to extend its data processing capabilities for managing data from the Current Population Survey (CPS).
In the area of CPS data management, the capability to process large files of the unpublished, individual record ('micro") data continued to support in-depth analysis of labor force behavior.
This capability played a major role in initiating the release and publication of the new earnings data being obtained in the CPS.
The system for computerized data base management and table production for the Bureau's Employment Situation press release and other related publications consistently provided timely output at reasonable cost and demonstrated its capacity to meet changing and expanding requirements.
Major activities of the prices and living conditions program during fiscal year 1980 included the release of all major economic indicators according to the preannounced schedules and in accordance with release procedures established by the Office of Management and Budget.
Through the first 6 months of fiscal 1980, the staff had distributed over a million copies of printed materials in response to more than 350,000 recorded requests for data.
These figures exclude an extremely heavy correspondence and analysis workload requested by the Congress, policymaking agencies in the Executive Branch, labor unions, business, and the public.
Such requests total in the thousands, and most are handled on a timely basis.
In response to widespread concern over the measurement of homeownership costs in the CPI, BLS initiated monthly publication of five alternative experimental measures of homeownership costs in January 1980.
The measures are based on work conducted during the course of the CPI Revision and are based on information already being collected for the current CPI program.
The staff also developed a new production system providing average prices for food to replace the program that was discontinued with the termination of the unrevised CPI.
The staff completed implementation of an ongoing program to update the CPI outlet sample in one-fifth of the CPI pricing areas each year.
The revision of the PPI program is continuing: Weights have been revised; pilot surveys to test concepts, designs, and procedures for the full-scale comprehensive revision have been completed; revised indexes for 28 industries are now being published; and 90 other industries are in various stages of development with 30 additional measures scheduled for publication in January 1981.
BLS recently received the report of the Expert Committee on Family Budgets, which was established to identify either the standards or the methodologies required to revise the current program.
BLS has begun to evaluate this report and will seek comment from the BLS labor and business advisory committees as well as major Government users.
In the IPP, the staff produced price indexes that cover 60 percent of the value of products exported from the U.S. and 37 percent of the value of products imported into the U.S. Indexes covering an additional 21 percent of exports and 44 percent of the value of imports are in various stages of development scheduled for completion by 1983.
Data collection began for the CEX.
Data collection for the Diary component of the survey started in September 1979; collection for the quarterly interview began in October of the same year.
BLS continued to strengthen and expand its program of research in productivity and technology.
The staff extended the analysis of factors contributing to the productivity slowdown, including the impact of capital formation as well as demographic changes in the labor force.
In the manufacturing sector, they studied energy impacts and adjustment to changing prices and output levels.
The Office added productivity measures for fabricated structural metal, construction machinery, drug stores, paper and plastic bags, and ball bearings to the list of industries for which measures are published.
About 93 separate productivity measures are now published in the manufacturing, mining, transportation, trade, communication, and service sectors of the economy.
The Office refined and expanded the series of productivity in the Federal government to cover 373 organizations, up 26 from one year ago.
The staff completed indexes for 1967-69 fiscal years for 28 functional groupings of Federal agencies representing 66 percent of the Federal civilian work force.
The staff updated trends in manufacturing productivity and labor costs for 11 countries during the year and compiled estimates of the comparative levels of compensation of wage earners in 31 countries and 34 manufacturing industries.
In addition, they updated international comparisons of labor force, employment, and unemployment in nine industrial countries.
These measures provide insights into the changing competitive position of the United States.
The Office studied the employment implications of automation and other technological changes and prepared reports appraising the impact of major technological changes on productivity, employment, and occupational requirements over the next 10 years on five major American industries.
The Bureau completed a survey on labor and material requirements for hospitals and began a survey for shopping centers and retail stores.
These studies measure the total labor and material requirements as well as the occupational distribution of the types of construction to serve as a basis for estimating the labor generating effects of construction programs.
The Office gave major attention to methods for improving State and local area employment and unemployment estimates.
The staff developed a comprehensive improvement plan aimed at each of the major elements in the estimation system.
They began a test of a nonresident claims data exchange system to improve the quality of the unemployment insurance claims data that are a major input into the estimate and also began work on developing a system for comparing 1980 Census estimates with the current local area unemployment statistics.
The establishment payroll survey data were adjusted to March 1979 employment benchmark levels in line with usual practice but 3 months earlier.
Based on the National Commission on Employment and Unemployment Statistics (NCEUS) recommendations, the Bureau conducted a complete review of the establishment survey of employment, hours, and earnings.
The staff planned a multi-year revision of this Federal-State cooperative program, and some basic groundwork is underway.
The review considered methods of sampling estimation, data processing, solicitation, data collection, and training.
The staff expanded the State and area component of the industry payroll survey during FY 1980 to provide current monthly data for nine additional Standard Metropolitan Statistical Areas (SMSAs) plus the Virgin Islands.
As required by CETA, the Office calculated wage indexes derived from quarterly reports on insured employment and wages for over 3,000 counties and 450 prime sponsors for use in determining the maximum allowable wage for public service employees involved in CETA programs.
Also, they used these data to construct a wage index for determining hospital cost reimbursements for Medicare patients.
They initiated a validation of State procedures and processing with regard to the preparation of the ES-202 Report (Quarterly Report on Covered Employment and Wages).
The Office completed analyses of the results of FY 1980 pilot surveys of job openings.
In 1980, the Bureau developed national estimates of occupational employment by industry for manufacturing industries.
The 48 State Employment Security Agencies cooperating in the Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) Survey collected data from employers during 1980.
The Bureau collected data for the remaining States.
The OES survey is conducted on a 3-year cycle, with approximately one-third of the economy surveyed each year.
At the end of the 1980 survey cycle, national estimates were available for all manufacturing industries for up to 1,500 occupations.
During the past year, the staff produced two publications documenting the 1990 employment projections.
Bulletin 2018, Methodology for Projections of Industry Employment, presents a detailed description of the models and methods used to develop employment projections.
Bulletin 2056, Historical and Projected Input-Output Table of the Economic Growth Project (2 volumes), presents input-output tables developed as part of the projections.
In the occupational area, the staff worked to prepare the 1982-83 edition of the Occupational Outlook Handbook.
They developed national estimates of occupational employment by industry in an industry-occupational matrix using data from the Occupational Employment Statistics Surveys.
They produced Exploring Careers, a publication aimed at career exploration at the junior high school level.
At the same time, the Office began revising its published employment projections for 1990.
These revisions encompass review and updating of a broad range of factors including business cycle developments, changes in the labor force, and price and productivity trends.
The staff replaced the inputoutput data base to reflect the release of the 1972 benchmark by the Department of Commerce.
The results of the revisions will be published in a series of articles and bulletins to be released over the next year.
Wage and industrial relations programs expanded the Employment Cost Index to include employer costs for employee benefits, bringing the index to a measure of change in compensation in addition to wages and salaries for employees in the private nonfarm sector.
Also important was a comprehensive test for the Office of Personnel Management on private-sector employee benefit plans for use in the Federal Government's approach to total compensation comparability for its employees.
The Office published for the first time the Employment Cost Index measuring relative changes of total compensation (wages and salaries plus employee benefit costs) for the March 1980 quarter.
Expansion of the Index to cover 12 million State and local government workers began with a publication target set for November 1981.
The Bureau made other improvements in data processing which allowed for more decentralized processing.
In addition to allowing more of the work to be carried out in the regional offices, these improvements reduced cost and time requirements.
A principal new effort, which began in 1980, is the development of an estimation system that will permit the publication of indexes as well as relatives and will be more efficient in the treatment of routine changes in the establishment sample.
A major effort to collect and analyze a large body of data on private industry employee benefit plans was successfully completed.
The project, a comprehensive test carried out in cooperation with the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), provided data for OPM to use to evaluate and compare employee compensation in Federal Government with that in private industry.
BLS publication of test results marked the first time that comprehensive data have been available on the detailed characteristics of benefit plans—leave, pensions, and a variety of insurances—in private industry.
The Office continued a series of studies to provide data on the economic effects of the Fair Labor Standards Act.
The staff completed a two part study covering May 1979 to meet the needs of the Minimum Wage Study Commission.
The first part provides national data on employee earnings and hours in all private industry, including information by age and sex.
The second part measures changes between May 1978 and May 1979 in employee earnings and hours and the incidence of employee benefits in a panel of establishments.
The Bureau launched a nationwide survey of employee earnings and hours in May 1980.
Designed to meet the needs of the Employment Standards Administration, the survey will provide data on the frequency distribution of employees by individual hourly earnings and weekly hours of work.
The staff will develop separate data by employee age and sex, industry, and establishment status under the Fair Labor Standards Act.
The Bureau conducted area wage surveys in 70 areas under its regular program and an additional 100 area wage surveys and 115 special industry wage surveys under contract with the Employment Standards Administration for use in administering the Service Contract Act.
The staff enhanced the regular surveys in 24 areas by adding data on the proportion of workers participating in health maintenance and insurance plans.
They will add data for the remaining 46 areas over the next 2 years.
The Bureau improved the timeliness and appearance of area bulletins by using photocomposition.
The Office analyzed national data developed from the program in a May Monthly Labor Review article on occupational wage relationships.
The staff continued planning begun in 1979 for future survey activities relating to Fedral pay reform proposals.
The Office continued to upgrade the analytical approaches to industry wage studies by using regression techniques, variance analyses, and the occupational pay matrix.
The staff prepared a Monthly Labor Review article on wage dispersion by industry which was issued in late 1980.
The annual survey of professional, administrative, technical, and clerical pay (PATC) was delivered on time for use in determining the amount of the October pay adjustment for Federal white-collar employees.
During the year, the staff did substantial research in developing and revising job definitions to be used in classifying workers in future surveys.
The Office released data on employee paid leave in the private sector for the first time in 1980.
The PATC survey was the vehicle for collection of this information requested by OPM for their total compensation comparability project, which is a major element in the Pay Reform bill now before the Congress.
The staff continued to add new studies to the Industry Wage Survey program: Millwork and upholstered furniture, savings/loan associations, electrical transmission equipment, and smelting and refining of nonferrous metals.
Combining two or more related industry studies into one study through "survey umbrellas,"initiated 3 years ago, has reduced data collection costs as well as providing a broader base for analyzing industry sectors.
Responding to the growing importance of collective bargaining in the public sector, the Bureau issued its first report on the size of labor-management agreements covering employees of State and local governmental units.
This marked the beginning of a regular program of releases on key public-sector labor agreements.
The Office will issue reports semiannually that will be similar to the established series on the size of major collective bargaining agreements in the private economy.
The Bureau's industrial relations program published an analytical study of major collective bargaining agreements in the private and public sector, Employer Pay for Leave and Union Business.
Work is in progress on a study dealing with negotiated plant movement and relocation allowances provisions.
The staff completed a study of more than 100 characteristics of major agreements in effect in 1980, to be released in early 1981.
They produced collective bargaining reports for four industries whose contracts expired in 1980: Steel, telephones, aerospace, and longshore.
The staff prepared a report, Work Stoppages in Government, 1978, as well as a bulletin analyzing all stoppages in the economy in 1978.
Planning is well along for the 1981 edition of the Directory of National Unions and Employee Associations, which will include the results of a survey of single-firm unaffiliated unions.
Several amendments were introduced in Congress relating to the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) inspection activity, which involved BLS.
The Supplementary Data System (SDA), which provides detailed information on the characteristics of the occupationally injured or ill from State workers' compensation records, was expanded, and the Work Injury Report (WIR) survey program, designed to obtain highly specific information from injured workers related to particularized accidents to assist OSHA and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) in injury prevention efforts, was improved.
Several amendments to the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 were again introduced in Congress, all of which, except one, were defeated.
The Labor-Health and Human Services appropriations bill for FY 1981 contained a rider which would prevent OSHA from conducting general schedule inspections of employers with 10 or fewer workers in industries having a lost workday injury rate less than the national average, based on the most recently published BLS data.
The BLS provided OSHA and Congressional staffs with data on the number of employees and establishments potentially excluded by this proposed legislation.
In the 1980 annual survey, the Bureau obtained data from employers on the object or the event associated with jobrelated fatalities, marking continuation of the program begun in 1979.
In November 1979, the Office produced two press releases on the results of the 1978 survey—one on the general annual survey estimates and the other on causal patterns of fatalities by major industry classification.
The staff also prepared detailed occupational injury and illness statistics in a summary, an analytical bulletin, and five industry guides to assist employers in evaluating their injury and illness experience.
States participating in the annual survey program released data in similar publications; BLS additionally assisted in making data available to researchers and safety specialists through the National Technical Information Service.
In fiscal year 1980, 36 States supplied injury and illness data based on workers' compensation first reports of injury under the Supplementary Data System (SDS).
This system obtains information on detailed characteristics associated with work accidents.
The information supplements the industryspecific trend data derived from the annual survey and is transmitted to OSHA and NIOSH for use in meeting their respective program responsibilities.
Additionally, standard tabulations showing distributions of occupational injuries and illnesses by work characteristics and work situations are generated for each participating State.
Participating States and BLS analyze the distribution and clusters of cases with particular emphasis on the characteristics of injuries and illnesses, including the industry of the injured or ill employees.
These tabulations and analyses serve a wide variety of applications in the occupational safety and health area.
Standard tabulations for each State and records of individual cases are made available to accident preventionists and researchers through the National Technical Information Service.
BLS prepares special announcements to inform potential users of the availability of SDS information.
In the 1980 fiscal year, analyses of injuries to women and of methods to target safety programs appeared in the Monthly Labor Review.
Analytic work is expected to be greatly expanded during the 1981 fiscal year.
BLS encourages and assists State agencies in providing data and in expanding analysis of individual State data.
The Bureau initiated recordkeeping seminars to maintain the quality of injury and illness information recorded by employers in their establishments.
BLS developed a slidesound show to aid in State and regional presentations and conducted over 50 seminars during the fiscal year.
The BLS continued its Work Injury Reports (WIR) survey program to obtain detailed accident information directly from injured employees, which is not available from either the annual survey or the SDS.
The Office completed and published four studies relating to injuries of the eye, face, head, and foot.
Currently, surveys planned are related to servicing and maintaining equipment, amputations, back injuries, and hand injuries.
The OSH Act requires statistical programs to meet Federal and State needs, encourages the participation of States in the programs, and authorizes grants to provide half the funding of State costs.
Recordkeeping, the annual survey, SDS, and the WIR surveys of injured employees are all carried out with the participation of State agencies.
In the 1980 fiscal year, 49 States participated in the annual survey; 36 in the SDS; and 27 in the WIR.
The special projects program focused on problems regarding occupational illness measures.
The staff prepared an evaluative report on data sources directly or individually associated with occupational illnesses.
The BLS participated with OSHA and NIOSH in planning for a proposed survey on lead exposure; with the National Center of Health Statistics on occupational and environmental statistics, as mandated under Public Law 95-623; and with the National Safety Council on causal information on occupational injuries.
With the reentry of the United States into the ILO, the staff prepared special analyses to assist the organization's specialized industry committees.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) moved into the decade of the 1980's emphasizing worker rights while continuing its common sense efforts to make the American workplace safer and more healthful.
Major steps were taken in FY 1980 not only in health and safety standards development, but in all other aspects of the agency's activities as it worked to fulfill its Congressional mandate to".. .assure so far as possible every working man and woman in the Nation safe and healthful working conditions and to preserve our human resources."
One of the main influences on the agency's activities during the year, not only in protecting worker rights, but in almost all other efforts, resulted from decisions handed down by the U.S. court system.
On February 26, the U.S. Supreme Court, in a unanimous decision (Marshall v. Whirlpool), upheld the right of workers to refuse to do a job which presented an immediate danger of death or serious injury.
The Court's action upheld a decision by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 6th Circuit which had been appealed by the plaintiffs.
OSHA also was seeking clarification from the Court since in a similar case (Marshall v. Daniels Construction Co.) the Court had refused to review a Fifth Circuit Court's decision denying that right.
In another key decision in July, the Supreme Court affirmed another ruling of the Fifth Circuit which set aside OSHA's benzene standard.
That standard limited the amount of benzene to which a worker may be exposed to one part of benzene per million parts of air (i.e. the permissible worker exposure limit).
A plurality of the Court opined that OSHA failed to make an adequate formal finding that the standard would remedy a significant health risk.
At the same time, however, the Court reaffirmed the agency's mandate to issue standards to protect workers' safety and health.
As the year ended OSHA, in a "risk assessment" study, was reviewing the health effects of the one part per million exposure level to estimate the risk compared to what studies showed the risk was at 10 parts per million parts of air, the former permissible worker exposure level which will stay in effect as long as the new standard remains vacated.
During its new session, the Court has agreed to review a decision of the D.C. Circuit upholding OSHA's cotton dust standard.
A main point of contention in the case is whether the costs to an employer, when complying with an OSHA standard, must bear a "reasonable relationship" to the benefits which result.
An appeal before the Court to a lower court decision upholding OSHA's coke oven emissions standard was withdrawn by the plaintiffs.
The D.C. Circuit upheld the validity of OSHA's lead standard for the major lead industries including primary and secondary smelters and battery plants.
For the other lead industries, the Court stayed the engineering and work practice control provisions and gave OSHA six months to complete evaluation of feasibility data for these industries.
The D.C. Circuit Court, in a separate ruling, vacated on procedural grounds the OSHA regulation requiring employers to pay employees for the time spent in accompanying inspectors during walkaround inspections.
The agency must repromulgate the rule.
In response to an order from the U.S. District Court that all states with state job safety and health plans must have "fully effective"enforcement programs, OSHA has submitted to the court a proposed plan under which states could reach that "fully effective" level of compliance staffs.
The proposed plan lists the state staffing levels (‘Benchmarks") needed.
Challenges to OSHA's regulations on worker access to employer-kept toxic exposure and medical records were awaiting action in both the D.C. and Fifth Circuits as the year ended.
OSHA promulgated an important rule permitting worker and OSHA access to employer-maintained medical and toxic exposure records.
Nothing is considered more basic in job safety and health matters than workers' right to know what they are working with and its effects.
The standard, which became effective August 21, added no new recordkeeping requirements, but outlined the conditions under which records that employers voluntarily create are to be maintained and made available to employees, their representatives and OSHA.
The standard applies to general industry, maritime and construction employers having employees exposed to toxic substances or harmful physical agents.
The agency also has issued a proposal to provide agricultural workers the same access to such information.
Another major health standard was promulgated in January stating the agency's policy for identification, classification and regulation of potential occupational carcinogens.
Cancer currently is the second leading cause of death in the United States with more than 400,000 persons dying annually from some form of the disease.
Government reports say that from 20 to 40 percent of these cancer cases may be work-related, and OSHA believes work-related cancer deaths often can be prevented.
The new so-called "generic"or general cancer policy establishes a system for identifying and classifying carcinogens based on the nature and extent of the scientific evidence of their cancer-causing potential, and provides a standard-setting procedure, including the annual publication of a "candidates list'' of potential cacinogens.
OSHA published a candidates list of 107 substances in August under that policy and as the fiscal year ended was awaiting comment on the health effects of these chemicals to determine if they warranted further scientific review as potential carcinogens.
The list resulted from OSHA's initial screening of more than 2,000 substances with some evidence of carcinogenicity.
The list is not a scientific determination of carcinogenicity nor is it a preclassification warning.
The Environmental Protection Agency's Carcinogen Assessment Group (CAG) also has issued a list of 150 substances with substantial evidence that they may be carcinogens.
Rather than relisting substances on the CAG list, OSHA has referred to this list as well for substances to be given a closer look as potentially cancer causing.
Substances from OSHA's candidate list and the CAG list will be classified as Category I potential carcinogens (if they meet the criteria of a potential carcinogen in humans or in single mammalian species in long-term testing) or Category II potential carcinogens (when the evidence is "suggestive'').
Substances classified Category I or II then will be selected for priority lists according to the estimated number of workers exposed, the level of human exposure, and related evidence for individual rulemaking.
The cancer policy is the first of a series of "generic" rulemakings contemplated by OSHA.
The generic approach is considered more efficient then case-by-case regulation.
For example, OSHA currently is developing a generic pesticide regulation to cover exposure to any toxic substance used as or in the formulation of pesticides.
Rather than concentrating on specific permissible exposure levels for each such substance, the regulation would set forth general procedures to be used to protect employees engaged in pesticides manufacturing and formulation operations involving all such substances.
OSHA neared completion of an initial revision to its noise standard that would prescribe the essential elements of a hearing conservation program.
Risk assessment studies were conducted for standards that would limit worker exposure to asbestos, beryllium, chromium and MOCA/MBOCA to determine if the standards remedy a significant health risk.
Preliminary work was done on a proposed standard for cadmium; the cotton dust standard for the cotton-seed oil industry was reevaluated; an advance notice of proposed rulemaking on the health hazards in grain handling facilities was published; epidemiological studies and other material on worker exposure to nickel was reviewed; and a proposed standard for abrasive blasting neared completion.
OSHA also evaluated the feasibility of engineering and work practice controls for a number of industries for which the D.C. Circuit Court has stayed the relevant provisions of the lead standard.
Performance-oriented standards (i.e. those which state broad goals rather than specifying set procedures for achieving worker protection), streamlining, clarifying and updating were the watchwords in safety standard development as OSHA promulgated new fire protection regulations and neared completion of a similar overall revision of its electrical standards.
To cut costs and reduce waste without cutting regulatory effectiveness, OSHA reduced the volume of mandatory provisions of its fire protection standards from 400 pages to 15.
In addition to getting rid of provisions unrelated to worker health or safety, hundreds of pages of referenced material (such as the National Fire Protection Association standards) were removed from mandatory requirements and placed in non-mandatory appendices.
By adopting performance-oriented provisions, the new fire protection regulations allow employers, especially larger companies, the choice of a variety of methods for achieving worker protection.
The appendices provide guidelines for the smaller firms, who are without the resources to develop their own programs.
The same format is being followed in the proposed revision to OSHA's electrical standards for general industry.
The final rule on the proposed revisions, which would reduce wordage from about 250,000 to 15,000 words, was expected early in the new fiscal year.
The performance-oriented provisions of the proposed standard are expected to be flexible enough to incorporate new technology and enable employers to substitute updated equipment and practices, many of which will be reflected in the NFPA's National Electrical Code which is frequently revised.
The proposed standard will cover electrical installation safety requirements and is to be the first part of a planned four-part series.
The other three major parts will cover safety related work practices, safety related maintenance requirements, and safety requirements for special equipment.
OSHA promulgated a new safety standard to protect an estimated 322,000 workers who service potentially explosive tube-type truck, bus, trailer and other tires using multi-piece rim wheels.
A final standard for the perimeter guarding of lowpitched roofs to protect workers from falls neared completion.
Advance notices of proposed rulemaking, the first step in OSHA's rulemaking process, were published for confined spaces in both general industry and construction; grain handling; and lockout and tagout of powered machines, equipment, systems and processes.
OSHA also worked on various stages of rulemaking for conveyors; educational and scientific diving; hazardous materials; oil and gas well drilling, servicing and related operations; walking/working surfaces; welding and cutting; floor and wall openings; ladders and scaffolds; tunnels; and marine terminals.
Just as the year was ending, OSHA promulgated an amended rule confirming the authority of its compliance safety and health officers to obtain ex parte warrants (i.e. those obtained without notifying employers) to enter workplaces for inspection as well as authorizing the officers to seek warrants prior to beginning inspections.
OSHA area officers also were given the authority to begin, in early FY 1981, to withdraw citations for violations or to modify penalties during informal conferences with employers.
The new procedure is expected to expedite abatement of hazards, reduce unnecessary litigation, and give small business an opportunity to resolve differences without costly litigation and without lessening worker protection.
OSHA continued to act resolutely in dealing with serious violations of job safety and health standards.
In February, the agency cited the Newport News Shipbuilding and Dry Dock Co., the nation's largest, alleging 617 violations and proposing penalties totalling $786,190, more than double the largest amount ever proposed previously against any one company.
Under the OSH Act, the agency may recommend cases for criminal prosecution if an employer willfully violates a specific OSHA standard and a worker dies as a result of the violation.
During the fiscal year 10 cases were referred to the Justice Department for possible criminal prosecution, bringing the total thus referred to 26 since OSHA came into being.
In fiscal year 1980 federal OSHA inspected 63,363 workplaces for compliance with job safety and health standards.
Of these, 52.6 percent were general schedule (programmed inspections), 25.4 percent were in response to workers' complaints, 3.6 percent were accident investigations, and 18.4 percent were follow-up inspections to see if previously cited serious violations had been corrected.
As a result of these inspections, a total of 132,419 violations of job safety and health standards were alleged.
Of these 49,474 were for alleged serious, willful or repeat violations with resulting proposed penalties totaling $23,306,203; there were a total of 82,945 alleged violations of all other types, with proposed penalties totaling $184,300.
Figures for FY 1979 and 1980 revealed that a large portion (32 and 37 percent of the totals) of OSHA's citations were for alleged serious, willful, and repeat violations whereas only 14 percent fell into these categories in FY 1977.
As a result of intensive recruiting efforts, OSHA added 31 compliance safety and health officers, bringing the agency total to 1,612 by year's end.
OSHA's Office of Field Coordination and Experimental Programs serves as a single source of program guidance and policy interpretation for the agency's decentralized field operations.
During the year, the office prepared a system for scheduling inspections according to the hazardousness of the industry; assisted the Department of Justice with technical information and expert witnesses in a case involving an explosion of a grain elevator which resulted in fatalities; worked on the amended rule on ex parte warrants; and was a key source for the agency's information system and case files.
The Directorate of Technical Support provides scientific and engineering support for OSHA's standard-setting and compliance operations.
During the fiscal year, the directorate issued jointly with the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health a report on radio frequency heat sealers, and health hazard alerts (general warnings and guidelines for safe use) on 2- Nitropropane, and on Benzidine-o-Tolidine-, and o-Dianisidine-based dyes.
It granted General Motors Corporation a permanent variance from several provisions of OSHA's lead and arsenic standards while considering similar variances for the Ford and Chrysler Motor Companies.
It also drafted regulations to simplify and clarify the variance process.
Economic and environmental studies were designed and carried out in 19 health and safety areas of major concern to the agency and interagency studies for providing guidelines to industry for compliance strategies and implementing guidelines for environmental analysis regulations were worked on.
The directorate completed several medical field investigations on: the herbicide oryzalin; health hazards of wood preservatives; pneumonitis in the synthetic textile manufacturing process; brain cancer in the petrochemical industry; and asbestos-related diseases in several plants.
A group of experts on noise control technology developed a videotape series on engineering noise controls as well as other instructional material on job health hazards.
Respirator quantitative fit testing procedures were developed and onethird of the Docket Office files was converted to microfiche.
An automatic storage and retrieval system was instituted and safety and health scheduling models were modified.
The Agency's"New Directions"grants program to increase the educational competence in job safety and health matters among employee, business, educational, and non-profit organizations received new funding.
The agency awarded $15.5 million in such grants during FY 1980 with $3.5 million of this in new grants and $12.0 million for strengthening programs which received earlier grants.
Of the total amount, $4.2 million came from the National Cancer Institute and $300,000 from NIOSH.
The Office of Information and Consumer Affairs put out 17 new booklets and 4 posters during the year that stress worker rights and explain various standards and program activities.
As a followup to the publication last year of a series of five booklets and two posters on Section 11(c) of the Act (the so-called"anti-discrimination"ciause) which prohibits discrimination against a worker for exercising his or her rights under the Act, the office issued a Spanish translation of each.
Other booklets, meant for general distribution, covered topics ranging from noise control, servicing multi-piece rim wheels, and acrylonitrile, to an explanation of onsite consultation services for employers.
OSHA's Training Institute in Chicago was reorganized into a safety branch and a health branch to improve the efficiency of its operations.
The Institute trained about 3,000 people during the year, including state compliance officers, other federal agency personnel, and employer and employee representatives as well as OSHA compliance officers.
Worker rights are protected under the OSH Act by a section (Section 11(c)) which prohibits an employer from discriminating against an employee for exercising his or her rights under the Act.
During the year worker complaints filed under the clause increased sharply to 4,029 compliants compared to 2,951 in FY 1979, a 36 percent increase, and five times the number filed in FY 1975.
The section also authorizes back pay awards including benefits and interest when such discrimination has been determined.
In one of the more notable such awards, the manager of a pet store in South Natick, Mass., received a courtordered award totalling $14,000 in a suit initiated by Labor Department regional solicitors in Boston.
A cornerstone of OSHA's "Common Sense" approach is aid to small business.
In line with this policy, OSHA has established a free onsite consultation service in all of the 50 states and in U.S. territories.
The service is completely independent of OSHA's inspection efforts and helps employers to recognize and correct safety and health hazards.
During the year about 21,000 employers requested the free service in 39 states and territories covered under federal contract arrangements.
No comparable figures were available for FY 1980 on the number of businesses using the service run under OSHA-approved state plans in the other 18 states and territories, but in the previous year, an additional 18,785 employers used the service in these areas.
OSHA's "New Directions" grants program also was planned with the needs of small businesses in mind.
The ability to serve small business remains a primary criterion for awarding the grants.
In 1980 the agency appointed a special assistant for small business to establish and maintain close contact with the small business community, to act as the agency's principal spokesperson for OSHA's efforts and policies as they affect small business, and to be the main conduit for the flow of ideas from the small business world into the agency.
Under the leadership of the Small Business Assistant, in April, OSHA and the Small Business Administration signed a memorandum of agreement aimed at increasing the participation by small entrepreneurs in OSHA's rulemaking and increasing the flexibility in the application to them of safety and health standards.
Under the OSH Act, federal agencies are responsible for setting up their own on-the-job safety and health programs.
The responsibilities of each of the 120 agencies in this matter is spelled out in Presidential Executive Orders, the latest of which (E.O. #12196) became effective October 1, 1980.
The latest executive order has new safety and health provisions strengthening on-the-job protection for the approximately 2.8 million federal workers, and expands the roles of OSHA, the various federal agencies, and the General Services Administration.
On August 15 OSHA issued proposed administrative rules implementing the executive order and called for public comment on them.
The final rules establishing the basic job safety and health program elements were expected to be promulgated early in the new fiscal year.
OSHA, NIOSH, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Food and Drug Administration, the Consumer Product Safety Commission, and the Food Safety and Quality Service (U.S. Department of Agriculture) make up the Interagency Regulatory Liaison Group (IRLG), which was formed in 1977 to eliminate waste and duplication through cooperative efforts.
During the year the IRLG focussed major regulatory integration efforts on asbestos, benzene, benzidene and its cogener dyes, chlorofluorocarbons, formaldehyde, and PCB's, as well as sharing information on several other toxic substances.
In other intergovernmental activities, OSHA represented the Department of Labor on the Radiation Policy Council set up by the Executive Office of the President to review current federal activities on radiation control.
It participated with the Mine Safety and Health Administration, the Employment Standards Administration, and other department agencies in preparing research requests from the Department to NIOSH and signed two memoranda of understanding with the U.S. Coast Guard, one on carrying out job safety and health enforcement activities on the outer continental shelf, and the other establishing procedures for cooperation between OSHA and the Coast Guard in developing health standards for maritime activities.
The Employment Standards Administration (ESA) focused on consolidating administrative reforms made in recent years to insure that workers receive their rightful protections.
The Wage and Hour Division concentrated on violations of the minimum wage and overtime requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA).
Nearly 74,000 investigations were carried out under these provisions during fiscal year 1980.
A total of $110.9 million in unpaid wages was disclosed—$43.7 million due to 347,000 employees in minimum wage underpayments and $67.2 million due to 276,000 employees in overtime underpayments.
Employers have so far agreed to pay $25 million to 251,000 employees for unpaid minimum wages and $44.6 million to 225,000 employees for unpaid overtime.
When employers refused to pay and the department could not litigate, employees were advised of their right to bring a private suit to collect the back wages due to them.
Fiscal year 1980 saw a new enforcement project—the Employers of Undocumented Workers Program—expanded.
Its purpose is to reduce the economic incentive to hire undocumented workers through vigorous enforcement of wage and hour standards.
The division targeted for investigation geographic areas of the country and industries in which undocumented workers traditionally have been employed.
Almost 14,000 investigations were conducted, disclosing $12.5 million in unpaid minimum wages due to 116,000 employees and $14.8 million in unpaid overtime due to 70,000 employees.
Employers already have agreed to pay over $14 million to employees.
In additional cases, the department is engaged in negotiations or litigation to recover back wages for employees.
As part of the Employers of Undocumented Workers Program, special teams of compliance officers focused their time and resources on specific locations and industries.
This concentrated enforcement activity took place in Miami, Dallas, Los Angeles, Brooklyn, the Bronx, Houston, and New Jersey.
Investigations focused above all on the garment industry, construction, gasoline service stations, restaurants, and hotels.
The Wage and Hour Division is providing the Minimum Wage Study Commission with data from investigations conducted during a random survey of 18,000 business establishments.
The commission, established by 1977 amendments to the FLSA, will analyze the data to determine the overall level of compliance with the minimum wage, overtime, and other provisions of the act.
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit ruled that the 1974 extension of the federal minimum wage law to domestic service employees is constitutional, and that it applies to employees such as guards on an estate.
The decision, reached in Marshall v. Rose, was the first to uphold the constitutionality and scope of the law as it applies to domestic service workers.
The department issued final determinations specifying certain state and local government activities which are subject to the minimum wage and overtime requirements of the FLSA.
State alcoholic beverage stores, among others, are included among the covered activities.
These determinations stemmed from the Supreme Court ruling in National League of Cities v. Usery.
In that case, the court held that the federal wage and hour law cannot constitutionally be applied to state and local government employees who engage in services which states and their political subdivisions traditionally have afforded.
The FLSA does authorize employees to pay subminimum wages"in order to prevent curtailment of opportunities for employment' of certain workers.
Nevertheless, the employers must apply to the Wage and Hour Division for authority to pay such wages.
During fiscal year 1980 more than 660,000 handicapped workers, full-time students, student learners, and apprentices were employed at special lower rates.
The division monitors the payment of special minimum wages to insure that employers meet all requirements for authorization of certificates.
Investigations carried out in the past fiscal year focused in particular on sheltered workshops, which often have authority to pay many of their employees less than the minimum wage.
More than 200 sheltered workshops, or 52 percent of the total investigated, were found to have underpaid 6,500 of their workers by $1.2 million.
Testimony presented at 1979 hearings on a petition to end the authorization of lower minimum wages for blind workers indicated that workers whose blindness is their only handicap can be as productive as other workers.
The division therefore has developed an experimental program under which such workers who currently earn less than the minimum will receive graduated pay raises over a period of years until they are earning the full minimum wage.
The division will study the program at its conclusion to determine whether it should be made permanent.
Investigations involving the child labor provision of the FLSA revealed that nearly 10,000 minors were employed illegally.
Almost three quarters of the violations occurred in the retail trade industry.
The division assessed approximately $1.7 million in civil penalties against 1,099 employers who had illegally employed 8,510 minors.
Several important court cases involving the child labor program were decided during fiscal year 1980.
In Jerrico, Inc. v. U.S. Department of Labor, the Supreme Court upheld the department's authority to impose civil money penalties on employers who violate the child labor provisions and to apply the monies toward the cost of administering the law.
Decisions were reached in two other cases dealing with 1977 amendments to the FLSA which authorized the Secretary of Labor to grant waivers to permit 10- and 11-yearolds to harvest short-season crops by hand under specified conditions.
One of those conditions is that 'the level and type of pesticides and other chemicals used would not have an adverse effect on the health or well-being of the individuals to whom the waiver would apply.
The department's attempts to enforce this requirement of the law had led to almost continuous litigation.
The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed a decision of the U.S. District Court for the State of Washington and upheld the Labor Department's decision not to allow 10- and 11-year-old children to harvest crops by hand where certain pesticides were used.
The court also ruled that the department had been fully justified in finding existing pesticide standards established by the Environmental Protection Agency for adults unsatisfactory.
Earlier in the year the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia had given a very strict reading to the requirement for the evaluation of pesticides.
The court held that there must be proof of "absolute safety" or"zero risk" before a waiver can be issued and enjoined the department from granting waivers under its existing regulations.
The decision was based in part on the fact that the regulations were originally issued without an opportunity for public comment.
By order of the District Court for the District of Columbia, the department republished the regulations on pesticides for public comment in March 1980.
None of the comments submitted, however, met the court's ruling that there be absolute proof of no adverse health effects on 10- and 11-yearold children.
The final regulations issued in August 1980 therefore deleted all pesticide standards established previously by the department.
In order to receive waivers, employers now either have to submit a statement that no pesticides or chemicals were used on the crop to be harvested or have to submit objective scientific data which the Secretary of Labor can use to set safe entry times for 10- and 11-year-olds.
In a related issue, the Labor Department and the Environmental Protection Agency signed an agreement in March 1980 to develop a pesticide protection program for farmworkers.
A principal feature of the agreement is a fiveyear study of the effects of pesticides on the health of children employed in agriculture.
The past fiscal year brought changes in the way the department enforces laws protecting farmworkers which should insure greater coordination of efforts by the various agencies and more efficient enforcement of the laws.
In June 1980, the department signed an agreement ending litigation in the NAACP v. Marshall case.
A group of organizations representing farmworkers had originally filed the case in 1972, alleging the department violated the rights of migrant and seasonal farmworkers in the provision of employment services.
The terms of the agreement called for the establishment of Farm Labor Coordinated Enforcement Committees on both national and regional levels.
These committees now oversee and coordinate the department's enforcement of laws protecting farmworkers.
ESA, which enforces the Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act, has participated fully in the formation and activities of these new committees.
Also in accordance with the agreement, the Wage and Hour Division has selected and placed throughout the country 20 compliance officers who specialize in farm labor law enforcement.
These farm labor specialists participated in a concentrated enforcement program which took place on the East Coast during the summer and fall of 1980.
Working closely with regional and local offices, they developed an enforcement strategy which focused on known violators of the Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act and the wage and hour law.
The program covered specific sections of North and South Carolina, Maryland, Virginia, and New York where large numbers of farm workers are employed, and uncovered many violations of both laws.
The division conducted a total of 4,485 investigations involving the Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act.
Nearly 65 percent of the cases revealed violations by farm labor contractors, their employees, or users of their services.
Nearly 4,000 undocumented workers were found to be employed.
The act is the only federal law which prohibits an employer, in this case the farm labor contractor, from employing undocumented workers.)
During the first nine months of calendar year 1980, 17,500 farm labor contractors and employees of contractors registered with the department and in doing so placed their 520,000 crew members under the protection of the Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act.
The department also either denied or revoked 116 certificates.
These figures are comparable to those for the same period in 1979.
Court cases decided this year had an impact on the farm labor enforcement program.
In the Green Goddess case, the U.S. Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals held that a corporation can'"personally'engage in farm labor contracting activities directly through its agent-employees, and thus qualify for an exemption under the act. The same court ruled in Marshall v. Silver Creek Packing Co. that a packing shed which handles and supplies workers to harvest the produce of others does not perform "solely for its own operation" and therefore cannot qualify for an exception, since the farmers whose fruit is picked benefit directly from the company's hiring activities.
FLCRA regulations stipulate that a contractor must be able to show evidence of a bona fide inquiry into each prospective employee's citizenship or authorization to work in this country.
During the past fiscal year, the department expanded the list of documents which can be accepted as proof of citizenship.
The new rules allow the use of readily accessible documents, including baptismal certificates, certificates of discharge from the U.S. armed forces, and declarations signed by the workers which attest that they are U.S. citizens.
The Office of Government Contract Wage Standards concentrated its efforts on more efficient administration and enforcement of the various laws which provide wage standards for employees on government contract work.
The office was reorganized this past fiscal year, the field enforcement and wage determination staffs received extensive training.
A more vigorous investigation program began and has produced positive results.
Back wages found due to workers in fiscal year 1980 totaled a new all-time high of $12 million due to 45,000 workers.
Employers have agreed to pay $8.78 million in back wages to 36,000 workers, and additional monies will be paid when administrative hearings or litigation are completed.
The increased enforcement activity has resulted in greater public awareness of the rights of workers and the responsibilities of employers, which in turn has led to an increase in the number of complaints alleging violations of the laws.
About 14,500 prevailing wage and fringe benefits determinations were issued under the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts during the fiscal year.
Of the total, 1,386 were general determinations published in the Federal Register which apply to many construction contracts in a given geographic area, and the rest were for specific construction projects.
Under the Service Contract Act, determinations setting wage and fringe benefits standards for a wide variety of job classifications were applied to 33,000 contracts.
The department published proposed regulations which would revise and update rules under the Davis-Bacon Act and Service Contract Act and make the administration of both laws more efficient.
A major research project on the Davis-Bacon Act has been designed.
The study will, among other things, seek to determine whether there is a difference in wages between federal and nonfederal construction projects and examine the impact of the act on local labor markets.
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFC-CP) continued to modernize its methods for enforcing equal employment opportunity in employment with federal contractors.
Fiscal year 1979 saw a complete reorganization of OFCCP and the launching of a major effort to overhaul its regulations.
Fiscal year 1980 has brought concentration on applying those reforms to the complex and pressing needs of the work force.
The success of this effort is reflected in the enforcement statistics for fiscal year 1980, nearly all of which are substantially higher than those of the previous year.
OFCCP conducted over 3,000 compliance reviews of federal contractors in locations where over 900,000 persons are employed.
The agency also investigated 1,640 complaints of discrimination under two laws and an executive order which prohibit job bias because of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or status as a veteran.
Financial commitments made by federal contractors in settlements with the department are nearly twice as large as those for the previous fiscal year.
A total of 670 employers committed $16.2 million to equal employment opportunity and affirmative action, of which $9.9 million went into back pay awards to 5,100 women, minorities, disabled persons, and veterans.
Handicapped persons received $760,000 in back pay, the highest total in the seven-year history of the Rehabilitation Act.
Administrative complaints were filed against 38 companies when equal employment opportunity or affirmative action problems could not be resolved.
Five contractors were debarred from federal contract work—that is, they lost their eligibility to do business with the government.
One of the debarments involved the Firestone Tire and Rubber Company, a major government contractor which had failed to declare underutilization of minorities and women in various job groups and to develop an action-oriented program to correct this deficiency.
The implementation of the debarment order against Firestone was enjoined, and the case now is before a district court for adjudication.
Two other cases set precedents in establishing the department's right to have access to information needed to insure job equity in the work place.
The Prudential Insurance Company of America had refused to provide computer tapes which the department deemed vital for determining whether it had discriminated on the basis of race or sex.
The University of California at Berkeley had refused to release faculty review documents and to allow notes already taken by compliance officers to be removed from the campus after an investigation had revealed possible job discrimination.
The department lifted both debarments when the contractors agreed to furnish the necessary documents.
Precautions were taken in both cases to protect confidential materials.
A similar case involved Uniroyal, Inc., which had been debarred in fiscal year 1979 for its refusal to provide information on alleged job bias in its Mishawaka, Ind., facility.
The department reinstated the company this fiscal year after it agreed to pay $5.2 million to 750 current and former female employees and to take substantial affirmative action steps.
The Uniroyal case involved an affected class of employees—a group continuing to suffer the effects of past discrimination.
OFCCP has begun to devote more of its resources to combatting such systemic discrimination because greater numbers of protected workers benefit from these efforts.
During the past fiscal year, OFCCP found evidence of systemic discrimination in 460 cases.
Some 70 cases were resolved when contractors agreed to pay back wages to employees or to make major changes in their employment practices or both.
OFCCP's efforts have focused in particular on the special problems experienced by handicapped persons.
The first class action involving handicapped persons who had been victims of discrimination was settled this year.
Varo, Inc., a Texas electronics firm, agreed to pay $225,000 in back wages to 85 qualified handicapped persons who had applied for jobs and been screened out because of their disabilities.
The settlement was the largest ever for a group of disabled persons.
In addition, the firm agreed to give 32 of the persons job preference and promised to made reasonable accommodation for their physical and mental disabilities.
A favorable ruling in an important court case further bolstered OFCCP's efforts for disabled people.
The U.S. District Court in Hawaii upheld the department's position on key points under Section 503 of the 1973 Rehabilitation Act in the E.E. Black Company case.
The court ruled that individuals who are perceived as handicapped by their potential employers cannot be denied jobs because they might become risks at some point in the future.
OFCCP also works with federal contractors to help them understand their equal employment requirements and to develop creative, practical, and effective ways of meeting those requirements.
Such cooperation is vital to insure that all workers can take advantage of new opportunities in the constantly changing job market.
To achieve this goal, OFCCP is working with the department's Employment and Training Administration (ETA) to bring together those who are being trained for jobs with existing opportunities.
The efforts are called '"linkage."OFC-CP investigators refer employers who need assistance in reaching affirmative action goals to local job or training centers funded by ETA which have programs aimed at women, minorities, handicapped people, and veterans seeking to enter the job market.
During the past fiscal year, 500 such linkages resulted in jobs for almost 1,200 persons.
In addition, OFCCP officials met directly with federal contractors in a series of seminars held throughout the past fiscal year in major cities across the U.S. Representatives of some of the nation's largest corporations attended the seminars, which were designed to help them understand the latest developments in affirmative action requirements.
To insure that there are qualified job applicants among the groups which traditionally have suffered from discrimination, OFCCP has become a catalyst in the creation of training programs.
For example, in Seattle, it worked with other Federal agencies, State and local government offices, labor, and the private sector to set up a new cooperative program to promote the employment of women in trades such as construction, where men have usually predominated.
The Non-Traditional Employment for Women (ANEW) program is the first of its kind and should serve as a model for other parts of the country.
OFCCP has begun a pilot project designed to help small businesses meet their affirmative action requirements and keep their paperwork to a minimum.
To help Federal contractors understand the special needs of disabled persons on the job and the accommodations which must be made for those needs, OFCCP issued a handbook called Affirmative Action for the Handicapped.
Final regulations issued during the past fiscal year outline for the first time affirmative action goals to increase job opportunities for minorities in construction projects throughout the U.S.
The goals vary by geographic area and are equal to the percentage of minorities in the civilian workforce in each area.
In December 1979, the agency issued proposed regulations which contain a new, concise, and strengthened package of equal employment opportunity requirements for federal contractors.
The proposed rules also simplify the enforcement process for contractors in specific areas and allow for greater participation by labor unions in the contract compliance process.
The regulations are scheduled for final publication in December 1980.
One form of sex discrimination in the work place would be dealt with by proposed guidelines issued by the department and EEOC.
These rules address cases in which employers restrict only women from jobs because of exposure to substances that might pose reproductive hazards.
Another set of proposed regulations would bar employers from paying their employees' dues to private clubs that discriminate in their membership policies.
These rules would treat a subtle form of discrimination against women and minorities, who often are denied business and professional gains because they cannot gain membership in the "right" clubs.
OFCCP and EEOC proposed a memorandum of understanding that would streamline the enforcement of equal employment opportunity laws and reduce cost and duplication of efforts for business.
Under the agreement, many of the critical operations of both agencies would be coordinated.
One important provision would continue to transfer most individual job bias complaints to EEOC for investigation, thus allowing OFCCP to focus its efforts on systemic discrimination.
The Division of Federal Employees' Compensation made significant progress toward its goal of becoming a model for the efficient administration of a workers' compensation program.
The division now processes claims at a faster rate than ever before.
It met its goals for the fiscal year of processing 80 percent of all traumatic injury claims within 40 days and 75 percent of all cases involving occupational disease within five months.
It also met its goals for more rapid delivery of compensation payments and payment of bills for medical services.
Despite a slight increase in the number of new cases over the previous fiscal year, the pending case inventory was reduced by nearly half.
Much of the improvement in service to claimants was due to the automatic data processing system which gradually has been developed and implemented in the program.
The initial system is on line in all district offices, and the full system should be in operation by the end of fiscal year 1981.
Automatic data processing insures that claims can be tracked and located rapidly and accurately, and enables managers to handle their expanding caseloads with greater efficiency and ease.
Increased productivity has led to an increase in the requests for hearings of disputed cases.
By January 1980, there was a backlog of 3,100 requests.
The agency formed a special Hearings and Review Task Force, which processed 2,500 cases during the three months of its existence.
By the end of the fiscal year, the Branch of Hearings and Review had a pending workload of only 1,200 cases—half of what it was at the end of fiscal year 1979.
One of the most important goals of any workers' compensation program is to restore injured workers to employment as soon as is medically possible.
The increased emphasis on vocational rehabilitation is producing positive results in the FECA program.
A total of 584 workers were successfully rehabilitated during the past fiscal year at a substantial savings of more than $9,000 in compensation per case per year.
A joint Labor Department and Postal Service rehabilitation program which began in September 1979, has produced some notable successes, and has the potential of serving as a prototype for similar projects with other federal agencies.
Another promising project will be carried out within the Department of Labor itself.
Under the Homebound Employment Project, departmental employees with disabilities that require them to remain at home will be allowed to work at home.
The program will attempt to demonstrate that these employees can be as productive as employees stationed at traditional worksites and that reduced administrative costs will make it economically feasible for employers to hire homebound workers.
An essential aspect of any compensation program is the weeding out of those claimants who are not legally entitled to receive benefits.
The program conducted reviews of more than 55,000 long-term disability cases during the fiscal year, resulting in downward adjustments of benefits or removals of cases in 5,222 instances and a saving of $16.8 million.
Cases of suspected fraud were referred to the Office of Inspector General for investigation and possible criminal prosecution.
A record $726 million in benefits were paid to coal miners and their surviving dependents in fiscal year 1980.
The Division of Coal Mine Workers' Compensation received 34,000 new claims and added 31,000 beneficiaries to the rolls, bringing the total number of beneficiaries receiving monthly compensation to 68,000.
Miners who are approved for monthly compensation also receive medical treatment benefits for black lung disease.
Nearly 86,000 additional miners who receive their black lung compensation from the Social Security Administration have been approved for medical treatment benefits from the department.
Decisions on claims are now being made at the rate of about 12,000 per month—up from around 800 per month two years ago.
The tremendous upsurge in black lung claims and payments stems from the 1977 amendments to the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act, which expanded coverage, liberalized eligibility requirements for black lung benefits, and placed the burden of cost on the coal industry.
Administrative changes made in the program in recent years have enabled it to deal competently and efficiently with the increased volume of cases.
The Social Security Administration paid out about $1.3 billion in fiscal year 1980 to miners and survivors on claims filed with that agency before the department became responsible for the black lung program.
These beneficiaries are paid from appropriated funds.
All costs of the department's black lung program will ultimately be borne by the coal industry, primarily through a government-administered trust established by Congress in 1978 and funded by an excise tax on coal production.
In July 1980, when the trust fund was nearly depleted, President Carter signed a bill making a $381,704,000 advance from the Treasury available to carry the program to the end of the fiscal year.
Advances such as this one must be repaid with interest to the Treasury.
Several steps were taken in the course of the year to improve service to claimants.
The agency issued final medical standards for determining coal miners' disability or death due to black lung disease, and also issued a new procedure manual to its district offices.
Development and implementation of the automated data processing system continued.
Social Security Administration to file a claim with the department for medical benefits.
The extension was made to ensure that no eligible miner is deprived of the right to seek medical benefits.
The program also took action to protect coal miners who allege that their employers discriminate against them because they have exercised safety- and health-related rights.
The agency signed an agreement with the department's Mine Safety and Health Administration to improve services and to increase efficiency by coordinating the handling of discrimination complaints by miners.
The Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 guarantees, among other things, the right to X-ray examinations for black lung and to transfer, based on findings, to a less dusty working area.
Consolidation of fundamental administrative improvements was the main goal and accomplishment of the Division of Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation during the past fiscal year.
Once again there was a reduction in the number of claims awaiting determination.
Cases are now handled more quickly than ever before.
In addition, about 72 percent of all disputed cases are resolved within 60 days, and 65 percent of all informal conferences to resolve disputed issues are scheduled, held, and reported within 45 days.
The division is also stressing the provision of early rehabilitative medical services for disabled persons who might benefit from such assistance.
The social and economic gains which can be realized by returning claimants to the work force cannot be denied.
The program works closely with the Division of Vocational Rehabilitation to insure that counseling and referral services are available.
More than a thousand injured workers began to receive some type of rehabilitative service last fiscal year, and 345 were successfully rehabilitated.
Other actions were taken to improve the performance of the program.
Development and installation of the automatic data processing system continued.
The program concentrated on on-site reviews to improve the performance of the district offices.
It also worked with the Office of Inspector General to identify compensation abuses and to prosecute those who violate the law.
The courts upheld the department's interpretation of 1972 amendments to the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act in several significant cases during fiscal year 1980.
One of those cases involved the extension of coverage to shoreside areas, which the department had taken as an obligation to extend the act's coverage to the greatest number of persons.
In P.C. Pfeiffer Co. v. Ford, the Supreme Court reaffirmed the department's position that all operations of both stevedores and terminal operators are covered—that is, the entire process of transferring cargo between trucks and rail cars and ships.
In two other cases, Sun Shipbuilding v. Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and Thomas v. Washington Gas Light Company, the Supreme Court reaffirmed the department's position that workers' compensation legislation provides alternative and cumulative remedies for an injured worker.
Therefore, a worker is not held to have made a binding election based on the intitial choice of the jurisdiction in which to pursue a claim.
The Division of State Workers' Compensation Standards continued to provide technical assistance and other services to the states.
Special emphasis was placed on providing on-site technical assistance to help the various state compensation systems improve their administrative information systems and rehabilitation programs.
Representatives of the program also worked closely with state legislatures and advisory committees to prepare or to evaluate proposed legislation.
In April 1980, the division coordinated the New England States Workers' Compensation Conference.
This meeting provided representatives from industry, labor, the insurance industry, and state governments in New England with an opportunity to meet and discuss their common problems.
Three important publications on state workers' compensation programs were prepared during the past fiscal year.
Volumes 2, 3, and 9 of the Research Reports of the Interdepartmental Workers' Compensation Task Force were published.
The program took first steps toward creating a library and a clearinghouse of research documents and publications on workers' compensation programs.
Both facilities would be available to the general public.
The division continued its review of the states' activities related to the recommendations of the 1972 National Commission on State Workmen's Compensation Laws.
A report on adoption by law of the 19 essential recommendations from 1972 to 1980 is now under review, and research on implementation of 30 of the other 65 recommendations has begun.
The Office of Workers' Compensation Programs faces a growing number of cases involving occupational disease.
Because of the often complex medical evidence concerning the cause, degree, and duration of disabilities of this nature, claims are difficult to evaluate and require a great deal of time for processing.
To deal with this situation, OWCP created a Division of Medical Services and Standards.
Staffing of the new division began during the past fiscal year.
Already standards and procedures for claims involving lower-back injuries, radiation exposure, asbestosis, and cardiac and other stress-related injuries are being developed.
Such guidelines are needed to facilitate the processing of claims and to provide medical care of the highest quality to all covered workers.
During FY 1980, the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) reviewed many of its existing regulations, beginning an intensive study of all metal and nonmetal standards, to ensure their continued relevancy and effectiveness in light of changes and developments in the mining industry.
Enforcement activities were strengthened through the Program in Accident Reduction (PAR) and Compliance Assistance Visit (CAV) program.
MSHA worked with certain metal and nonmetal mine operators to provide advice and technical assistance in complying with the 1977 Federal Mine Safety and Health Act.
Roof control enforcement in underground coal mines received heightened attention during FY 1980.
MSHA enforced requirements for cabs and canopies on mobile equipment and worked to insure that roof control plans were improved and followed.
As a result, roof fatalities declined.
MSHA worked to involve the public in its rulemaking process, and continued to work with labor, the academic community and other federal agencies to achieve safe and healthy workplaces for our nation's miners.
Coal Mine Safety and Health representatives, operating from 10 district offices, 18 subdistrict offices and numerous field locations throughout the major coal-producing states, conducted 86,019 inspections and investigations at 2,168 underground mines and 3,341 surface mines during FY 1980.
These included 7,323 spot inspections at particularly hazardous underground mines.
The coal mine safety and health work force numbered 1,797 at the end of FY 1980, 1,355 of whom were Authorized Representatives of the Secretary, including inspectors, district and subdistrict managers, engineers, industrial hygienists and specialists.
MSHA inspectors issued 128,030 citations to coal mine operators during the fiscal year for violations encompassing virtually the entire range of safety and health conditions and practices.
Federal inspectors issued 5,464 orders of withdrawal from coal mines or mine sections after finding imminent danger or other violations.
Coal mine operators have filed 218 petitions for modification of safety standards with MSHA since Oct. 1, 1979.
Of these, 123 have been granted, denied or dismissed.
The agency also received 325 complaints of employers' discrimination against miners for exercising their rights under the 1977 Act.
Of these, 63 complaints were settled or had decisions rendered in favor of the miner.
Thirty-eight cases are pending before the Commission.
In the first 11 months of the fiscal year, the Coal Mine Safety and Health division opened 96 other special investigations involving civil or criminal violations on the Act, and false reporting or equipment misrepresentation.
Indictments were returned by Federal grand juries in six cases.
To help ensure equitable enforcement of safety and health regulations throughout the coal mining industry, Coal Mine Safety and Health is reviewing '"unassessable" citations and orders, and informing field managers of enforcement issues that need to be brought to the attention of inspectors.
A new Uniform Mine Filing System has also been instituted for the districts.
This system enables survey teams to evaluate all inspections or reviews of certain important projects.
When multiple fatalities occur, a select team of investigators from the administrator's office examines the accident to establish the cause and to recommend remedies to prevent the recurrence of similar accidents.
Technical specialists evaluate mine operators' plans for roof control, ventilation, respirable dust, fire control, hearing conservation, blasting procedures, and mine refuse structures.
Technical studies have proven the importance of putting cabs and canopies on mobile equipment, mounting sprays on auger mines, plugging abandoned oil/gas wells, and prolonging the life of wire ropes on hoists and other equipment.
Revised respirable dust regulations were promulgated for underground coal mines.
These redefine respirable dust, stipulate new procedures for sampling, and provide for certification of persons to conduct respirable dust sampling, and maintenance and calibration of sampling devices.
Similarly revised regulations on respirable dust for surface coal mines and surface work areas of underground coal mines have been proposed.
Revised regulations on transfer of underground coal miners who show evidence of pneumoconiosis have also been proposed.
These regulations give such miners the option to work in an area of the mine where the respirable dust concentration is at or below 1.0 milligrams per cubic meter of air.
Additional rights pertaining to rate of pay and work schedules are included.
The operator employing miners who have exercised this option would be required to conduct a bimonthly sampling program involving each affected miner.
Regulations on miner participation in the respirable dust program for underground and surface coal mines have been proposed.
These require that operators provide the miners' representative an opportunity to participate in the entire respirable dust sampling program.
This is intended to promote better cooperation between coal mine operators and miners and to improve the effectiveness of the respirable dust program.
Inspection guidelines for construction sites using asbestos were issued, including information on determining exposure factors, sampling for airborne dust, and evaluating results and issuing citations.
Engineering controls, personal protection, housekeeping and waste disposal were also covered.
The Denver Computer Center assisted MSHA develop and test a revised computer program to support respirable dust regulations.
The system tracks sampling results from coal mine operators and provides the operators and MSHA with periodic reports.
The Metal and Nonmetal Mine Safety and Health division through its six district offices, 12 subdistrict offices and 71 field offices, conducted 22,555 regular inspections at approximately 900 underground metal, nonmetal and stone mines and about 14,000 surface mines, stone quarries and sand and gravel pits during FY 1980.
During the year, 540 metal and nonmetal mine inspectors issued 27,176 citations and orders for violations of standards and for imminent danger conditions.
In addition to regular inspections, 9,453 compliance follow-up inspections were conducted during the year to check the abatement of hazards on which citations or orders were issued.
Two-week journeyman-level technical courses were developed, including training in ground control, industrial hygiene, and special investigation.
Inspectors with one year or more experience received training in at least one of these courses at the National Mine Health and Safety Academy, and supervisory inspectors with basic supervisory skills completed two weeks of advanced training.
In addition, a training course in citation and order writing also was developed during FY 1980.
By mid-year a manual had been devised and inspectors had been trained as instructors.
They trained other inspectors at various field office locations.
A Compliance Assistance Visit (CAV) program began to assist operators in complying with the provisions of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977.
The program alerted them to potentially hazardous conditions or practices prior to beginning operations.