If the Department of Labor's activities in fiscal year 1981 could be summed up in one word, that word would be "change."
With the coming of a new Administration in January of 1981, the Department began the long, difficult, and sometimes painful process of reevaluation and restructuring to render the greatest possible service to American workers while still achieving the required reductions in spending.
This process of change touched every agency of the Department, resulting in a thorough review of all programs and the reduction, restructuring, or elimination of those that failed to meet the needs for which they had been established.
These changes were a vital part of the Administration's efforts to reduce overall government spending and regulation—two of the key elements in the Economic Recovery Program.
Throughout these program changes, however, the goal of the Department has continued to be the fullfillment of its mandate to "foster, promote and develop the welfare of the wage earners of the United States."
With the increased emphasis on improved efficiency and smaller budgets, the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management (OASAM) played a major role in the Department's activities during the fiscal year.
Much of this effort was directed toward the implementation of procedures to deal with the changes in personnel that would be brought about under the fiscal 1982 budget.
Within this area, the continued implementation of the Civil Service Reform Act (CSRA) was of major importance.
In particular, progress was made in the development of a performance appraisal system.
As required by the CSRA, all performance appraisal systems for employees were developed, where required, in cooperation with the employee unions.
The employee unions were also consulted in setting regulations on adverse actions and actions based on unacceptable performance.
An Office of Civil Rights (OCR) was established in OASAM during the year, with responsibility for enforcing title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and similar nondiscrimination statutes, regulations, and orders in programs receiving or benefiting from financial assistance from the Department.
Training Administration (ETA) grant programs, but those administered by the Mine Safety and Health, Occupational Safety and Health, and Employment Standards Administrations as well.
A high priority was also placed on implementation of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980.
The Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management was designated as the "senior official" of the Department, under the PRA, and in that capacity, was given primary responsibility for the management of information resources within the Department of Labor.
As a result, an intense examination of all reporting and recordkeeping requirements was initiated.
As a part of the Department's efforts to implement the Economic Recovery program, the Employment Standards Administration took several actions designed to reduce the cost of compliance with Federal law, while retaining needed protection for workers.
The Administration proposed rule changes in the area of affirmative action to reduce the paperwork burden for employers, and thus the cost of compliance, while maintaining the necessary safeguards for protected groups.
These proposed changes were published in the Federal Register on August 25, 1981, with the comment period ending after the close of the fiscal year.
During that period, over 1,500 comments were received.
The volume of comments received in another area— industrial homework—was far greater.
Following the publication of proposed changes in the rules prohibiting industrial homework in seven industries, the Department received over 10,000 responses.
These responses were a major factor in the decision to lift the ban on industrial homework in only one area.
This decision was made, and the final regulations published, on October 9, 1981, shortly after the close of fiscal 1981.
Significant changes were also proposed in the Davis-Bacon Act to alter the formula for determining the prevailing wage and for certain other calculations under the act.
A far more realistic cost of construction projects under Federal auspices would result, as well as a savings to the taxpayer of several hundred million dollars.
Finally, the Secretary announced that strike forces would once again be used in the Department's drive to prevent minimum wage and overtime violations, especially in the apparel industry.
Strike force teams were therefore reestablished in New York, Los Angeles, Philadelphia, New Orleans, Denver, and San Francisco.
Their 1,153 investigations resulted in agreements by employers to repay over $2.5 million in wages to workers.
Foremost among the Occupational Safety and Health Administration's (OSHA) efforts during the year was the development of a new inspection targeting strategy.
Under this new strategy, OSHA will be able, for the first time, to direct its inspection efforts at those establishments with the highest rate of lost workdays.
During fiscal 1981, OSHA acted to certify six States and territories as having completed all the commitments contained in their State plans.
This action brings the total number of certified State plans to 18.
OSHA also relinquished dual jurisdiction in four States, freeing OSHA personnel for Federal compliance activities.
OSHA continued its efforts to revise and clarify industry safety standards.
Through the increased use of performance-oriented standards, employers can more easily determine the requirements being placed upon them.
Safety was also a major concern in America's mines.
The Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) put new regulations into effect governing the availability of rescue equipment in underground mines.
MSHA established a review committee to study all mine safety standards and to eliminate unnecessary and outdated regulations.
During fiscal year 1981 the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) continued to focus its resources on involving the private sector in the training and employment of disadvantaged workers.
This was the first full year of operation for the Private Sector Initiative Program, and a strong effort was made to find employment for 300,000 CETA public service employees as the Federal government ended the subsidization of public service jobs.
The Office of the Solicitor and the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) continued work in several areas.
The Special Litigation Staff of the Solicitor's Office pursued a resolution of the Teamster's Central States Pension Fund case, while the Office of the Inspector General was able to virtually eliminate a backlog of unresolved audits of ETA grants.
In addition, OIG continued to obtain significant indictments, convictions, and sentences in major organized crime and labor racketeering cases.
The Women's Bureau placed major emphasis on identifying at the State and local Ievel and in the private sector existing resources that can be used to improve employment options and opportunities for women.
Specifically, the Bureau implemented the first stage of a national training program designed to increase women's access to apprenticeship training.
The Bureau also worked to establish apprenticeship training for women held in State correctional facilities.
Finally, the Bureau continued its studies and technical assistance in the areas of child care, pay equity, alternative work patterns, and others.
Labor-management relations during the year focused increasingly on the need for greater cooperation between workers and managers in order to overcome serious productivity problems.
This increased cooperation will also be a factor in dealing with changing patterns in technology and in the labor force.
Using a new Compliance Audit Program, the Labor-Management Services Administration significantly raised the number of union financial audits and embezzlement investigations conducted in 1981.
Regulations were issued that reduced paperwork requirements under ERISA, while LMSA concentrated its enforcement resources on pension cases involving a considerable number of participants and large amounts of money.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) continued its work on revisions in both the Consumer and Producer Price Indexes.
During the fiscal year, BLS published five alternative measures of home ownership costs, including a rental substitute.
Beginning in 1983, that rental equivalence will be used in the Consumer Price Index.
The Commissioner of Labor Statistics testified before several congressional committees on the effects of the CPI on Federal expenditures and has been appointed to the Cabinet Working Group dealing with that subject.
In the reporting of unemployment statistics, the Bureau announced improvements that include better calculation of the number of discouraged workers, of usual hours worked, and other characteristics.
Finally, the Bureau continued to expand its program of analysis and research in the area of productivity.
This year marked a return of the United States to participation in the International Labor Organization after a withdrawal during the previous administration.
During the year the United States initiated efforts to strengthen the evaluation of ILO technical programs to improve their effectiveness.
These and other efforts were beginning to show progress by the end of the fiscal year.
A year ago, in the introduction to the 1980 Annual Report, my predecessor wrote, "We have every reason to be proud of what we have done. It has not been easy. We have not achieved perfection, but we have succeeded in establishing a system which has maintained the confidence of most of our citizens. In my view, this confidence is one of the most enduring strengths of the American system."
One year later, those words have even greater meaning.
Our task has not been to write regulations, but to improve those that exist, making them more beneficial to workers and to employers.
Again, it has not been easy, nor have we achieved perfection.
But we have done what we set out to do.
We have preserved the unequaled protections enjoyed by American workers while taking the necessary steps to rebuild the American economy; we have continued the Department's work to fulfill our mandate.
As the 17th Secretary of Labor, I am proud of the work the Department has done, and proud, too, of my part in it.
During the fiscal year, the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) continued to focus its resources on involving the private sector in training and finding jobs for disadvantaged workers.
Fiscal 1981 was the first full year of actual operation for the Private Sector Initiative Program.
A strong effort was made to obtain employment for more than 300,000 public service employment (PSE) workers who were phased out of their governmentsupported jobs by September 10, 1981.
In addition, ETA continued to provide training and other employmentrelated services to groups experiencing particularly severe disadvantages in the labor market, including youth, veterans, older persons, women, migrant and seasonal farmworkers, and Indians and other native Americans.
Community employment programs were provided by 477 State and local prime sponsor organizations that received funds under the several titles of CETA for employment and training services at the local level.
In fiscal 1981, an estimated 1.1 million persons participated in title II, A, B, and C programs administered by the prime sponsors at a cost of about $2.2 billion.
During the year, approximately 733,000 persons terminated from these programs.
Of this number, 272,000 were placed in jobs and 222,000 returned to school or entered further training.
Of the persons enrolled in the programs, 42 percent were enrolled in classroom training, 10 percent in onthe-job training, 35 percent in work experience, and 13 percent in other activities.
A total of 209,700 service years were provided in public service jobs at a cost of approximately $2.2 billion.
About 560,000 persons were employed in public service employment (PSE) jobs at some time during the year.
The major change in the CETA system in fiscal 1981 was the decision to phase out the PSE program.
Some 307,000 individuals employed in PSE jobs were terminated by September 30, 1981.
As a result of the Department's reemployment effort, some 65 percent of all of the terminated PSE participants were either placed in permanent unsubsidized employment or moved into other training situations.
Approximately 50 percent of the balance of the participants qualified for and received unemployment compensation.
Work on performance standards for programs funded under title II BC was completed and the standards were implemented at the start of fiscal 1981 on both an experimental and voluntary basis.
The standards take into consideration local labor market conditions.
Five measures for title II BC programs for which standards are developed are the following: (1) Entered Employment Rate; (2) Cost per Entered Employment; (3) Positive Termination Rate; (4) Cost per Positive Termination; and (5) Average Wage at Placement.
Work is now proceeding on standards for the Private Sector Initiative Program where the same five measures will be used.
Additional administrative changes to relieve the paperwork burden on prime sponsors reduced some grant requirements and eliminated others.
Information in the initial plan submitted for comment was also substantially reduced.
Data show a continued increase in Private Industry Council (PIC) involvement in programs for participants.
Participant enrollment at the end of the third quarter of fiscal 1981 was 77,429, exceeding all of fiscal 1980's participant enrollment by 33 percent.
The highest percentage of program expenditures was in classroom training (52.3 percent) for more than 46,000 participants.
On-the-job training programs accounted for 22.4 percent of the expenditures with 24,000 participants.
Approximately 23,000 participants were placed in unsubsidized employment with almost 95 percent of these placements in the private sector.
Almost all program participants were disadvantaged, and many had additional employment handicaps such as being older workers, youth, offenders, and displaced homemakers.
The Private Sector Initiative Program (PSIP) has stimulated PIC's and prime sponsors to develop and implement local innovations or refinements to existing programs ranging from entrepreneurships, small-business internships, technical assistance to small businesses, and private sector involvement in school curriculum development to job creation through economic development.
In addition to their ongoing efforts to increase business participation in the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit program, PIC's became heavily involved in the public service employment reemployment effort.
PIC's are provided flexibility through the use of employment generating services (EGS) and initiated many EGS projects during fiscal 1981.
Major types of EGS activities included labor market information, marketing, economic development, cooperative ventures, and special assistance in the transition of unemployed workers to unsubsidized employment.
Technical assistance guides on topics of importance to title VII programs were developed and disseminated to provide program guidance and support to PIC's and prime sponsors.
Training sessions were conducted around the country to increase PIC and prime sponsor proficiency in working with the private sector on economic development and labor market information activities.
The National Alliance of Business, the Human Resources Development Institute, and public interest groups continued their contributions to cultivate the public-private sector partnership.
The programs provided under title IV of the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA) are specifically designed to address both the structural unemployment problems of 14 through 21-year-old youth—particularly disadvantaged youth—and to fill the immediate needs of youth who are unable to find jobs.
These programs—The Youth Employment and Training Program (YETP), the Youth Community Conservation and Improvement Projects (YCCIP), the Summer Youth Employment Program (SYEP), the Youth Incentive Entitlement Pilot Project (YIEPP), and the Job Corps—offer a broad range of work experience and training services to make youth employable, including the encouragement to return to or continue in school.
The majority of the youth who participate in these programs are 16- to 19-year-olds.
In fiscal 1981, as in other years since the inception of these programs in 1977, data reveal that enrollments ran well above planned levels.
YETP, which provides work experience, counseling, and occupational career information, served 291,910 participants, 50.5 percent of whom were white, 35.2 percent black, and 10.4 percent Hispanic.
Of those who left the program by the end of June, 76.9 percent terminated positively, with 26.8 percent returning to or continuing in school, and 19.1 percent entering unsubsidized employment.
The remainder either went into advanced training or experienced other affirmative outcomes.
In YCCIP, a short term (12-month), highly laborintensive community improvement program, mainly for high school dropouts, a total of 31,406 participated, of whom 49.9 percent were white, 32.2 percent black, and 14.1 percent Hispanic.
By June, 23.3 percent of those who left the program had obtained unsubsidized employment; 30.2 percent went into advanced training or had other positive terminations, and 6.6 percent returned to school.
Approximately 800,000 youth participated in the Summer Youth Employment Program (SYEP).
SYEP provides youth an opportunity to learn and earn during the sunimer months through work experience and vocational exploration.
The Consolidated Youth Employment Program (CYEP), begun as a demonstration project in fiscal year 1979, concluded on September 30, 1981.
CYEP consolidated the planning, operations, and management of YETP, YCCIP, and SYEP into a single year-round process.
More importantly, CYEP promoted the creation of an individualized assessment and service delivery system based on competency and responded to the multiyear employability development needs of disadvantaged youth.
Thirteen CETA prime sponsors participated in the demonstration, serving 18,736 youth.
Preliminary findings reveal that (1) year-round planning should continue: it provides a sense of continuity to program administration as well as linking sequences of activities for youth; (2) employability development, whether for youth or for adults, is enhanced when it is individualized and when progress is documented in a manner reflective of community standards; (3) individual peformance levels or benchmarks, which were developed in CYEP to record the acquisition of skill based on competency (thus forming the foundation of employability development planning), should be expanded to include adults as well as youth for whom it is difficult to find unsubsidized employment; (4) through benchmarks, validated by local employers, program activities and private employers can more specifically express labor market needs; (5) regular reassessment is an important status check for an individual's progress toward acquiring skills necessary for competitive employment; (6) a broad spectrum of services should be available for youth who are at different stages on their way to becoming employable.
Another demonstration project served 545 Indochinese refugee youth through various combinations of English as a Second Language (ESL) training and work experience or on-the-job training and work experience.
The project was conducted by prime sponsors in seven locations with a high density of Indochinese refugee youth: Boston, Mass., Fairfax County, Va., Orange County, Calif., San Mateo County, Calif., Sacramento, Calif., St. Paul, Minn., and Seattle, Wash.
This project will expire on December 31, 1981; early indications show that approximately 98 percent of the participants will either return to or enter school or be placed in jobs.
In fiscal 1981, the Youth Incentive Entitlement Pilot Projects (YIEPP) were phased out.
This demonstration program began in 1978 and served over 80,000 economically disadvantaged youth, aged 16 to 19, residing in 17 selected communities across the Nation.
Participating youth were guaranteed a part-time job at the minimum wage during the school year and a full-time job at the minimum wage over the summer, provided that they enrolled, or were already enrolled full time, in either a high school or GED program.
To get and keep their jobs, participants also had to maintain satisfactory school and work attendance and adhere to work performance standards.
A major premise underlying YIEPP was that youth who are both in the labor market and in school were likely to have greater employment and earnings potential after leaving school than those who do not participate in these activities.
The short-run goals of the program were to reduce the school dropout rate, increase the high school graduation rate, and provide work experience and income to eligible youth.
The long-range goals were to improve the employability and productivity of participants and increase their earnings potential.
Early results show quite clearly that YIEPP had a considerable effect on the education and employment rates of disadvantaged youth, particularly those who had dropped out of school.
School enrollment rates for the "hard-core'" group, that is, those who were neither in school nor in the labor force prior to YIEPP participation, increased 70.7 percent.
The rate of employment for all YIEPP participants rose 90.2 percent during the course of the program.
During fiscal 1981, Job Corps expanded its capacity to approximately 44,000 corpsmembers.
The number of centers has been increased to 106.
Over 6,600 corpsmembers have now participated in the experimental education improvement effort initiated in 1979.
New models linking small conservation centers by computer for purposes of testing, prescribing remediation, instructing, scheduling, and educational recordkeeping have been introduced.
Models in tutorial peer instruction, learning disabilities, bilingual ESL, controlled classroom use of handheld calculators, and revision of the math and world-of-work program continue.
Less successful programs have been replaced by those showing superior results.
A major effort in fiscal 1981 focused on improving the vocational training programs offered at Job Corps centers.
Vocational teachers were trained to instruct in the culinary arts, driver education, and clerical courses.
A revised vocational training handbook describes competency-based vocational education and contains a new format for instructors to record training achievements.
Additional booklets deal with Job Corps Vocational Advisory Councils and methods to establish linkages with business and industry.
Job Corps center directors received management assistance training; procurement training was given to regional and center staff responsible for contract administration.
In fiscal 1981, national programs continued to provide training and other employment-related services to severely disadvantaged groups in the labor market.
Special programs, generally conducted by national organizations, provided services to Indians and other Native Americans, migrant and seasonal farmworkers, older persons, women, and other special target groups.
The Senior Community Service Employment Program provides grants to national organizations and State governments to develop part-time jobs in community work for economically disadvantaged persons aged 55 and older.
In fiscal 1981, over 54,200 older persons were provided employment through the program with an appropriation of $277.1 million.
The Native American Employment and Training Program provides grants to Indian tribes, other native American communities, and various organizations to support a wide variety of training and employment services.
More specifically, the Office of Indian and Native American Programs designates grantees, allocates funds, processes grant documents, and monitors and provides technical assistance to grantees.
These programs served about 50,000 persons in fiscal 1981; almost 17,500 persons received classroom training; 3,500 were placed in on-thejob training; 14,500 were in work experience positions; and 14,500 held public employment service jobs at a cost of over $81 million.
The Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker Programs provide services ranging from job training to emergency relief to service for seasonal farmworkers.
In fiscal 1981, these programs allocated over $80 million to 48 organizations and to six State and local governments.
Grants were also awarded to other groups to conduct demonstration programs, to provide technical assistance, and to perform evaluations.
Services during the year included classroom training for 21,000, on-the-job training for 4,000, and work experience opportunities for 3,500.
A total of almost 210,000 people received assistance such as nutritional services, health and medical care, and emergency help.
Contractors under Special National Programs and Activities in fiscal 1981 placed almost 30,000 individuals in unsubsidized private sector jobs at a cost of from $600 to $2,400 per placement.
Almost all of these individuals were economically disadvantaged, most were minorities, and many were either women or handicapped.
In addition, as a part of the Public Service Reemployment effort, these programs provided training or employment for about 4,000 Public Service Employment terminees in fiscal 1981.
National sponsors of programs for the handicapped served over 5,000 handicapped individuals in fiscal 1981, resulting in the placement of more than 3,300 in private sector jobs at an average cost per placement of less than $600.
All of these individuals were economically disadvantaged and over 35 percent were minorities and women.
In addition to these employment and training efforts a range of conferences, seminars, publications, and other information, geared to improving employment of the handicapped in the private sector, were provided to over 2,000 employers and 1,500 handicapped individuals.
The Targeted Outreach Program, designed to provide private sector employment for minorities and women in apprenticeable trades, provided services to about 9,000 individuals in fiscal 1981.
Of those placed, 42 percent were in apprenticeship positions; 86 percent of the total were minorities, and more than 30 percent were women.
The average cost per placement was $2,400.
Major Community-Based Organizations provided training and onsite assistance to over 1,500 local affiliates and almost 6,000 staff, in order to improve linkages to the State and local employment and training system.
The capabilities of these affiliates were enhanced in order to use effectively over $21,000,000 in employment and training resources for the primarily disadvantaged constituencies they serve.
Under the partnership program with the labor movement, over 23,000 private sector job opportunities were generated nationwide for the employment and training system—largely because of the efforts of the AFL-CIO's Human Resources Development Institute.
In addition, approximately 670 CETA prime sponsors and Private Industry Councils (PIC's) were provided technical assistance to strengthen the development and conduct of training programs.
The program of Small Business Workshops conducted under CETÀ title III, Section 301(g), was designed to provide useful information to potential small business owners.
Implementation began in fiscal 1981 with the development of an award winning series of three films and supporting booklets.
The series of films is being aired on almost 200 stations of the Public Broadcasting System (PBS) nationwide.
In addition, fiscal 1981 saw the development of a special training program entitled 'Small Entrepreneurial Enterprise Centers"that will be delivered initially in a few local communities under the sponsorship of banks, chambers of commerce, or PIC's.
The National Puerto Rican Forum sponsored the program for Persons of Limited English-Speaking ability.
This program provides linguistically tailored classroom instruction, counseling, job development, and employmentrelated services to persons of limited English-speaking ability.
In fiscal 1981, over 2,100 individuals were placed in unsubsidized jobs at approximately $650 for each placement.
All of these individuals were disadvantaged, 97 percent were minorities, and more than 40 percent were women.
Fiscal 1981 saw the conclusion of the Help through Industry Retraining and Employment (HIRE) I program with the employment of over 5,700 individuals.
Through the course of this program almost 15,000 persons, primarily veterans (almost 70 percent), were employed in the private sector.
Two-hundred and twenty-five corporations participated in the program by providing employment and training opportunities in the over 50 different occupations.
The jobs ranged in salary from $3.50 to $21.00 per hour and the program experienced a retention rate of over 80 percent.
The National On-the-Job Training (NOJT) program provided over 13,000 training opportunities for skilled, well-paying private sector jobs in fiscal 1981.
These training opportunities were made available mainly through national level unions and employer associations and included OJT programs in the construction industry, the automotive industry, the railroad industry, the machine tool building industry, and tool, die, and precision machining.
Over 11,500 placements were made by these contractors at an average cost of less than $1,700 per placement.
Of those placed, 83 percent were disadvantaged, 35 percent were women, 42 percent were minorities and 17 percent veterans.
Most of the jobs paid over $5.00 per hour.
In fiscal 1981 the Employment Service's major emphasis was on assisting individuals terminated from CETA public service employment (PSE) to obtain jobs.
Of the 113,955 PSE participants registered with the employment service, 47,547 (41.7 percent) entered unsubsidized employment.
A total of 398,997 certifications under the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit were issued by the State Employment Security Agencies (SESA's) to employers who had hired eligible workers, exceeding by 33 percent the Department's goal of 300,000 certifications in fiscal 1981.
The Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 amended and extended the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit until January 1, 1983.
The Departments of Labor and Treasury continue to have joint responsibility for administering and publicizing the program.
At the State and local levels, the SESA's are responsible for managing the delivery system and issuing vouchers to eligible workers and certifications to employers who have hired eligible workers.
Prior to amendment, the SESA's coordinated vouchering activities carried out by several agencies.
A JSEC is a group of employer representatives formed to provide a link between the Job Service and the employer community.
JSEC's recommend to local Job Service offices changes designed to improve Job Service performance.
More than 22,000 employers are now members of 1,040 JSEC's throughout the United States.
These employers give in excess of 150,000 volunteer hours of time each month to help the Job Service improve its delivery and service capability to applicants and employers while helping to reduce unemployment.
In addition to the areas of special emphasis, the Employment Service provided a high level of service to the general public during fiscal 1981.
Nearly 13,855,000 individuals submitted applications at Employment Service offices, and 6,996,000 job openings were listed by employers.
The Employment Service filled 4,990,000 of these job openings (71 percent).
The average wage of job openings received was $4.46 per hour compared to $4.13 per hour in fiscal 1980.
The average wage of openings filled was $4.41 per hour, 8 percent higher than the previous year.
The Veterans Employment Service (VES) monitors ETA's veterans' programs, primary among which are the services provided by Job Service offices and by State and local CETA programs to ensure that veterans receive priority.
The more than 2,500 local Job Service offices across the country provide veterans with priority in interviewing, counseling, aptitude testing, job development, and referral to job openings.
All Job Service offices have assigned to their staffs at least one specially trained '"local veterans' employment representative"(LVER) who works directly with veterans applying for assistance.
Federal field staff of the VES are responsible for monitoring and evaluating all services.
There is at least one VES representative outstationed in every State and in all 10 Labor Department regional offices.
In fiscal 1981, the Department also had contractual agreements with several national organizations to provide information and assistance to hard-to-reach veterans.
The organizations included the American G.I. Forum, Blinded Veterans Association, and the National Urban League.
The Disabled Veterans Outreach Program (DVOP) is staffed by disabled veterans who reach out to other disabled and Vietnam-era veterans and help them obtain the employment and training services they need.
DVOP staff also are based at local Job Service offices.
Fiscal 1981 was a year of new and shifting program initiatives as well as a continuation of improvements in Unemployment Insurance Service (UIS) operations.
Emphasis was placed on implementing policies in the prevention and detection of fraud, abuse, and waste.
Specifically, the UI program focused on six major areas of consideration: program integrity, program quality, productivity of operations, financing and trust funds, program management, and the management and service delivery aspects of worker dislocation programs.
During fiscal 1981, 23 million initial claims were filed in the State Employment Security Agencies (SESA's).
One hundred seventy million weeks of unemployment were claimed and $14.9 billion was paid out in benefits to almost nine million recipients.
First payment promptness, the major indicator of program performance, continued as a high priority goal for UIS and the SESA's.
Forty-five SESA's were able to pay at least 87 percent of their initial claims within 14 to 21 days, and 96 percent of first payments were made within 35 days of the week ending date of the first compensable week.
Major legislative changes were made to the extended benefit program.
In addition to changing the way State trigger rates are computed, the national trigger was dropped.
This means extended benefits were payable only on a State-by-State basis.
Eligibility standards were tightened by requiring claimants to have a substantial labor force attachment and to broaden and intensify their efforts to find work.
Improving internal security in the SESA's continued as a major element in the drive to curb fraud and abuse.
Regional office and SESA staff assessed the adequacy of internal security in all SESA's, using a review outline developed by UIS.
As a condition for receiving additional administrative funding for internal security, SESA's were required to submit detailed plans for their internal security operations in fiscal year 1982.
In their efforts to curb fraud and abuse, SESA's detected $185 million in overpayments—an amount equal to 1.1 percent of benefits paid.
During the same time, SESA's recovered $87 million in overpayments, or 56 percent of those overpayments subject to recovery.
To control improper payments, UIS implemented a pilot random audit program in five SESA's.
The audit program has been designed to produce valid rates of detectable overpayments or improper payments on a statewide basis and will serve as a management tool to identify problems and to take corrective action.
It will be expanded to another 10 States next fiscal year.
To improve the accuracy of UI statistics and the validity of productivity measurements, the UI Service conducted workload validation studies in 36 States.
The balance of the 53 SESA's will have their studies completed during the next fiscal year.
These studies concentrated on those workload items which were known to have reporting problems.
The UIS implemented cost model restudies of tax operations in 18 States.
The results of these studies will be used in the fiscal year 1983 budget allocation as updated productivity measurements.
Progress was made during the first part of the year with respect to solvency of the UIS trust fund.
The Federal Unemployment Account had outstanding loans to 18 State unemployment funds totalling $4.6 billion going into fiscal 1981.
Thirteen states repaid $567.2 million from State funds and/or reductions in credits against employers' Federal unemployment taxes.
Massachusetts and Montana repaid their loans in November 1980.
However, nine States had to borrow $2.2 billion.
Illinois, Michigan, Ohio, and Pennsylvania accounted for $1.9 billion of the $2.2 billion lent during the year.
Kentucky was a first time borrower.
During the last 6 months of the year, no advances were requested.
Total outstanding loans at the close of fiscal 1981 increased to $6.2 billion.
Under the Disaster Unemployment Assistance (DUA) program during 10 months of fiscal 1981, there were 13 major disasters declared in 8 different States, representing less than half the number of disasters declared in 1980.
Some 947 individuals received DUA for a total of $626,730.
This represents only 6 percent of the number of DUA recipients and less than 2 percent of the dollars spent for DUA benefits in 1980, a considerable decrease.
Approximately 400,000 workers received first payments of trade readjustment allowances (TRA); approximately $1.7 billion was paid.
This dollar amount is in addition to any unemployment insurance payments these workers received.
Under the Redwood Employee Protection Program (REPP), $42,727,353 has been paid to affected workers since the beginning of the program.
As of August 15, 1981, 2,735 workers received $24,630,675 in weekly payments and 1,161 workers received $17,786,041 in severance payments.
A total of 203 workers have received $310,637 in job search allowances and/or relocation allowances.
The Continous Wage and Benefit History (CWBH) project came under the director of the State-Federal CWBH policy committee as recommended by OMB to give the States more direct control of the CWBH system.
The committee has recommended a new questionnaire, expansion of the number of participating States from 14 to 20 to achieve national representation, and development of a set of performance criteria to be implemented during fiscal 1982.
The Work Incentive (WIN) program continued its efforts during fiscal 1981 to assist the transition of individuals and their families from welfare to jobs and economic independence.
At the end of the fiscal year, a little more than 1.5 million persons receiving or applying for Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) were registered with the WIN program.
Nearly three-fourths of them were women; slightly more than half were minorities, and 55 percent lacked a high school diploma.
Job entries rose by 12 percent over fiscal 1980 as more than 300,000 WIN registrants entered unsubsidized employment.
Half of them earned enough at job entry to leave the AFDC rolls immediately.
The others continued, at least temporarily, to receive some assistance, but at a reduced level.
State Welfare agencies reported annualized welfare grant reductions of approximately $760 million, more than double the $366 million it cost to operate the program, as a result of WIN registrants' employment.
Approximately 70 percent of program expenditures was used to provide employment and training services, the remaining 30 percent funded employment-related social services.
The newly employed workers were paid an average starting wage of $4.17 an hour.
Unemployed parents, most of them unemployed fathers, who accounted for 22 percent of WIN job entrants in fiscal 1981, averaged $5.17 an hour, and one-fourth of them were paid $6 or more an hour when they started work.
As part of the function of providing employment, training, and social services to registrants, WIN staff appraised over 800,000 individuals to determine their needs for assistance and their employment potential.
270,000 registrants were provided with training or temporary subsidized employment, with 28 percent of them in programs funded through other than WIN resources.
Social services included assistance with child care arrangements for over 65,000 registrants.
A major WIN emphasis in fiscal 1981 was expansion of the intensive employability services (IES) component, especially the IES group job-seeking (IES/GSJ) activity, designed to speed the transition of WIN registrants from welfare to work.
Both IES and IES/GJS assist basically job-ready individuals to acquire the skills required to find and keep a job.
In fiscal 1981, more than 135,000 registrants participated in IES, and another 57,000 were aided in their job search efforts through IES/GJS activity.
The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981 (P.L. 97- 35) made changes in basic AFDC eligibility and WIN exemption criteria, and established three optional work experience programs—the Community Work Experience Program (CWEP), the Work Supplementation Program (WSP), and the Work Incentive Demonstration Program.
States may establish CWEP's—a supplement to WIN—to provide work and training for persons unable to find unsubsidized employment.
Persons required to participate are all current WIN registrants and parents or relatives caring for a child 3 to 6 years old if child care is available.
Under WSP, States may use AFDC funds to provide or subsidize jobs for recipients as an alternative to receiving an AFDC grant.
Acceptance of supplemented jobs would be voluntary, and recipients choosing not to participate would be subject to regular AFDC work requirements.
Work Incentive Demonstration Programs will be funded for a period of 3 years and will be administered solely by the title IV A agency as an alternative to WIN in States electing to participate.
Apprenticeship made some important advances in fiscal 1981.
Minority participation increased to 18.4 percent of all apprentices, up from 17.1 percent at the end of fiscal 1980.
Concerted efforts to interest women in careers in the skilled trades resulted in an increase in female participation to 5.7 percent of all apprentices.
Five years ago, women constituted but 2.2 percent of the apprentice population.
Apprenticeship in the uniformed military services had a big year, increasing to over 24,000.
Almost 3,700 new apprenticeship programs were registered, 13 of which were with Federal agencies, and another 13 with international unions and large interstate employers such as public transportation and energy transmission companies.
Six new occupations were approved as apprenticeable.
During fiscal 1981 over 400,000 apprentices received training.
The number of apprentices in training as of the end of the year declined to just under 316,000, reflecting overall business conditions.
There were more than 20,000 fewer apprentices in the construction industry at the end of the year than at the beginning.
Major declines also occurred in the number of apprentices in the manufacturing and public administration sectors.
Important changes in emphasis also occurred during the year.
CETA cutbacks required the termination of most New Initiatives in Apprenticeship activities, including the successful school to work apprenticeship program and the development and promotion contracts with employer associations and international unions.
Preapprenticeship and apprentice outreach activities of the State employment security agencies and CETA-funded nonprofit and governmental units were cut back or eliminated.
On the other hand, BAT's quality in apprenticeship program continually reviews and rates the performance of the more than 50,000 apprenticeship programs in teaching apprentices the manipulative skills and the theoretical principles required in their trades.
The quality program thus directly addresses value of apprenticeship to the worker, the employer, and the country as a whole.
Another activity begun during the year was an examination of the factors constituting "apprenticeability" and occupations currently considered "apprenticeable"in programs registered by the Bureau of Apprenticeship Training (BAT) and the States' apprenticeship agencies (SAC's).
BAT has solicited the input of the Federal Committee on Apprenticeship, the SAC's, and other interested parties in its review.
The Office of Policy, Evaluation and Research focused on policy issues and options in defining the dimensions and scope of the employment and training system fc the 1980's, and addressed other significant policy iss.es, including program performance measures, block grant funding, optional funding levels and formulas, immigration policy, enterprise zones, and key OMB and Congressional budget issues.
Major legislative attention was directed to extension of the Older Americans Act, youth employment and training programs, extension and revision of the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit for employers, and passage of the Trade Act and Unemployment Insurance Amendments contained in the Omnibus Reconciliation Act of 1981.
Research efforts concentrated on policy issues to strengthen local employment and training programs, local economic development linkages, mandatory work experience, work adjustment assistance, and illegal aliens' use of unemployment insurance, and their tax payment patterns.
Research to improve direct, short-term programs included a variety of experimental and demonstration projects and studies of on-going programs.
Preliminary results were reported this past year from the Youth Incentive Entitlement Pilot Projects to encourage disadvantaged youth to graduate from higlı school by offering them guaranteed summer jobs and part-time school-year jobs as long as they stay in school.
Preliminary results were also reported for demonstrations of job search clubs for participants in CETA, the Work Incentive Program (WIN), and the Employment Service (ES).
In fiscal 1981, the first of several schedule Demonstration Offices was opened to conduct ES-related research and experimental projects.
An ES-related study examined 20 local ES offices that had high rates of placing veterans in an effort to improve veterans services throughout the system.
Another ES project involved the preparation of a technical assistance guide for choosing for local offices sites most convenient to the client groups being served.
Research that concentrated on improving the employability of the economically disadvantaged included WIN demonstration models to return teenaged AFDC mothers to school and training; quality electronics job training for AFDC clients; and a survey of exemplary CETA training proven to be most effective in training and placing economically disadvantaged groups and minorities.
The first estimates of CETA impact on participant earnings found that fiscal 1976 participants did gain more in earnings, about 7 percent, in the first year after leaving the program than a comparable group of nonparticipants.
Considerable variation occurred because of preprogram earnings and by type of program participation.
Thus, participants who had a history of limited preprogram earnings gained substantially, more than 20 percent, over their comparison group.
In contrast, those who had relatively high earnings before CETA did not register a gain over their counterparts.
Women achieved large net gains, while those for men were slight.
Among the four major types of program activities surveyed, training programs were found to have had larger effects on postprogram earnings than the subsidized employment programs.
The largest were for those in classroom training, with a smaller impact generated by public service employment, and no impact for those in work experience programs.
Evaluations of the private sector initiatives program found that the development of closer CETA-business ties is a gradual process, that it generates differing emphases in differing localities, and that it is heavily dependent on local factors and leadership.
A related study of the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit, enacted to induce employers to hire from specified groups with high unemployment, found that its design and administration had produced less use by employers than had been expected.
Late in fiscal 1981, Congress extended this tax credit for an additional year, with modifications to meet some of the problems pointed up by the evaluation.
Studies of the effects of the 1978 amendments of CETA found that the amendments did largely achieve their objectives.
Most notably, CETA managers became more sensitive to the need to tighten administrative controls to prevent fraud and abuse, but this added to administrative strains on the program.
The CETA amendments also achieved a sharp shift in targeting of Public Service Employment to a more disadvantaged clientele by tightening eligibility requirements and limiting wage levels, but these changes reduced skill levels of the PSE jobs and led local governments to regard the program as less useful for their objective of providing public services.
Service job placements, and revising the alien labor certification process.
An LMI Training Institute was launched to train CETA and PIC planners, Job Service staff, local labor market analysts, private employers, and others on the production, interpretation, and use of LMI.
Training and user symposia were provided to more than 1,750 persons during the year.
Cooperative projects were undertaken with international employment and training agencies of Israel and Mexico.
Through representation in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OCED), ETA representatives participated in comparative analyses of public employment service activities, youth programs, work sharing, and other labor market measures, as well as in preparation of policy and analytic documents for the 1982 OECD meeting of labor ministers on employment policy.
In the emergency preparedness area, the Civil Emergency Preparedness Manual was updated, and in cooperation with the Department of Defense, labor market information sources were developed to assist in military recruitment and the transfer of military dischargees into the civilian labor force.
Fiscal year 1981 was the first full year of operation for ETA's new system for providing Management Assistance and Training (MAT) to CETA prime sponsors and other grantee agencies in the employment and training system.
Congressional hearings on the reauthorization of CETA gave the first impetus for ETA to increase the volume and improve the delivery of technical assistance and training to ETA grantees.
Subsequently, a committee was established composed of prime sponsors, Job Service staff, staff from ETA's National and regional offices, and those non-Federal organizations that are essential parts of the employment and training community.
The report of this committee, "Review of ETA's Technical Assistance and Training (TAT) System,"confirmed that ETA had not met prime sponsors'needs for technical assistance in quantity or quality.
These findings were also confirmed by a study conducted by the House Committee on Appropriations.
ETA's first step, following the identification of the problems in the delivery of TAT, was to establish at the national level the Office of Management Assistance (OMA) as mandated by the CETA reauthorization.
This office, organized in December 1979, was followed by the establishment of regional Management Assistance Staff (MAS) units.
These offices were established for the planning and delivery of TAT.
The underlying principle of the new MAT system is that the employment and training community must develop its own MAT expertise and establish a cooperative system for its use.
Upgrade professionalism and reduce staff turnover in the ETA system.
Establish a needs identification process that quickly pinpoints program operator needs indicated by program assessments, audits, complaints, investigations, and other sources.
Localize the delivery of MAT so that it can be more cost efficient and tailored to specific State and local needs.
Assure program operator acceptance (user-ownership) by having users actively involved in planning and developing the system and participating in the delivery of both management assistance and training.
Build a cost-sharing system capable of meeting the large unmet MAT needs with the relatively small appropriation of TAT funds.
Assure that all resources delivering TAT are incorporated into the comprehensive MAT plan.
Track and evaluate all management assistance and training to ensure constant improvement and the realization of the overall goal of program management improvement.
Development of 19 training courses, with an additional 6 under development.
Establishment of two labor market information centers.
Establishment of statewide delivery systems for MAT in 15 States.
Establishment of resource inventories in seven ETA regions.
Planning and development of a Management Information System (MIS) for MAT activities, expected to be operational in January 1982.
Long Range Planning (5-year plan) to assure cohesiveness and consistency in the delivery of MAT services from year to year.
Establishment of 7 new State training institutes, bringing the total number of State institutes to 15.
Development of a system for MAT fund accounting.
In fiscal 1981, ETA emphasized reducing fraud and mismanagement within employment and training programs.
The Special Review Staff (SRS) conducted in-depth monitoring reviews of 15 prime sponsors.
Fifty reviews had been planned during fiscal 1981 and each year thereafter.
However, because of severely restricted travel funds only 15 reviews were completed.
In the reviews a monitoring procedure was implemented that samples the three major activities that have the greatest potential for fraud and program abuse—financial and administrative management, program management, and equal opportunity.
The processing of complaints has become an everincreasing area of importance in the administration of ETA programs.
Recorded complaints at the Federal level that averaged 250 per year during the 1974-77 period increased to 660 during fiscal 1981.
The proportion of complaints involving equal opportunity (EO) problems has dipped in recent years.
While EO problems accounted for the majority of complaints in earlier years, they declined to 40 percent of all complaints in fiscal 1978 and to 30 percent in fiscal years 1979 through 1981.
The 1978 CETA amendments established fixed time periods for resolution of all complaints—60 days at the local level and 120 days at the Federal level.
A system for measuring compliance with the mandated time periods has been developed and is in place throughout ETA.
The latest effort to assess the current level of compliance indicated that the average age of open or nonresolved complaints had dropped from 8.5 months at the end of fiscal 1978 to 5.5 months in fiscal 1979 to 4.2 months in fiscal 1980 and to 3 months in fiscal 1981.
In response to widespread concern over the measurement of homeownership costs in the Consumer Price Index, the Bureau of Labor Statistics published five alternative experimental measures of homeownership costs, including a rent substitute.
The Bureau plans to introduce a rental equivalence measure in January 1983.
Commissioner of Labor Statistics Janet L. Norwood testified before several congressional committees examining the effect of the Consumer Price Index on Federal expenditures and was appointed to the Cabinet Working Group on Cost of Living Adjustments and Federal Programs.
Revision of the Producer Price Index continued, though at a slower pace than planned because of staff attrition and hiring freezes.
The Bureau received and is evaluating a report from an Expert Committee on Family Budgets.
The Bureau assisted the Secretary in analyzing the recommendations of the National Commission on Employment and Unemployment Statistics and in preparing a report to the Congress.
The changes announced by the Secretary included improved measures of discouraged workers, of usual hours worked, of school enrollment status, and of other characteristics of the employed and unemployed.
The Secretary also endorsed the Bureau's plans for a multiyear revision of the establishment survey of employment, hours, and earnings.
The Office of Management and Budget designated the Employment Cost Index as a principal Federal economic indicator, reflecting the importance of the series in analyzing the Nation's economy.
The Office of Personnel Management again requested and BLS collected information on paid leave in the private sector and on the detailed characteristics of private employee benefits plans, major elements in the Federal Pay Reform proposals before the Congress.
The Bureau continued to expand its program of productivity analysis and research.
It extended the analysis of factors contributing to the productivity slowdown, including the impact of capital formation, energy price measures, and changes in the composition of the labor force.
The staff developed a new generation of computerdeveloped charts for use in briefing the White House staff.
Work continued on the development of a Management Information System for the Bureau.
The new Administration's economic plans for fiscal years 1982 and 1983 required rethinking Bureau program priorities and redoing the fiscal 1982 budget submission to Congress.
President Reagan ordered a 12 percent reduction across the board, or a reduction from the $123.4 million requested earlier for fiscal 1982 to $108 million.
The BLS request includes plans to revise the Current Employment Survey of establishments, redesign the Current Population Survey, and develop the rental equivalence test for the Consumer Price Index (CPI) X1 measure.
The office released all major economic indicators according to the preannounced schedules and in accordance with release procedures established by the Office of Management and Budget.
Through the first 6 months of fiscal 1981, the staff distributed over 1.5 million copies of printed materials in response to more than 500,000 recorded requests for data.
These figures exclude an extremely heavy correspondence and analysis workload in response to written and telephone requests from the Congress, policymaking agencies in the Executive Branch, labor unions, business, the public, etc.
Such requests total in the thousands; the vast majority are handled on a timely basis.
In response to widespread concern over the measurement of homeownership costs in the CPI, BLS continued monthly publication of five alternative experimental measures of homeownership costs.
The measures are based on work conducted during the course of the CPI Revision and on information already being collected for the current CPI program.
Publication of average prices for food and fuel items continued in 1981.
Item samples for gasoline were reselected in order to represent better the current mix of products.
The staff completed the second phase of an ongoing program to update the CPI outlet sample in one-fifth of the CPI pricing areas each year.
The revision of the Producer Price Index (PPI) is continuing, althouglı at a slower rate than originally planned because of staff attrition and the hiring freeze.
Revised indexes for 98 industries and their products are now being published.
They represent 28 percent of mining and manufacturing production; 110 other industries are in various stages of development with indexes for 21 additional industries scheduled for publication in January 1982.
BLS recently received the report of the Expert Committee on Family Budgets, which was established to identify either the standards or the methodologies required to revise the current program.
BLS has discussed the report and received the advice of its Labor and Business Research Advisory Committees.
The BLS is continuing its evaluation of the prograin in light of the current budget environment.
In the International Price Program (IPP), the staff produced price indexes that cover 65 percent of the value of products exported from the U.S. and 65 percent of the value of products imported into the U.S. Indexes covering an additional 12 percent of exports and 8 percent of the value of imports are in various stages of development scheduled for completion by the end of fiscal 1982.
Indexes were published that compare U.S. price trends of 64 export products with the price trends of competitive products exported from Germany and Japan.
The staff completed the first year of data collection for the Consumer Expenditure Survey.
Development of a computer system to support editing and tabulation of these data for publication is under way.
The Office gave major attention to conducting the preliminary work for a multiyear revision of the establishment survey of employment, hours, and earnings.
A test of a centralized computer processing system for production of State estimates was begun.
Also, the staff conducted two one-time surveys to provide information on the perception of employers towards the design of various forms and the availability of certain data items in establishment payroll record systems.
The staff expanded the State and area component of the industry payroll survey during fiscal 1981 to provide current monthly data for nine additional Standard Metropolitan Statistical Areas (SMSA's) and for the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and four areas in Puerto Rico.
As required by the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA), the Office calculated wage indexes derived from quarterly reports on insured employment and wages for over 3,000 counties and 450 prime sponsors for use in determining the maximum allowable wage for public service employees involved in CETA programs.
Also, the staff used these data to construct a wage index for determining hospital cost reimbursements for Medicare patients.
They completed initiation of validation of State procedures and processing with regard to the preparation of the ES-202 Report (Quarterly Report on Covered Employment and Wages).
In 1981, the Bureau developed national estimates of occupational employment by industry, for nonmanufacturing industries, for about 1,500 occupations.
The Occupational Employment Statistics survey is conducted on a 3- year cycle, with approximately one-third of the economy surveyed each year.
The staff completed a computer system providing for production of a major publication of State and area annual demographic employment and unemployment data several months earlier than in previous years.
The Office concentrated much of its effort in two areas—assisting in the Secretary of Labor's response to the National Commission on Employment and Unemployment Statistics (NCEUS) recommendations and making changes in the Current Population Survey (CPS) program related to the 1980 census.
The legislation establishing the NCEUS charged the Secretary of Labor with submitting a final report to Congress detailing the actions taken with respect to the Commissioner's recommendations.
The Bureau provided the technical expertise and assistance required for the preparation of the Secretary's report, which was submitted to Congress in the fall.
Phases II and III of the Methods Development Survey, a special research panel conducted by the Bureau of the Census, tested many key Commission recommendations relating to the Nation's monthly labor force survey (the Current Population Survey, CPS).
A prototype labor force questionnaire, incorporating many of the Commission's recommendations for new and/or revised questions, was developed.
The revised document will be tested in fiscal 1982 and will replace the present questionnaire in January 1983.
New questions include those designed to identify and more objectively measure discouraged workers and to identify usual as well as actual hours worked by the employed.
Questions were also designed to collect monthly data on the school enrollment status of persons 16 to 34 years of age and to sharpen several items relating to characteristics of the employed and the unemployed.
In response to another of the Commission's recommendations, the staff prepared a report relating employment problems to economic status.
The staff produced new CPS table specifications as a result of changes in the 1980 census (such as the use of new occupational categories) and as a response to changing demand for data for different labor force groups (such as blacks and Hispanics).
Also, work was begun on adjusting CPS data to the 1980 population count introduced with the release of data for January 1982.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics continued to meet the labor force data needs of persons in the press, business, academia, Congress, and government agencies.
Analyses issued included the regular monthly summaries of employment and unemployment, as well as the special semiannual and annual reporting, plus quarterly reports on weekly earnings, women in the labor force, and minorities.
Special research projects resulted in articles on youth employment, employment patterns in recessions, occupational segregation, occupational gains among blacks, sex/earnings differentials, regional earnings and regional unemployment, and employment in the service and agricultural sectors of the economy, among others.
Also, a data book on working women was published, and extensive work was done on two other data books—one providing historical data on hundreds of labor force series and the other on CPS “gross flows" data.
These are scheduled for completion in fiscal 1982.
Wages and Industrial Relations In October 1980, the Office of Management and Budget designated The Employment Cost Index (ECI) as a ‘Principal Federal Economic Indicator"whose release date is monitored and published in the Statistical Reporter.
During the year, work was completed on collecting and processing State and local government data which were published for the September quarter.
At the same time, the staff introduced a new estimation system allowing estimates of indexes as well as quarter-to-quarter change.
Finally, a method of regularly and systematically maintaining the survey establishment sample was developed and put into place during the year.
The Office delivered the annual survey of professional, administrative, technical, and clerical pay (PATC) a week ahead of time for use in determining the amount of October pay adjustment for Federal white-collar employees.
The survey is on an extremely tight production schedule that calls for a March reference date and a July 1 release of tabulations.
During the year, the staff did substantial research in developing and revising job definitions to be used in classifying workers in future surveys.
The Office released data on employee paid leave and benefit plans in the private sector for the second time in 1981.
The survey provides a unique source of comprehensive data on the detailed characteristics of employee benefit plans—leave, pensions, and a variety of insurances—in private industry.
The PATC survey again was the vehicle for collection of paid leave information requested by the Office of Personnel Management for its total compensation comparability project, which is a major element in the Federal Pay Reform proposals now before the Congress.
The staff continued planning begun in 1979 for future survey activities relating to pay reform proposals.
The Bureau conducted area wage surveys in 70 areas under its regular program and an additional 117 area wage surveys and 120 special industry wage surveys under contract with the Employment Standards Administration for use in administering the Service Contract Act (SCA).
Two surveys of Brevard County were also conducted to meet the emergency needs of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Adding data on the proportion of workers participating in health maintenance and insurance plans enhanced 24 regular area wage surveys.
In 1980, this item was added to the first 24 areas and, in 1982, the remaining 22 areas will be included.)
All 70 regular surveys bulletins included an improved set of matrix tables, showing occcupational pay relationships in establishments.
Improvements in the timeliness and appearance of SCA publication summaries were made through the introduction of photocomposition.
The Office continued to upgrade the analytical approaches to industry wage studies (IWS) through the use of regression techniques, variance analyses, and the occupational pay matrix.
The staff prepared a Monthly Labor Review (MLR) article on wage dispersion by industry which appeared in the April 1981 issue.
Another article tracing pay trends in public and private pay in the last half of the 1970's appeared in the July MLR.
The staff continued to add new studies to the Industry Wage Survey program: Savings/loan associations, electrical transmission equipment, smelting and refining of nonferrous metals, and electrical machinery.
Photocomposition of IWS bulletins has trimmed an average of 1 month from publication lag.
The Bureau improved the timeliness of material issued on major collective bargaining agreements.
A bulletin on interplant transfer provisions was issued on schedule, as was a bulletin on characteristics of major collective bargaining agreements.
The staff partially computerized production of monthly data on work stoppages, allowing same day release to the national office and regional offices through the Bureau's LABSTAT system.
Responding to the growing importance of collective bargaining in the public sector, the Bureau improved the timeliness of the new series on the size of public sector labor-management agreements.
Production time was cut in half, and the goal to produce public sector data on the same schedule as private sector data—1 month after the reference month—will be achieved early in 1982.
The Office completed a series of studies on the economic effects of the Fair Labor Standards Act, with a nationwide survey of employee earnings and hours in May 1980.
Designed to meet the needs of the Employment Standards Administration, the survey provided data on the frequency distribution of employees by individual hourly earnings and weekly hours of work.
The staff developed separate data by employee age and sex, industry, and establishment status under the Fair Labor Standards Act.
BLS continued to strengthen and expand its program of measurement, analysis, and research in productivity and technology.
The staff extended the analysis of factors contributing to the productivity slowdown, including the impact of capital formation, energy price measures, as well as changes in the composition of the labor force for the private business economy and the nonfarm and manufacturing sectors.
The Office introduced new productivity measures for the Class I bus carriers, transformers, nonwool yarn mills, machine tools, metal cutting machine tools, and metal forming machine tools industries to the list of industries for which measures are presently published.
About 100 separate productivity measures are now published in the manufacturing, mining, transportation, trade, communication, and service sectors of the economy.
The staff also completed a comprehensive chartbook on productivity and the economy.
The Office refined and expanded the series on productivity in the Federal Government to cover 405 organizations, up 31 from 1 year ago.
The staff completed indexes for the 1967-80 fiscal years for 28 functional groupings of Federal agencies representing 66 percent of the Federal civilian work force.
The staff updated trends in manufacturing productivity and labor costs for 11 countries during the year and compiled estimates of the comparative levels of compensation of wage earners in 33 countries and 34 manufacturing industries.
In addition, the Office updated international comparisons of labor force, employment, and unemployment in nine industrial countries and issued a special bulletin on youth unemployment.
These measures provide insights into the changing competitive position of the United States.
The Office studied the employment implications of automation and other technological changes and prepared reports appraising the impact of major technological changes on productivity, employment, and occupational requirements over the next 10 years on five additional major American industries.
A survey on labor and material requirements for shopping centers and retail stores was completed, and one for single-family housing was initiated.
These studies measure the total labor and material requirements as well as the occupational distribution of the types of construction to serve as a basis for estimating the labor-generating effects of construction programs.
Economic Growth and Empioyment Projections This Office prepares projections of economic growth and employment by industry and occupation.
A system of models has been developed to make medium- to long-range projections of GNP, industry output, and employment under alternative assumptions about Federal government policies, labor force participation, unemployment rates, and other factors.
A macroeconometric model provides estimates of aggregate supply and demand while a projected input-output model is used to estimate the effects of aggregate economic levels and policies on employment by industry.
A projected industry-occupation matrix is used to translate industry employment requirements to occupational employment.
The projections provide insights into the effects of Federal government policies on the magnitude and industrial composition of demand and employment by industry and occupation, and they assist industry and State and local governments in anticipating changing market structures and in formulating their own medium- and longterm plans.
The occupational projections are designed primarily for use in career guidance and education planning and provide the data for the Occupational Outlook Handbook and other career guidance publications issued by the Bureau.
In addition, the data base and models, which have been developed over time as part of the projections system, provide an important analytical capability to deal with a wide variety of current employment issues of interest to the Department and others.
Projections of various sectors of the economy have required a thorough study of recent conditions and relationships affecting output and employment.
The Office provides other Federal agencies with estimates of the effect of their total outlays, or of particular programs, on private jobs in recent periods.
Work on current job estimates in fiscal 1981 included studies on the employment requirements generated by energy changes, defense expenditures, construction, and agriculture.
The Office also prepares current summaries of the principal economic indicators and provides a monthly summary and analysis of short-term economic forecasts.
During the past year, the staff prepared several articles presenting a new set of labor force, economic, employment, and occupational projections to 1990.
Work to improve the timeliness of the underlying data bases was undertaken and planning for an extension of the projections to 1995 was completed.
In the occupational area, the staff prepared the 1982-83 edition of the Occupational Outlook Handbook.
National estimates of occupational employment by industry were prepared for 1978, 1980, and projected 1990 based on data from the Occupational Employment Statistics Surveys.
In fiscal year 1981, the Bureau of Labor Statistics surveyed about 285,000 employers for reports of their occupational injuries, illnesses, and fatalities.
From survey responses, national estimates of incidence rates and numbers of occupational injuries and illnesses on a calendar year basis are prepared and made public.
The Supplementary Data Systems (SDS), based on selected State workers' compensation information, and the Work Injury Reports survey program (based on questionnaire responses of injured employees) continued intact as adjuncts to the annual survey, each providing more information on work-related injuries and/or illnesses.
In the annual survey conducted in fiscal 1981, the Bureau continued for the third successive year to obtain data from employers on the object or the event associated with job-related fatalities.
In November 1980, BLS issued two press releases on the results of the 1979 survey—one on the general annual survey estimates and the other on causal patterns of fatalities by major industry classification.
Detailed occupational injury and illness statistics were also published in a summary and in five industry guides which assist employers in evaluating their injury and illness experience.
States participating in the annual survey program release data in similar publications.
In fiscal 1981, 35 States agreed to supply injury and illness data based on workers'compensation first reports of injury under the Supplementary Data System.
This system obtains information on detailed characteristics associated with work accidents.
The information supplements the industry-specific trend data derived from the annual survey and is transmitted to OSHA and NIOSH for use in meeting their respective program responsibilities.
Additionally, standard tabulations showing distributions of occupational injuries and illnesses by work characteristics and work situations are generated for each participating State.
BLS and participating States analyze the distribution and clusters of cases from the SDS with particular emphasis on the characteristics of injuries and illnesses, including the industry of the injured or ill employees.
Standard tabulations for each State and records of individual cases are made available to accident preventionists and researchers through the National Technical Information Service, and potential users are informed of their availability in special announcements.
These tabulations and analyses serve a wide variety of applications in the occupational safety and health area.
In the 1981 fiscal year, analyses of amputation injuries and of injuries by age of the worker appeared in the Monthly Labor Review.
The first presented data showing that young workers are hurt more, but not as seriously, as older workers; the second reported an estimate of 21,000 amputations in 1977, most involving the loss of a finger.
The Bureau developed a new measure of work injury risk.
For the first time, a ranking of hazardous occupations will be available.
At the request of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the Bureau drafted an injury profile of the Heavy Construction, Except Highway and Street Industry (SIC 162).
This report contains detailed information on the major factors associated with work-related injuries in this industry, including industry incidence rates, the ages of injured workers by duration of employment, their sex and occupation, the nature and source of injuries, the parts of body affected, and the types of accidents which produced the injuries.
The BLS continued its Work Injury Reports (WIR) survey program in order to obtain detailed accident information directly from injured employees, which is not available from either the annual survey or the SDS.
Four occupational injury studies were completed in the 1981 fiscal year, relating to servicing and maintaining equipment, amputations, back injuries, and hand injuries.
Currently planned surveys are related to falls from elevators, falls on stairs, logging, and oil and gas extraction.
The OSH Act requires statistical programs to meet Federal and State needs, encourages the participation of States in the programs, and authorizes grants to provide half the funding of State costs.
Recordkeeping, the annual survey, SDS, and the WIR surveys of injured employees are all carried out with the participation of State agencies.
In fiscal 1981, 48 States participated in the annual survey; 35 in the SDS; and 25 in the WIR.
Under the new Administration OSHA has adopted three principles in its efforts to improve workplace safety and health conditions.
The first is equal emphasis.
The agency is striving to place equal emphasis on all of the problem-solving tools that Congress gave OSHA to carry out its responsibilities.
These tools include the ability to set standards, enforce compliance, approve State programs, provide consultation, offer education and training, and foster the creation of special projects.
The second element is selectivity.
Since OSHA's resources are limited, the agency must be extremely selective about what it chooses to do.
Every action must have a demonstrably positive effect at the workplace level.
Finally, OSHA seeks and offers cooperation.
Neither antibusiness nor antilabor, OSHA is a regulator that intends to work alongside both, seeking new and better ways to protect workers by reducing or eliminating workplace hazards.
OSHA is using a four-step process in the promulgation and review of both safety and health standards.
The purpose of the process is to ensure that any standards set by the agency will be sensible, effective, and enforceable.
The four steps are (1) to demonstrate a significant risk; (2) to demonstrate that the proposed standard will reduce that risk substantially; (3) to collect scientific data and analyze it in terms of industry-based economic feasibility to set a standard; and (4) to determine the most efficient and effective way of attaining that standard.
During fiscal year 1981, OSHA published an amendment to its standard for occupational exposure to noise.
This amendment provided for the establishment of hearing conservation programs in industries where workers are exposed to more than 85 decibels.
The effective date of the amendment was stayed, however, until August 22, 1981, to permit the agency to consider numerous requests and petitions to clarify and amend the new rules.
As a result of this reexamination, OSHA allowed much of the amendment to become effective, but also announced its intention to reopen the public record and, possibly, revise several other provisions of the amendment.
In keeping with the July 1980 Supreme Court decision in the "Benzene Case,"which required OSHA to consider the significance of risk in promulgating occupational health standards, OSHA published a notice in the Federal Register deleting those portions of its cancer identification and classification regulations that conflicted with the court's ruling.
On January 23, 1981, the agency published proposed revisions to 29 CFR Part 1990 to bring the regulations into conformance with the court's directive.
These conforming amendments were withdrawn on March 17, 1981, to give the new administration time to consider regulatory alternatives not reviewed prior to publishing the proposed amendments.
Although OSHA had promulgated its final standard for occupational exposure to lead in November 1978, the standard had been partially stayed and was the subject of several legal challenges brought by industry and labor.
On August 15, 1980, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit upheld the lead standard in most respects for a number of industries.
However, the court also found that OSHA had failed to present substantial evidence to support the feasibility of the standard for approximately 45 other industries.
The court gave OSHA 6 months in which to complete a reassessment of the issue of feasibility for these industries.
Accordingly, OSHA published a supplemental statement of reasons in the Federal Register.
Following submission of the supplemental statement of reasons to the court, several industry groups informed the agency of their intention to file administrative request for reconsideration and stay of the remanded standard.
Therefore, OSHA and the industry petitioners jointly filed a motion with the court asking that further judicial proceedings be held in abeyance pending OSHA's action on the reconsideration request.
The court granted the motion to defer action on the supplemental statement until October 11, 1981.
In the interim, OSHA published an advance notice of proposed rulemaking in the Federal Register announcing its intention to reevaluate and reconsider the entire lead standard and to review the technological and economic feasibility of complying with the regulation.
This review is currently under way.
On January 16, 1981, OSHA published a proposed standard that would require employers to identify the hazardous chemicals in their workplaces and to inform their employees of the identity and nature of the employees' hazardous exposures.
This regulation was believed necessary to provide information to the approximately 25 million American workers who are exposed to hazardous materials in their workplaces.
On February 12, 1981, the proposed rules were withdrawn to give the agency time to consider regulatory alternatives that had not been fully considered.
The agency intends to repropose a hazards identification standard early in fiscal year 1982.
In keeping with the current administration's policy on regulatory reform, OSHA has announced its intention to review and reevaluate a number of existing occupational health standards.
These include the generic cancer standard, the cotton dust standard, the noise standard, and the regulations for access to employee medical and exposure records.
Reviews of these regulations were under way at the close of fiscal year 1981.
During fiscal year 1981, OSHA continued its efforts to review and revise entire subparts of the general industry standards to update and clarify the language of the requirements.
Through the use of performance-oriented standards, employers, especially small business employers, can more easily determine what requirements are being placed upon them.
The employers are also free to determine how to comply rather than follow detailed specification requirements.
As part of this effort, OSHA published an advance notice of proposed rulemaking to announce an intention to revise Subpart H, Hazardous Materials, to clarify the language and requirements of the current standards.
Also in 1981, OSHA began a new effort to review every existing safety standard to determine those which may require revision, amendment, or revocation.
The agency published a plan in the Federal Register that outlined which subparts of regulations will be reviewed each year of the next 10 years.
OSHA promulgated an important rule permitting revisions to be made to the former electrical standard resulting in one which is more performance oriented.
The new standard clarifies and simplifies the mandatory requirement of the original regulations by reducing the word volume by 90 percent while maintaining the same protection afforded to employees.
OSHA also issued a final standard on guarding of low-pitched roof perimeters during the performance of built-up roofing work.
OSHA proposed a new standard for marine terminals on January 16, 1981.
These regulations, when final, will represent a comprehensive set of performance-based standards that will provide a significant reduction in the amount of mandatory regulatory compliance at present required of industries engaged in marine cargo handling.
Many of the general industry standards (29 CFR 1910) would become inapplicable and the agency would, in effect, reduce the volume of regulations to one-sixth of the current regulations.
During fiscal 1981, informal public meetings were held on lockout/tagout requirements to protect employees from injuries caused by failure to deactivate or prevent reactivation of movable electrically energized or pressurized equipment while employees are performing work on such equipment.
Information on conveyors was requested and informal public meetings were also held.
Work continued on tunnels (underground operations) and the possible revision of the multipiece rim wheel standard.
OSHA's 1,200 Federal compliance officers are responsible for the protection of approximately 40 million employees in 3 million of the nation's workplaces.
Some 30 million workers and 2 million workplaces are under the jurisdiction of OSHA-approved State operations.)
To maximize compliance officers' effectiveness, the agency has created a targeting system that will enable them to concentrate their efforts where the serious hazards are.
The new program evolved from field-testing a variety of new approaches for improving inspection targeting.
Of nine experiments conducted over the past year, early findings from two were found to be particularly promising.
As a result, procedures tested by the Milwaukee and Pittsburgh area offices were combined to form the new targeting strategy for fiscal 1982.
This change will permit the agency, for the first time, to direct programmed safety inspections to those establishments with the highest lost work-day case rates.
In the past, targeting has been based on industry rates and, as a consequence, both 'high"and "low rate" firms were targeted.
During an inspection, compliance officers discuss with employers and employees the full range of agency services—including consultation, education and training—to help them achieve safe and healthful workplaces.
In turn, compliance officers have a number of tools to aid them in the inspection process.
The following are some of those tools.
OSHA's Salt Lake City Analytical Laboratory, responsible for analyzing work-site samples, made 109,000 individual analyses of 49,500 samples in the past year.
This laboratory was upgraded and made more efficient through improved equipment and increased computerization.
The lab was recently designated a "flagship"laboratory by the accreditation committee of the American Industrial Hygiene Association.
Sample turn-around time has been reduced from 23 days 3 years ago, to 9 days now.
The Maintenance and Calibration Laboratory, responsible for maintaining equipment used during inspections, has computerized the shipping and sound department to improve the management of equipment.
The status of 30,000 pieces of equipment handled annually by the laboratory is entered into a computer, as is all new equipment, prior to being shipped to the field.
This provides an accurate check of the listings in the Departmental Property Management System and assists the regions in their management of equipment.
Other improvements in field equipment procedures include the establishment of an equipment advisory committee to coordinate use of equipment in the field (including reallocation of excess equipment); redesign of the vertical elutriator used in measuring cotton dust, to avoid conflict with the OSHA electrical standard; and coordination of field equipment purchases to take advantage of bulk price discounts.
OSHA's Office of Occupational Medicine conducts field investigations in response to requests from the field.
In fiscal year 1981, 22 such investigations were conducted, including a study of fatalities in a resins manufacturing firm, a study of asbestos exposures, and a study of birth abnormalities in a hospital.
The agency's Health Response Team, consisting of high-level industrial hygienists, provides specialized industrial hygiene assistance to the regions.
The team assists in complex or specialized inspections, including conducting most of the OSHA inspections for nonionizing radiation throughout the United States in 1980-81.
This past year the team trained two representatives from each region to conduct these inspections.
A three-part video tape on nonionizing radiation was produced to provide additional guidance.
Other projects on which the team worked include measuring nitrogen oxides for an area office in the Atlanta region, helping with the inspection of a major lead smelter in the Seattle region, responding to a report of illness in a Federal building in Idaho, and investigating dust exposures in a Florida post office.
The Technical Data Center (TDC) supports all areas of the agency by maintaining hard copy and on-line access to technical information.
This year the TDC completed the first phase of reducing the docket files to microfiche in order to protect these one-of-a kind records.
A cooperative effort with the regions resulted in upgrading technical reference libraries in the field.
The Office of Variance Determination reviewed 115 applications for variance from the standards.
Of special interest was the assistance given to the Chrysler and Ford Motor companies by the granting of variances from the lead and arsenic standards for their solder grind operations.
General Motors was granted an identical variance in 1980.)
The variances permit alternative practices that provide equal or better protection for workers.
The office also has worked closely with labor and industry in developing guidelines for constructing chimneys to heights of several hundred feet.
The Office of Statistical Studies and Analyses published a study of fatalities related to oil/gas well drilling rigs and prepared in draft another study related to fatalities involving miscellaneous working surfaces.
During fiscal year 1981, OSHA reviewed about 400 adverse administrative law judges'decisions and in about 160 of these cases filed a petition for review of the judge's decision with the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission in Washington.
Some of the novel issues raised in the review commission trial and appellate cases included whether an employer violates OSHA's generalduty clause by exposing his employees to a known animal carcinogen and whether an employer who places employees' medical removal protection (MRP) payments in an escrow fund rather than paying the employees, willfully violates the MRP provisions of the lead standard.
Other activities included the review of approximately 15 fatality inspections for possible criminal prosecution under Section 17(e) of the OSH Act.
Approximately four of these cases were referred to the Department of Justice with a recommendation that the employer be prosecuted.
OSHA was designed to be a partnership between the Federal Government and the States.
Section 18 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 provides that a State or territory that wants to assume responsibility for development of occupational safety and health standards may submit for approval to OSHA a State plan for such standards and their enforcement.
Currently, OSHA has given initial approval to 23 comprehensive State plans and to one plan, Connecticut's, that is limited in scope to public employees of the State and its political subdivisions.
During fiscal year 1981, OSHA certified six States and territories as having completed all the commitments contained in their State plans, thereby indicating that the State or territory had in place all the structural components necessary to administer the OSHA program within its boundaries.
This brings to 18 the total number of State plans that have been certified by OSHA.
In addition, OSHA ceased withdrawal action against the Wyoming and Indiana State plans, and denied petitions requesting the withdrawal of the Virginia plan.
Current information did not warrant withdrawal action.
Once a State plan is certified, OSHA's monitoring of the State plan focuses on whether administration of the plan is providing protection to employees that is at least as effective as that provided under the Federal OSHA program.
After at least 1 year of this postcertification monitoring, OSHA may grant final approval to the State plan.
An additional requirement for final approval was established in the court order under AFL-CIO v. Marshall, the "Benchmark Case," which requires a State to achieve 100 percent of its individual compliance-staffing level benchmark, as established by OSHA, prior to final approval.
Believing that previously established benchmarks were unrealistic, OSHA began a review of the State plan compliance-staffing benchmark formula in order to develop staffing levels for the individual States which more closely reflect current agency policies.
Under reduced benchmarks many States are expected to qualify in this area more quickly for final approval of their plans.
During fiscal year 1981, OSHA relinquished dual enforcement jurisdiction in the four States where such jurisdiction remained.
Monitoring staff in those States was significantly reduced, freeing OSHA personnel for Federal enforcement activities.
Employers in every State who want help in recognizing and correcting safety and health hazards in their workplaces can have a free on-site consultation service funded by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
Primarily targeted for smaller businesses, this safety and health consultation program is completely separate from the OSHA inspection effort.
In addition, no citations are issued or penalties proposed.
Approximately 23,000 employers took advantage of this free service in fiscal 1981.
New Directions, the agency's grants program, makes funds available to employer organizations, labor groups, educational institutions and nonprofit firms interested in upgrading their safety and health competency through training.
The grants create self-sustaining programs designed to allow the recipient organization to become independent of Federal funding after a 3 to 5 year developmental period.
The agency awarded $18.4 million in grants during fiscal 1981 with $328,000 of this in new grants and $18.1 million for strengthening programs that received earlier grants.
Of the total amount, $2.1 million came from the National Cancer Institute.
Because of New Directions grants, some 80,000 employers and employees received training and assistance.
As a result of the renewed emphasis on the area of education and training, the agency has implemented a new outreach system to publicize the program as well as new auditing and monitoring systems to ensure that the money is spent wisely.
To enhance the efficiency and quality of operations, management was upgraded at OSHA's Training Institute in Chicago by providing for a full-time director, chief of safety branch, chief of health branch, and instructional support groups.
The institute trained 3,953 people during the year, including State compliance officers, other Federal agency personnel, and employer and employee representatives as well as OSHA compliance officers.
New courses were added in three subjects: oil and gas well drilling, occupational health and environmental controls, advanced maritime safety and health problems and procedures.
Training materials were provided to other Federal agencies on introducing 29 CFR 1960.20, ‘Federal Agency Safety and Health Program.
In cooperation with the Department of Education, 50 curriculum modules were developed for vocational/trade school safety and health training programs.
The Insititute's new board of directors conducted three meetings to provide recommendations for improvement of the Institute's curriculum.
An Instructor Fellows Program was implemented to encourage the sharing of expertise of highly experienced professional staff within the agency.
The first responsibilities assigned to OSHA, in Section 2(b)(1) of the OSH Act, are to encourage employers and employees to reduce hazards and to stimulate new and existing programs for providing safe and healthful working conditions.
Special projects is the vehicle used by the agency to encourage nontraditional problem-solving techniques.
One such example is the Bechtel Corporation's labormanagement safety and health committee located at their nuclear plant in San Onofre, California.
The program has been so successful that CAL-OSHA was able to drop the 21-acre site from its inspection targeting system.
A comprehensive nationwide program to encourage cooperative efforts by employers and employees is in the consultative stage of development.
States with OSHA programs, OSHA field staff, labor-management committee experts, and union and trade association representatives have been asked for suggestions and constructive criticism of the developmental program.
The public will be asked for comment and information before the end of 1981.
Under the OSH Act, Federal agencies are responsible for setting up their own on-the-job safety and health programs.
The responsibilities of each of the more than 100 agencies in this matter are spelled out in presidential executive orders.
The latest of these (E.O. #12196), effective on October 1, 1980, has new safety and health provisions strengthening on-the-job protection for the approximately 2.9 million Federal workers and encourages the establishment of labor-management committees.
On October 21, 1980, OSHA issued 29 CFR 1960, "Basic Program Elements for Federal Employee Occupational Safety and Health Programs," defining in greater detail the responsibilities of the agency, of the Secretary of Labor, and the heads of other Federal agencies.
A technical assessment of the health hazards associated with ethylene dibromide (EDB), the fumigant for the Mediterranean fruit fly.
A technical assessment of the hazards associated with ethylene oxide as a result of a petition to the agency for an emergency temporary standard.
An evaluation of a petition from the asphalt industry requesting that asphalt be separated from the standard for coal tar pitch volatiles.
This evaluation included coordinating the analysis of asphalt samples with the analytical laboratory in Salt Lake City.
A review paper on the economic impact on the auto industry of OSHA standards, other than lead and arsenic.
In accordance with the President's plan for economic recovery, the Employment Standards Administration (ESA) in fiscal 1981 focused on achieving significant spending reductions while protecting the rights of workers, taking steps to eliminate fraud and abuse in all programs, and reducing the paperwork burden on employers.
By year's end administrative improvements, regulatory changes, and legislative proposals had been initiated to achieve these goals.
The Employment Standards Administration administers more than 90 laws affecting American workers and employers including the wage and hour laws, the Executive Order requiring affirmative action in Federal contracts, and various workers' compensation programs.
Its three major prograin offices are the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, and the Wage and Hour Division.
Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs ESA's Office of Federal Contract Coinpliance Programs (OFCCP) enforces Executive Order 11246, aimed at assuring that contractors using public funds do not discriminate against employees because of race, color, sex, religion, or national origin.
It also administers Section 503 of the 1973 Rehabilitation Act and Section 402 of the Vietnam-Era Veterans'Readjustment Assistance Act requiring Federal contractors to take affirmative action to hire and promote qualified handicapped people, Vietnain-era veterans and disabled veterans of all wars.
During fiscal year 1981, OFCCP proposed regulatory and enforcement changes to promote equal employment practices by Federal contractors while streamlining procedures.
It sought to speed the processing of complaints and reduce the reporting burden for those doing business with the government.
OFCCP conducted 3,136 compliance reviews of Federal contractors employing more than two million workers, and investigated another 2,011 discrimination complaints.
It closed 172 compliance reviews and complaint investigations in which there was evidence of systemic discrimination.
There were 372 agreements in which contractors committed a total of $8.4 million in back pay and other financial outlays for training, future pay increases, and increased recruitment.
Back pay awards of $5.5 million went to 4,765 women, minorities, disabled persons, and veterans.
Administrative complaints were filed against 13 companies.
One contractor was debarred, losing eligibility to do business with the government.
The number of women working in construction and kindred trades increased by 39,000, or 5.
1 percent, from July 1980 to July 1981.
A nationwide study conducted by OFCCP concluded that the utilization goals were instrumental in the increase, particularly given the slackened overall demand for construction.
A 20 percent hiring rate for entry-level jobs in the coal industry was achieved through a number of conciliation agreements to recruit and hire women in coal mines.
Agreements were reached between 696 employers and training service agents funded by the Employment and Training Administration to provide specific training or trainees for specific contractor job openings.
These "linkage"agreements resulted in the immediate hiring of 949 persons, and will benefit many times that number as the agreements progress.
The hirees include minorities, women, handicapped workers and veterans.
OFCCP took the initiative in fiscal 1981 to encourage the establishment of Liaison Groups between industry, constituency groups and OFCCP.
The groups help to bridge the communication gap with employers OFCCP regulates and serve to reduce the amount of confrontation with OFCCP compliance officers.
The result has been a great increase in voluntary compliance, freeing the agency's resources to perform its job with fewer resources and to concentrate on more substantive discrimination issues.
Following publication of the proposed regulations on August 25, 1981, a 60-day public comment period elicited over 1,500 comments.
The Department also has requested public comments on affirmative action issues which will be the subject of future rulemaking.
The issues deal with availability, back pay, utilization goals in the construction industry, coverage of Federal and non-Federal sites, and methods of determining job groups.
The flow of employee complaints and increased reports of workers exploited in sweatshops continued to determine the priorities of the Wage and Hour Division.
The emphasis on complaint resolution reduced that inventory during 1981 from 22,791 to 19,692 despite 46,020 new complaints.
A total of 68,464 investigations were conducted under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) disclosing $52.8 million in minimum wage underpayments due 396,000 workers and $74.5 million in overtime underpayments due 291,000 employees.
Employers agreed to pay $31.9 million in back wages to 325,000 workers and $52.6 million to 250,000 employees due overtime pay.
The total amount, $83.5 million, in back wages that employers agreed to restore to workers represents a 20 percent increase from fiscal 1980.
The difference between the amounts reflects the refusal of employers to pay in cases deemed unsuitable for litigation.
Complainants may bring private suits to collect back wages due, plus liquidated damages, attorneys' fees, and court costs.
Amounts recovered in private employee suits are not included in ESA's enforcement statistics.
In fiscal 1981, strike forces were employed in New York, Philadelphia, New Orleans, Denver, Los Angeles, and San Francisco.
These targeted enforcement efforts are concentrated in geographic areas and specific industries where there has been a history of non-compliance.
Primary target industries were garment manufacturing, construction, restaurants, hotels, and motels.
As a result of the 1,153 investigations by these teams, employers agreed to restore $2.5 million in wages to 11,129 workers.
During fiscal 1981, the Wage and Hour Division found 13,825 minors employed in violation of the child labor provisions of the FLSA, an increase of almost 40 percent over the previous year's 9,968 violations.
Two-thirds of the minors were employed in retail trades; 3,781 were in nonagricultural occupations declared hazardous, and 131 in agricultural occupations declared hazardous.
Six hundred and fifty-two minors were found employed contrary to other agricultural provisions of the FLSA.
During fiscal 1981, 975 employers were assessed almost $1.5 million in civil money penalties for illegally employing 8,357 minors.
Exceptions were filed with the Wage and Hour Administrator by 253 employers alleging that the penalties should not have been assessed and requesting a hearing.
The Department of Labor and the Environmental Protection Agency continued to work together on the issue of a waiver procedure to permit short-season crops to be hand-harvested by 10- and 11-year-olds if pesticides used on those crops are found to be safe for that age group.
Research is under way to assess the health effects of pesticides on children employed in agriculture.
Special lower minimum wages were authorized by certificate for approximately 527,000 workers under the FLSA during the year.
The law provides for such authorizations “in order to prevent curtailment of opportunities for employment"for handicapped workers, full-time students, learners, apprentices, and messengers.
The number of full-time students authorized under this program was 35 percent less than in the previous fiscal year, and the number of handicapped workers employed increased by 3 percent.
In September 1981, the Department reestablished the Advisory Committee on Sheltered Workshops that had been in operation from 1939 to 1977.
The Committee makes recommendations on the administration and enforcement of the wage and hour laws for the employment of handicapped workers in sheltered workshops and patient workers in hospitals and institutions at wages below the applicable minimum wage.
Regulations issued under the FLSA restrict homework in six industries to individuals who are handicapped and cannot adjust to factory work or who are required to remain at home to care for an invalid.
Adopted in the 1940's when it was determined that restrictions on industrial homework would safeguard the minimum wage, the restrictions apply to women's apparel; jewelry; knitted outerwear; gloves and mittens; buttons and buckles; handkerchiefs; and embroideries.
In January and February 1981, public hearings were again held to determine the need to continue these restrictions.
A proposal to rescind the restrictions, inviting public comment, brought over 10,000 responses.
On October 9, after the close of fiscal 1981, final homework regulations were published that lifted the homework restrictions in the knitted outerwear industry.
Under terms of the settlement agreement in NAAP v. Marshall, a National Farm Labor Coordinated Enforcement Committee and regional coordination committees were established.
As a result, the Employment and Training Administration, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and ESA now coordinate their activities on behalf of migrant farmworkers at the national and regional levels.
The Under Secretary is designated as chairman at the national level and the ESA Regional Administrators chair the regional Farm Labor Coordinated Enforcement Committees.
Wage-Hour Compliance Officers and Farm Labor Specialists in the field concurrently conduct investigations on the activities of farm labor contractors.
The Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act is the only Federal law that prohibits an employer (farm labor contractor) from knowingly employing illegal aliens.
Cooperation between the Immigration and Naturalization Service and the Wage and Hour Division has served to deter the use of these workers in agricultural employment.
In fiscal year 1981, some 2,364 illegal alien workers were found to be employed compared to about 4,000 the previous year.
Cooperation between the Department of Labor and the Department of Justice has led to indictments against farm labor contractors charged with involuntary servitude or peonage for holding workers in labor camps and forcing them to work in the fields against their will.
The Division conducted 4,631 investigations under the Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act this fiscal year, of which 3,603 were found to be covered by the Act, reflecting a violation rate of approximately 60 percent.
Violations by users of farm labor contractors included the hiring of unregistered contractors and the failure to maintain required records.
Civil money penalties in the amount of $1 million were assessed in 680 cases.
Collections on penalty assessments amounted to over a half million dollars.
During three-fourths of the calendar year, 17,268 farm labor contractors and their employees were registered with the Department, placing 556,769 crew members under the protection of the Act, while 119 certificates of registration were either revoked or denied for violations.
Two court cases decided this fiscal year had an impact on the farm labor enforcement program.
In the Mountain Brook Orchards case, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit upheld the Department's interpretation of Section 4(c) of the Act which prohibits engaging the services of an unregistered farm labor contractor.
Mountain Brook Orchards had been assessed a civil money penalty for violation of that section of the Act.
In a criminal case involving involuntary servitude, United States of America v. Tony Booker and J.D. Rollins, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit affirmed a ruling by the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of North Carolina, holding that the conditions in a migrant labor camp operated by farm labor contractors Booker and Rollins violated the 13th Amendment, falling within the definition of slavery.
This action was initiated through cooperation between the Department of Labor and the Department of Justice.
Early in the fiscal year, the Department published regulations (29 CFR Parts 1, 4, and 5) which would have revised and updated rules under the Davis-Bacon Act and the Service Contract Act.
However, implementation of these rules was deferred pending a full regulatory review in accordance with Executive Order 12291, issued by President Reagan.
Substantive revisions in these regulations were published in the Federal Register on August 14, 1981, requesting public comment.
Government contract enforcement showed an increase this fiscal year, as did the number of employee complaints about violations.
Back wages were found due 54,180 workers under the various government labor standards statutes (i.e., the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, the Service Contract Act, the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act, and the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act) totaled $16,318,764.
Included were $13,802,727 in minimum wage and fringe benefit underpayments and $2,516,037 in unpaid overtime compensation.
Employers agreed to pay $11,521,230 in back wages to 45,565 workers.
During the fiscal year, 14,894 prevailing wage and fringe benefit determinations were issued under Davis-Bacon and Related Acts, and approximately 5,900 under the Service Contract Act.
The Division of Federal Employees' Compensation (DFEC) made significant progress in providing service for injured Federal employees.
During the fiscal year, 76 percent of all traumatic injury cases received were processed within the 45-day standard, improving to 86.2 percent in the final quarter.
Nontraumatic claims times also improved, with 39.1 percent being processed within the 150-day standard.
DFEC also made improvements in the timely payment of both medical bills and compensation.
Cases where compensation payments were made on a recurring basis were more closely monitored.
More than 50,000 periodic roll cases were reviewed in fiscal 1981 and actions taken which resulted in annual savings in compensation payments of over $20 million.
Following a successful pilot project in the Boston Region, FEC district offices now use Wage-Hour compliance officers to investigate claimants on the periodic roll.
Emphasis has been placed on the rehabilitation of disabled claimants for reemployment in their former jobs.
A joint Postal Service/DFEC rehabilitation project begun in 1979 continued to show good results in returning disabled workers to Postal Service employment.
Other Federal agencies have been encouraged to find appropriate jobs for their disabled employees.
In all the FEC district offices, where claims are processed and paid, an automated data processing system had previously been put into operation, with the capability of receiving and paying medical bills.
In fiscal 1981 an automated compensation payment component was added to handle payments to beneficiaries.
These computerized operations give greater efficiency and accuracy to the program's payment system.
To guard against fraud and abuse, plans were made for the Office of Inspector General in cooperation with a number of other Federal agencies to conduct a nationwide review of cases drawing continuing payments.
The Division already has actively pursued measures to strengthen security procedures used in the payment of bills and compensation and to protect the security of the computer system.
In an effort to contain medical costs, at year's end the Division was developing procedures for collecting information on questionable medical providers (physicians, hospitals, pharmacies, etc.) and was exploring the feasibility of contracting with private firms for the review of bills for medical services to determine the reasonableness of the charges.
The large backlog of black lung claims generated by the 1977 amendments was nearly eliminated during fiscal 1981.
The Division of Coal Mine Workers' Compensation issued initial findings on nearly 69,200 claims during the year, and received approximately 19,000 new claims.
In addition, 17,600 miners who receive their black lung compensation from the Social Security Administration w ere authorized by the Labor Department to receive pay nents for medical treatment benefits from the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund.
The Division's activities began to shift to more emphasis on contested claims, each of which entails individual preparation for a hearing by an administrative law judge.
More than 11,000 contested cases were prepared and forwarded to the ALJ's during fiscal 1981—over 1,000 more than in the previous year.
Contested cases have already been scheduled through 1984 for hearings.
During the fiscal year, $600.6 million in benefits were paid to approximately 89,000 coal miners or surviving dependents.
In addition, the Social Security Administration paid out $1.1 billion in fiscal 1981 on claims approved by that agency before 1972 when the Labor Department became responsible for the black lung program.
The payments by SSA are made from appropriated funds.
Two significant regulatory matters were acted upon.
The first involved publication of a proposed rule that more clearly defines those situations where a lessor of a coal mining property will not be liable for the payment of black lung benefits to employees of the lessee.
The second matter was the publication of a proposed rule to provide a remedy for miners discriminated against in their employment because of evidence that they have black lung disease.
Improved procedures implemented during the year resulted in collecting $42.9 million in overpayments and reimbursements owed the Government by claims beneficiaries, coal mine operators, insurance carriers, and medical providers under this program.
An automated payments system to facilitate the issuance of benefit checks has been developed and is being tested.
Total obligations from the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund for fiscal 1981 were $805.6 million.
Income to the trust fund from coal tax receipts and other revenues amounted to $253 million, and $555 million was borrowed from general revenues.
At fiscal year's end there was an outstanding trust fund debt of $1.5 billion.
Legislative proposals were being prepared that would alleviate the trust fund deficit by increasing the tonnage tax on coal produced.
The Division of Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation made progress in improving its administration with claims examiner training courses and development and installation of an automated data processing system.
The special fund disbursement system is now automated and an automated special fund accounting system is to be operational in fiscal 1982.
User requirements for a national computerized case management system were developed, and the system is to be implemented in fiscal 1982.
A procedure was completed, installed in October 1981, for direct and automated payment by the special fund to about 1,500 beneficiaries entitled to permanent total disability and death benefits for injuries or deaths that occurred prior to the amendment of the Longshoremen's Act in 1972.
The new procedure replaces a system of payment of these benefits by insurance carriers and employers who then claimed reimbursement from the special fund.
A full security policy requiring employers who are selfinsured under the Act to deposit securities with the Division in the full amount of their outstanding workers' compensation obligations was initiated this year.
The policy is designed to provide protection to the special fund in instances where self-insurers become insolvent or bankrupt; that protection is provided by a self-insured employer having a security deposit adequate to pay all outstanding workers'compensation claims.
Injury reports and the resulting compensation cases are processed by 16 district offices.
The Division of State Workers' Compensation Standards received and provided an analysis for 136 amendments to State workers' compensation laws during the fiscal year.
Special emphasis continued to be placed on providing on-site technical assistance to various State compensation systems.
The unit also continued to work closely with State legislatures and advisory committees to prepare and evaluate proposed legislation.
The Division coordinated and sponsored the second annual New England States Workers'Compensation Conference in June 1981 attended by 135 individuals representing various interest groups such as industry, labor, the insurance industry, State officials, and legislators.
During the year the Division published its report, State Compliance With the 19 Essential Recommendations of the National Commission on State Workmen's Compensation Laws, 1972-1980.
Research on implementation of 30 of the other 65 recommendations continues.
Also published were Volumes 5, 6, and 8 of the Research Reports of the Interdepartmental Workers'Compensation Task Force.
The Division is completing a study on each State's administration system in order to assess the state of the art of State systems.
The Division of Vocational Rehabilitation increased the quality, quantity, and timeliness of vocational rehabilitation services, thereby reducing human loss and compensation costs.
In fiscal 1981, 750 injured Federal workers were rehabilitated saving more than $10,000 per worker in compensation costs.
This added up to total savings of $7.5 million in compensation costs for the year.
In the Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation program, 386 injured workers in private industry were rehabilitated at savings for the year of more than $8,000 per worker in compensation costs, with a total savings of $3 million in compensation costs.
A comparison of Federal Employees' Compensation Act injured workers rehabilitated during fiscal year 1980 to those rehabilitated during fiscal 1981 indicates a 40 percent increase in the overall number of injured workers rehabilitated and a 76 percent increase in the number of injured workers rehabilitated with their previous employers.
An automated rehabilitation bill payment system was implemented in all FECA district offices during the year.
The system eliminates time-consuming procedures and interruptions in adjudicative process, and makes possible the tracking of the cost of rehabilitation maintenance, plan development, training, and placement payments.
An FECA automated rehabilitation status code pilot project was field-tested this year, for national implementation in fiscal 1982.
It should provide an important management tool for reviewing the progression of injured workers through the rehabilitation process.
An automated system for early referral of claimants for rehabilitation consideration will also be implemented in the FECA program in fiscal 1982.
During fiscal year 1981, the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) broadened communications and cooperation between the mining community and the government.
It emphasized consultative programs to help mine operators identify and combat safety and health hazards, worked to design more cost-effective regulations, and targeted inspection resources to give extra attention to mines with special safety and health problems.
Enforcement activities improved through the Program in Accident Reduction (PAR) and Compliance Assistance Visit (CAV) program, which both assist operators in improving health and safety conditions and afford better worker production.
In addition, MSHA completed most regulatory actions required by the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977.
In 1981, two new regulations became effective: the mine rescue team rule and the self-contained self-rescue device rules.
MSHA continued to involve the public in its rulemaking process and established committees to review all Metal and Noninetal mine safety and health standards with a view towards eliminating unnecessary and outdated standards.
In response to public comment, MSHA published a proposal that would revise its civil penalty regulations to provide more incentives for operators to comply with the Act.
Throughout the year, MSHA provided expertise to labor, operators, the academic community and State and other Federal agencies in guaranteeing a safe and healthy work environment for our Nation's most precious resource—the miner.
More than 232,528 presons were employed during fiscal 1981 in the coal mining industry, working at 2,546 underground mines, 2,316 surface mines, and 1,200 other surface operations under MSHA's jurisdiction.
Nearly 1,290 coal mine inspectors and specialists administered Federal coal mine safety and health regulations.
Coal mine inspectors operated from 10 district offices, 18 subdistrict offices, and 68 field offices.
The Coal Mine Safety and Health work force numbered 1,698 in fiscal 1981, compared to 1,797 in fiscal 1980, and 1,853 at the end of fiscal 1979.
Additional inspections and investigations focused on specific aspects of safety and health.
MSHA inspectors issued 14,973 citations to coal mine operators and independent contractors during the fiscal year for violations of safety and health regulations of the 1977 Act encompassing virtually the entire range of safety and health conditions and practices.
Coal mine operators filed 200 petitions for modification of safety standards with MSHA since October 1, 1980.
Of these, 150 were granted, denied, or dismissed.
Revised procedures for respirable dust sampling by mine operators at coal mines became effective in fiscal 1981.
Benefits from this revised sampling program are improved health protection for coal miners and a reduced regulatory burden on the underground coal min.
As part of the emphasis on dust control, tue rules also provide that dust sampling in designated areas be discountinued entirely where the risk of high dust concentrations is eliminated.
The revised program should assist in the reduction of incidence of coal workers' pneumoconiosis.
In conjunction with these revised dust sampling procedures, 1981 saw the success of a major new supporting computer system that aids in more efficiently processing respirable dust samples that are collected and submitted to MSHA each year by mine operators.
MSHA's Coal Mine Safety and Health activity introduced a revised quartz sampling program during fiscal 1981.
This program enables quartz analysis to be made on respirable dust samples that were previously too small for processing and makes possible the measurement of quartz levels in practically all mines.
Since only about 15 percent of the samples could be analyzed using previous procedures, this new procedure has significantly improved the protection of the miner's health.
In addition, because fewer samples are needed, this new process has decreased significantly the number of samples MSHA must take.
Coal Mine Safety and Health carried out several programs that concentrate resources on critical and potentially hazardous areas.
In one such program, the targeted mines were those where large quantities of methane are liberated; where the lost-day injury rate was greater than the national average; and where a history of roof falls, ignitions, fatalities, or severe injuries exists.
New regulations on "self-contained self-rescuers" became effective in June 1981.
Coal companies are now making these devices available to all underground workers.
Also in July 1981, new regulations became effective requiring that every operator of an underground coal mine assure the availability of two rescue teams for each mine and that the teams be properly trained and equipped.
In addition, MSHA signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the Commonwealth of Kentucky's Department of Mines and Minerals under which Kentucky will work cooperatively with mine operators to provide rescue services.
MSHA is also actively exploring the possibilities of entering into such agreements with other States to ease the regulatory burden on mine operators and to reduce duplication of effort.
Since the passage of the 1977 Act, coal miners have filed 1,161 complaints of discrimination with MSHA.
Under the provisions of the Act, 493 of these were withdrawn by the complainants because the cases were settled, 72 decisions were made in favor of the miners by the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission, and 596 were dismissed.
The Metal and Nonmetal Mine Safety and Health activity through its 6 district offices, 12 subdistrict offices, and 71 field offices conducted 21,614 regular inspections at approximately 900 underground metal, nonmetal, and stone mines and about 14,000 surface mines, stone quarries, and sand and gravel operations during fiscal 1981.
At yearend there were 517 metal and nonmetal mine inspectors, a decrease of 24 from the previous fiscal year.
During the fiscal year 21,825 citations and orders for violations of standards and for imminent danger conditions were issued.
In addition to regular inspections, compliance follow-up inspections were conducted to check the abatement of hazards on which citations or orders were issued; frequent inspections of gassy mines were made and further inspections conducted during shaft-sinking activities as well as during the operation of hoisting equipment, and at electrical installations.
Growth in the oil shale and precious metals industries increased the importance of these inspections.
Two special emphasis programs continued in fiscal 1981.
One, the Program in Accident Reductions (PAR), is aimed at reducing hazards at mines that have had injury incidence rates significantly higher than the national average.
The success of PAR during fiscal 1981 at 60 selected operations—with its emphasis on good safety programs, job safety analysis, accident prevention training, and safety awareness on the part of both management and labor—is shown by the 40 percent reduction in lostworkday injuries during the first three quarters of fiscal 1981 compared with the same period during fiscal 1980.
A total of 204 MSHA personnel and 53 persons from industry attended the PAR course presented at the National Mine Health and Safety Academy.
The Compliance Assistance Visit (CAV) program, begun in fiscal 1980, is the other special emphasis program.
A CAV is conducted only at the request of a mine operator.
It allows the operator to request an inspection of a new mine before it goes into operation on a seasonal or intermittent mine prior to reopening.
The operator may request a CAV for a new section of a mine, new equipment, or a new installation within a mine.
No monetary penalties are assessed for violations observed during the CAV.
Committees to review all metal and nonmetal mine safety and health standards were established to eliminate unnecessary and outdated standards, and to revise if necessary, those to be retained.
Metal and nonmetal investigations involved discrimination complaints; 188 special investigations were initiated on possible knowing or willful violations of standards.
Two health hazards, radiation and silica flour, received special attention.
In response to a petition for an emergency temporary radiation standard from the Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers Union and the Public Citizen group, MSHA and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) began a reassessment of MSHA's current radiation regulations.
When several silicosis cases were discovered at two silica flour mills, MSHA, with assistance from NIOSH, began a special, nationwide enforcement effort at all such mills.
Other special health projects conducted in cooperation with NIOSH were continued.
They included studies on exposure to talc minerals, exposure to fibrous minerals, and the nature and extent of pulmonary diseases among cement workers.
Office of Standards, Regulations and Variances The Office of Standards, Regulations and Variances, which coordinates MSHA's rulemaking process, continued work on those standards and regulations mandated by the Act, on rulemaking projects started before the Act was passed, and on the agency's review of all metal and nonmetal mine safety and health standards.
Regulations on revised sampling procedures for respirable dust in underground coal mines became final on November 1, 1980.
New rules governing the sampling for respirable coal dust in surface mines and the transfer of miners with evidence of pneumoconiosis were scheduled to become effective on December 1, 1980.
These regulations were temporarily delayed, and after an appropriate report was prepared in accordance with Executive Order 12291 on Federal Regulation, these regulations became effective on March 31, 1981.
The regulation requiring the use of self-contained selfrescue devices in underground coal mines became effective on June 21, 1981.
MSHA, in cooperation with mine operators and the Bureau of Mines, engaged in exhaustive field testing of the devices to determine how they affected miners in actual mine situations.
MSHA used the results of the field tests to help develop guidelines for their use.
Work continued on the surface safety and health construction standards required by the Act.
In this area, MSHA will take necessary action to assure that maximum protection is provided to this segment of the mining industry.
In response to public comment, MSHA published a proposal which would revise its civil penalty regulations to provide more incentives for operators to comply with the Act.
The proposal includes a fixed minimum penalty for nonserious violations.
MSHA reviewed all existing metal and nonmetal standards and regulations, consistent with the Administration's goals of regulatory relief.
2) to reduce recordkeeping requirements; (3) to clarify existing standards; (4) to delete unnecessary standards, and (5) to assure that all standards are relelvant.
As a result of public participation, MSHA reviewed comments from more than 100 organizations and individuals.
Early in fiscal 1982, MSHA will publish a priority listing of sections to be reviewed and will seek additional comment and specific regulatory proposals from the mining community on these sections.
One rulemaking project begun prior to the passage of the Act governs the sampling of respirable dust in underground coal mines.
In April 1980, MSHA published a final rule covering new sampling procedures for respirable dust in underground coal mines, effective November 1, 1980.
MSHA then proposed changes to the sampling program for surface mines and to the program providing for the transfer of miners who show evidence of pneumoconiosis.
Further proposed changes would allow miners' representatives to participate in the entire dust sampling program.
Public hearings were held to address these issues.
In December 1980, MSHA published a final rule regarding the procedures for sampling at surface mines and surface areas of underground mines and the transfer of miners having evidence of the development of pneumoconiosis.
That rule became effective March 30, 1981.
No further action was taken on the issue of miner participation.
During the fiscal year MSHA also proposed revisions to the following approval standards: Electrical Components and Headlights for Mobil Diesel-powered Transportation Equipment; Electric Cap lamps; and Signaling Devices.
These proposals modify requirements for approval of equipment to allow MSHA to test and certify equipment that incorporates advanced technology.
Comments were received and incorporated into the record.
The Office of Assessments, in fiscal 1981, continued to process all initial assessments within 17 days of receipt of the violation, and to honor all conference requests.
The conference allows mine operators, miners, and miners' representatives to discuss violations and related initial penalties with assessment office personnel, and to present additional facts or advance legal arguments before the amount of the penalty is proposed by MSHA.
These conferences—or informal hearings—resolve 85 percent of all assessed violations.
During fiscal 1981, 1,151 cases were referred to the Office of the Solicitor for a hearing.
As of the end of the fiscal year, 7,392 cases were pending enforcement action by the Justice Department and 9,537 were pending enforcement action by the Labor Department Solicitor.
The Office of Assessments completed the review of its regulations promised when the rules were issued in 1978.
After a review of written comments from industry and labor and several informal meetings with members of the mining community during the fiscal year, significant changes in the way intended penalties are calculated were proposed.
In fiscal 1981 MSHA's Education and Training activity continued to approve training plans and to train certifying instructors under the provisions of the 1977 Act.
About 6,000 training plans were approved or reapproved during fiscal 1981.
Approximately 400 mime training programs were evaluated for effectiveness and compliance with the 1977 Act.
A comparison of mine accident incident rates revealed that the mines that were evaluated showed an average 6-percent decline in incidents, while mines that were not evaluated showed an incident increase of 13 percent.
The power haulage accident rate rose drastically according to a 6-month study from October 1, 1980 through March 31, 1981.
During this period, 1,040 injuries and 12 deaths from haulage accidents were reported in the coal mining industry.
Responding to this problem, each Education and Training Center initiated a special awareness program aimed especially at those mines where power haulage accidents are a serious problem.
To keep current with the changes in mining techniques, new equipment, and new regulations Education and Training continued to develop training courses.
In addition to 26 underground and surface training modules developed under contract, Education and Training developed and completed five courses and tests for dust-equipment maintenance, two self-contained self-rescuer courses, and one course each in waste impoundment and noise.
In fiscal 1981, 11 mine rescue seminars were given throughout the country.
Three hundred industry instructors were trained in mine rescue and advanced mine rescue techniques; they in turn will train new mine rescue teams.
Funding allocations totalling S6 million were made to 38 participating States.
At present, the States, through the State Grants Program, are conducting instructor training and assisting mine operators in initial health and safety miner training and retraining, and, in some instances, conducting skills training.
Fifty-eight consultation visits were made to the Sate Grants Program administrators.
Continuous evaluations and consultations with each of the participating States has resulted in the program's increased effectiveness.
Education and Training's Audio Visual Service completed several 16mm training films, developed two video tape training programs, and distributed 5,500 training packages to industry.
Through education and training the National Mine Health and Safety Academy assists in reducing accidents and improving health conditions in the Nation's mines.
Located in Beckley, W. Va., the Academy offers a wide variety of programs, from 1-day courses to long-term resident programs of up to 12 weeks.
The Academy's programs are carried out through four departments: the Resident Education, Continuing Education, Office of Research and Planning, and the Business Office.
The Resident Education Department devoted 9,400 hours to classroom and laboratory instruction during fiscal 1981.
This represents a 27-percent increase over instruction hours in fiscal 1980.
In fiscal 1981, the academy developed a course in ethics and standards of conduct.
Required of all metal/nonmetal and coal inspectors, the program provides guidelines of conduct in the working environment, treating such subjects as conflict of interest and conduct on Federal property.
MSHA managers and supervisors received training.
Correspondence course completions continued to increase in fiscal 1981.
A total of 684 course completions represented 2,587 continuing education units and 4,294 student days.
These courses cover a wide range of topics relating to mining health and safety.
The Academy's Learning Resource Center supports all Academy programs with a collection of books, periodicals, films, video tapes, slide presentations and other reference materials on safety and health topics, mining engineering, human relations, and other related subjects.
The Publications Distribution Center, completed in July 1981, allows MSHA to centralize the distribution of its safety and health publications and other instruction materials.
During fiscal 1981, MSHA continued to meet its technical support objectives by completing about 6,924 approval actions on equipment used in the mining industry, approving 51 blasting plans for the Department of the Interior, Office of Surface Mining, and processing 173,490 respirable coal mine dust samples within 1 day of receipt.
The Health and Safety Analysis Center received and analyzed 142,708 accident, injury, and illness reports to predict areas of increased occupational hazards and to facilitate effective enforcement programming.
Quarterly summary accident, injury, and fatality reports for coal and metal/nonmetal mines were prepared and published.
Twenty internal reports were prepared and distributed upon request.
These reports provided in-depth analyses of pertinent hazards or trends in mining for the information of MSHA officials and the mining industry.
More than 4,650 noise and radiation instruments were calibrated for use by the inspectorate.
Requests for technical assistance from enforcement resulted in more than 610 in-mine investigations of safety and health hazards.
MSHA recommended approval of 230 mine waste impoundment plans and 40 devices for use in lieu of canopies.
The Mine Emergency Operations facility at Hopewell, Pa., was purchased, and specialized mine emergency equipment for the search and rescue of entrapped miners maintained.
MSHA developed and implemented a new analytical procedure for determining the quartz content of respirable dust samples collected in coal mines.
The new technique increases accurate sampling for compliance while it significantly reduces the enforcement effort by taking single samples rather than the multiple samples required previously.
Using a new Compliance Audit Program (CAP), the Labor-Management Services Administration (LMSA) greatly increased the number of union financial audits and embezzlement investigations conducted in 1981.
Regulations were issued to reduce reporting requirements under the Federal pension reform act and LMSA continued to concentrate its enforcement resources on pension cases involving a significant amount of plan assets and the greatest number of plan participants.
The focus of labor-management relations during the year turned increasingly toward the need for cooperation between management and labor to overcome serious problems with productivity and to recognize the efforts of a changing workforce to gain a greater voice in making workplace decisions.
During the year, the Supreme Court handed down a decision clarifying the rights of Reservists under the Federal veterans'reemployment rights law.
Appeals courts also issued important rulings on the reemployment rights of disabled veterans and the impact of the law on private pension plans.
A new strategy for auditing union financial records designed to identify and concentrate resources on cases most likely to involve major civil and criminal violations of the law enabled the office of Labor-Management Standards Enforcement (LMSE) to greatly increase the number of audits and embezzlement investigations conducted.
Using the Compliance Audit Program (CAP), LMSE completed 904 union audits in 1981 compared with 82 the year before.
The agency conducted 647 embezzlement investigations during the year.
The Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA), also known as the Landrum-Griffin Act, requires virtually all unions to file annual financial statements with the Department.
There were 50,904 active labor organizations with reports on file as of September 30,1981.
LMSE completed 7,504 investigations during the year.
Of these, 5,513 involved delinquent or deficient union financial reports.
Therewere also 256 investigations involving union elections.
The Department instituted 59 civil actions under LMRDA in Federal district courts, including 50 to set aside union elections.
Criminal charges under the law were brought against 37 persons.
The agency received annual financial reports from 2,991 labor organizations of Federal Government employees.
These reports are required under the Standards of Conduct provisions of the Civil Service Reform Act.
LMSE completed 151 Standards of Conduct investigations during the year, including 24 involving Federal employee union elections and 99 involving delinquent or deficient reports.
The Branch of Election Assistance (BEA) gave advice and help on the election provisions of LMRDA to 40 national and international unions.
The BEA is preparing to complete a supplement to its elections and trusteeships case digest in 1982.
BEA also processed more than 193 written, telephone, and walk-in inquiries from national and international union officials.
LMSE obtained voluntary settlement of national union officer election complaints involving the American Federation of Government Employees and the International Association of Fire Fighters.
In each case, LMSE is preparing to supervise the union's next regularly scheduled election in 1982.
LMSE issued two major publications during the year.
The Union Officer Elections and Trusteeships Case Digest, published in December, contains more than 1,400 cases involving the union election and trusteeship provisions of the LMRDA.
The Register of Reporting Labor Organizations, published in April, lists the more than 50,000 labor organizations that filed reports with LMSE in 1980 under the requirements of the LMRDA.
The office of Pension and Welfare Benefit Programs (PWBP) continued to reduce the number of pending applications for exemptions from the prohibited transaction provisions of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA).
The office also continued to improve coordination of enforcement activities with the Departments of Justice and Treasury.
PWBP closed 675 exemption applications in 1981, compared with 652 the year before.
It issued a series of class exemptions which made compliance with the prohibited transaction rules easier.
In addition, PWBP issued a publication discussing exemptions and describing how to apply for them.
Nine regulations were issued or proposed during the year, most of them reducing ERISA's reporting requirements.
One regulation, issued in conjunction with the Department of Health and Human Services, exempts employee welfare plans that offer membership in a qualified health maintenance organization from some reporting, disclosure, and claims procedures of ERISA.
Another new regulation allows the administrator of an employee benefit plan to defer obtaining an accountant's opinion of its annual report for that year if the report covers a plan year of seven months or less.