Noteworthy achievements by the Department, its agencies, and its employees marked the period covered by fiscal year 1982.
The long, difficult and sometimes painful process of reevaluation and restructuring—a process which touched every agency in the Department—has been, for the most part, completed.
With those changes now largely in place, the Department of Labor was able, in fiscal year 1982, to concentrate on its mandate with increased efficiency, improved capability, and renewed enthusiasm.
The result has been a record of accomplishments of which all of us in the Department can be proud.
The changes undergone in the Department have placed increasing responsibility in the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management (OASAM).
As we have worked to adjust to smaller increases in budget, the management of our resources has come to play an ever more important role.
OASAM has worked throughout the year to establish policies tliat assure the Department's compliance with Presidentially directed changes in budgets, programs, and policies.
One such change was the use, for the first time, of the performance appraisal system mandated by the Civil Service Reform Act.
In addition, a merit pay system was implemented for all supervisors and nianagers at the GS 13 to 15 levels.
Perhaps the most significant change, however, was the agreement between the Department of Labor and the General Services Administration delegating authority to the Department to manage the Frances Perkins Building.
Under this agreement, the Department becomes the first Federal agency to undertake the total operation of its headquarters building, a task that involves the management of over 1 million square feet of space and a budget of $5.2 million.
Much of the effort of the Employment Standards Administration (ESA) in fiscal 1981 was in the area of regulatory reform.
In fiscal 1982, however, enforcement of existing labor standards was emphasized.
In the area of minimum wage and overtime standards, for example, ESA conducted over 70,000 investigations and resolved over 46,000 complaints.
This reduced the backlog of complaints by 20 percent, disclosed'nearly $50 million in minimum wage underpayments, and secured employer agreements to pay $87 million in unpaid minimum wage and overtime payments to half a million workers.
ESA also continued its targeted enforcement program, which concentrated resources in areas and in industries with histories of minimum wage and overtime violations.
In one such effort, violations amounting to nearly $2 million in minimum wage and overtime payments were uncovered in Miami.
The increased emphasis on enforcement has not meant an end to ESA's efforts to improve existing labor law.
The agency introduced, in fiscal 1982, legislation to reform the Farm Labor Contractors Registration Act.
The proposed Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Workers Protection Act would eliminate many of the inefficiencies of FLCRA.
The agency also issued final regulations under the Davis-Bacon Act which would result in more uniform determination of prevailing wages, reduce cost for government construction, and increase employment opportunities in construction for women and minorities.
Implementation of those changes was deferred, however, when the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia issued a preliminary injunction.
ESA also continued its efforts to improve the management of the Federal Employees Compensation Act.
Working with other government agencies, ESA expanded a program to reemploy injured government workers as soon as possible in new jobs consistent with their abilities.
Both the Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the Mine Safety and Health Administration made major efforts during the year to improve management of their programs.
In addition, both agencies were successful in developing new, nonconfrontational approaches to safety and health problems which will result in increased worker protection.
In OSHA, the year saw the implementation of the first voluntary compliance programs for industry.
These programs allow employers with good health and safety records to work directly with workers to maintain health and safety standards in the workplace.
MSHA adopted a policy of reduced fines for minor violations.
That policy has resulted in fewer efforts by mine operators to contest citations and in greater efforts to improve safety.
In June, MSHA held the first joint Mine Safety and Health Conference, which brought together representatives of industry, labor, and government to discuss ways to improve mine safety and health.
The most important achievement of 1982 for the Employment and Training Administration was the success of efforts to replace the CETA program with a more efficient way of providing job training.
With the enactment of the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) of 1982, such a method now exists.
The new JTPA provides that 70 cents out of every dollar will be used for actual job training, rather than for such nonproductive uses as administrative costs.
It is a program specifically designed to ease the existing mismatch between jobs and workers'skills.
In addition, the JTPA contains a special program aimed at displaced workers — those whose jobs have been rendered obsolete through technological changes or increased foreign competition.
In addition to continuing its work in many areas, the Special Litigation Staff of the Solicitor's Office achieved a resolution of the Teamsters' Central States Pension Fund case.
The consent decree into which the Fund and the Department of Labor have entered will provide for continued safeguards to protect the assets of the Fund and guarantee the retirement security of the workers who depend upon those assets.
In fiscal 1982, the Women's Bureau completed the implementation of its Women in Apprenticeship program.
This program trained 2,800 people in 44 cities, ensuring greater assistance to women interested in apprenticeship programs and other nontraditional forms of employment and training.
The Bureau also conducted regional job fairs and talent banks designed to help women in their search for employment.
Finally, the Women's Bureau increased its efforts to encourage employer-sponsored day care facilities to enable women with children to seek employment opportunities outside the home.
The Labor-Management Services Administration continued to emphasize cooperation between workers and employers.
Fiscal 1982 saw the creation of a new Division of Cooperative Labor-Management Programs to serve as a clearinghouse for such ventures, and as a resource center for those doing research on the subject.
That division, as well as the recently published "Resource Guide to Labor-Management Cooperation," were the outgrowth of a Symposium on Cooperative Labor-Management Programs held by the Department in June.
The meeting brought together leaders from business, labor, government, and representatives of other groups to discuss ways to improve cooperation in labor relations.
Working with other agencies of the Department, LMSA continued efforts to secure passage of needed changes in the Labor-Management Racketeering Act.
Although those efforts were successful in the Senate, as of the end of the fiscal year, the bill had not passed the House of Representatives.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) continued its work on implementing revisions in both the Consumer Price Index and the Producer Price Index.
In addition, the Bureau's staff developed new, multifactor measures of productivity that will increase understanding of this element in the economy.
In an effort to make its statistical data more readily available and more useful to the public and to researchers, BLS has inaugurated a program that makes its major releases available electronically through computer terminals.
In fiscal 1982, the Bureau of International Labor Affairs was instrumental in developing legislation to implement the President's Caribbean Basin Initiative.
In addition, the Bureau helped formulate U.S. policy concerning international investment and transnational corporations.
Once again, the United States participated in the conference of the International Labor Organization (ILO).
The U.S. delegation sought to limit the extent of increases in the ILO budget and to improve the relevance and effectiveness of the ILO's technical programs.
For the first time, the annual report includes a chapter from the office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' Employment (OASVE).
Fiscal 1982 saw passage of the Veterans' Compensation, Education, and Employment Amendments, which transferred the Office of Veterans' Reemployment Rights from the Labor-Management Services Administration to OASVE.
The year also marked the establishment of the Secretary's Advisory Committee on Veterans.
During the year, OASVE continued operation of several national employment programs directed to veterans.
During 1982, the Inspector General's Office (OIG) doubled its number of fraud investigations.
One hundred thirty-nine investigations (compared to 64 in 1981) resulted in 176 indictments.
In the area of labor racketeering, OIG won 80 convictions, again doubling the prior year's rate.
Included were 13 indictments from the continuing investigation of the Fulton Fish Market in New York.
That investigation has already resulted in 32 other convictions, in addition to 44 pleas to lesser charges.
In my introduction to the report for fiscal year 1981, I wrote that the Department's activities could be summed up in one word: change.
This year, if I were to categorize our achievements, I would use the word "settled."
This past fiscal year the Department of Labor has operated within a new framework.
It is leaner, more efficient, and more purposeful.
The Department, through the efforts of its employees, has gone about its job with the calm determination of a veteran.
In many respects, its efforts have been unheralded.
But they have not gone unfelt.
Perhaps the actions of no other agency in Government touch more directly the lives of Americans than those of the Department of Labor.
What it does affects the lives of literally every man, woman, and child in the country.
Because the Department has a profound impact on so many people, it has a special responsibility to perform well.
In the year just ended it has done so.
I am proud of that achievement, and of my part in it.
Most of all, I am proud of the men and women of this Department who made that achievement possible.
The employment and Training Administration (ETA) had as its number one priority in fiscal year 1982 the development and enactment of training legislation to succeed the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA) which expired on September 30, 1982.
The new law — the Job Training Partnership Act of 1982 — was signed by President Reagan on October 13, 1982.
Under the Act, economically disadvantaged and unskilled youth and adults, dislocated workers, and others facing serious barriers to employment will receive job training and other services to prepare them for productive unsubsidized employment.
The Act, in addition, retains employment and training programs, such as the Job Corps, that have proven track records.
During fiscal 1982, CETA resources continued to be directed to involving the private sector more in training and finding jobs for disadvantaged workers, and to providing training and other employment-related services to certain groups experiencing particularly severe disadvantages in the labor market.
Because of CETA's imminent expiration, there were no regulatory changes in the program and the agency began to focus its efforts along the block grant concept.
ETA carried on its strengthening of the program content and administration of the unemployment insurance system that it had begun the previous fiscal year.
The resolution of outstanding audits of contracts/grants and the reduction of the backlog of contracts/grants awaiting closeout also continued to be a priority item.
Community employment programs were operated by 475 State and local prime sponsor organizations that received funds under the several titles of CETA for employment and training services at the local level.
In fiscal 1982, an estimated 826,000 persons participated in programs under titles II-A, B, and C at a cost of $1.8 billion, and approximately 624,375 participants were terminated from them.
Of these, 272,517 were placed in jobs, 225,369 of them in the private sector.
In addition, 55,157 returned to school or entered further training.
Of the persons enrolled in these programs, 47.7 percent were in classroom training, 29.4 percent in work experience, 14.5 percent in on-the-job training, and 8.4 percent in other activities.
At the end of the third quarter of fiscal 1982, 99 percent of the participants were economically disadvantaged and 29.1 percent were receiving some type of public assistance at the time of enrollment.
The average cost for placing a participant in a job in fiscal 1982 was estimated at $5,466 and the average hourly wage upon entering unsubsidized employment at $4.36.
During the fiscal year, ETA continued its review of grant paperwork requirements to relieve the burden of plan preparation to the extent that local needs for open planning and Federal needs for information on program management controls and other statutory compliance issues were not compromised.
Local youth programs under title IV of CETA are specifically designed to provide a broad range of work experience, training, and services to enhance the employability of disadvantaged youth.
These programs for fiscal 1982 included the Summer Youth Employment Program (SYEP) and the Youth Employment and Training Programs (YETP).
The Youth Community Conservation and Improvement Projects (YCCIP) was not funded as a separate program.
Prime sponsors were granted the flexibility under the Omnibus Reconciliation Act of 1981 to consolidate YCCIP with YETP.)
The majority of the youth who participated in these programs were 16 to 19 years old.
In fiscal 1982, as in other years since the inception of these programs in 1977 actual enrollments ran well above the planned levels.
YETP, which provides work experience, counseling, and occupational career information, served 238,457 participants, 47.0 percent of whom were white, 38.6 percent black, and 10.7 percent Hispanic.
Of the 211,411 participants who left the program, 34.2 percent returned to school, and 16.6 percent entered unsubsidized employment.
Approximately 23,980 or 12.5 percent of the job placements were in the private sector.
Some of the terminees from YETP went into advanced training or experienced other affirmative outcomes.
Since activities operated previously under YCCIP — a highly labor intensive program primarily for high school dropouts — were allowed under YETP, data include YCCIP statistics.)
Approximately 757,082 youth participated in the SYEP in fiscal 1982.
SYEP provides youth an opportunity to learn and earn during the summer months through work experience and vocational exploration.
In addition to the $685,155,047 initially allocated to prime sponsors for SYEP, an additional supplemental appropriation bill signed by the President increased the total funds for SYEP by $45,000,000.
These additional funds were used to extend the length of summer youth programs, increase the hours of programs that may have been operating at less than the maximum number of hours permitted, or to create opportunities for additional summer youth.
An additional $7.5 million in discretionary youth funds was also granted to 20 prime sponsors with large youth populations and higher than average unemployment.
These funds helped local governments find additional jobs and training assistance for disadvantaged youths and augmented their summer jobs programs.
Jobs Corps, another program for youth authorized under title IV of CETA served approximately 80,000 new enrollees (which translates into 40,000 service years) in fiscal 1982.
With the support of the General Accounting Office and the Department's Office of the Inspector General, ETA undertook a number of efforts to improve the quality and cost effectiveness of Job Corps.
These included management actions to make the program more effective and efficient such as revising procurement procedures to ensure that center contracts are competitively bid and that procurement practices are sound; examining all areas of the program for unit cost reductions, developing performance standards for Job Corps center operators, and carefully asssessing evaluations of the effectiveness of the program.
Programmatic accomplishments included development of competency-based curriculum materials for a majority of the program's vocational offerings and provision of training to Job Corps center staff.
The Private Sector Initiative Program, or PSIP (title VII of CETA), served approximately 133,925 persons in fiscal 1982 at a cost of about $241.8 million.
This represents a cost of $1,805 a participant.
The highest percentage of program expenditures (nearly 51 percent) was in classroom training which served a total of 61,512 participants.
On-the-job training programs in which 42,066 participants were enrolled, accounted for over 18 percent of the expenditures.
The categories of other activities and services to participants were responsible for over 30 percent of the PSIP expenditures.
Almost all program participants were disadvantaged (96.4 percent at the end of the third quarter of fiscal 1982) and many had additional employment handicaps such as being older workers, youth, offenders, and displaced homemakers.
Nearly 24 percent of the participants were receiving public assistance when they were enrolled in PSIP.
PSIP started as a demonstration program in the last quarter of fiscal 1979.
Private Industry Councils (PIC's) were established in each prime sponsorship and are composed of a majority of business representatives.
PIC involvement in training the economically disadvantaged for jobs in the private sector proceeded from the initial stage through three full years of operation.
Each year, local and State programs reflected increased private sector involvement.
The PSIP concept showed such potential that it had a significant impact on the development of the Job Training Partnership Act.
In fiscal 1982, the Department continued to provide training and other employment-related services to disadvantaged groups in the labor market.
Special programs served older workers, Indians and other Native Americans, and migrant and seasonal farmworkers.
The Senior Community Service Employment Program provides grants to national organizations and State governments to develop part-time jobs in community work for poor persons aged 55 and older.
In fiscal 1982, over 54,200 older persons were provided employment through the program with an appropriation of $277.1 million.
The Native American Employment and Training Program provides grants to Indian tribes, other Native American communities, and various organizations to support a wide variety of training and employment services.
These programs served about 35,000 persons in fiscal 1982; almost 10,200 persons received classroom training; 2,800 were placed in on-the-job training; 8,800 were in work experience positions; 6,300 held public service employment jobs; and 7,000 received services at a cost of $69 million.
The Migrant and Seasonal Farmworker Program provides services ranging from job training to emergency relief for migrant and other seasonally employed farmworkers.
In fiscal 1982, an estimated 48,190 persons were served by the program at a cost of slightly over $70 million.
Approximately 11,470 of these individuals received classroom training; 2,580 were placed in on-the-job training, and 2,640 were provided work experience.
Many also received supportive services such as nutritional assistance, health and medical care and emergency assistance.
In fiscal 1982, Special National Programs were reduced in scope, more sharply focused on meeting the needs of individuals with disadvantages in the labor market, and targeted to better address existing skill shortages in the economy.
In addition, there was a significant increase in the number of competitively awarded contracts for employment and training activities under this program category.
Contractors of Special National Programs placed an estimated 11,500 individuals in unsubsidized private sector jobs at a cost of about $650 to $5,000 a placement.
Most of these individuals were economically disadvantaged and members of minority groups.
Many were also women or handicapped.
It is estimated that in fiscal 1982 national sponsors of programs for the handicapped served over 6,600 individuals, resulting in the placement of over 4,000 in private sector jobs at an average cost a placement of from $650 to $2,000.
Nearly all of these individuals were economically disadvantaged, and close to 40 percent, minorities or women.
In addition, a variety of conferences, seminars, publications and other information was provided to private employers and other individuals to promote employment of the handicapped in the private sector.
Another program provides participants with linguistically tailored classroom instruction, counseling, job development, and employment-related services.
In fiscal 1982, an estimated 1,000 of the project's participants were placed in unsubsidized jobs at a cost of approximately $600 for each placement.
All enrollees were economically disadvantaged, almost all minorities, and nearly 40 percent women.
The regular national on-the-job training program enrolled an estimated 3,500 persons in training for skilled, well-paying private sector jobs in fiscal 1982.
These opportunities were made available mainly through national level employer associations and unions, included OJT programs in the construction industry, the automotive industry, and the service industry, and addressed skill shortages in the machine tool industry and in tooling and precision machining.
It is estimated that about 2,800 of those enrolled in training were placed in jobs.
Most of them were economically disadvantaged, about 25 percent women, 40 percent minorities, and 15 percent veterans.
Most of the jobs paid over $5 per hour.
Late in the fiscal year, contracts in two program categories—on-the-job training and targeted outreach — were awarded on a competitive basis.
Under the on-the-job training competitive awards, eight contractors will provide training for over 2,100 economically disadvantaged individuals or displaced workers which is expected to result in the placement of over 1,800 at a projected cost per placement of less than $2,100.
These programs will be operated in seven States.
Under the targeted outreach competitive awards, three contractors will place almost 2,100 minorities and women into apprenticeable occupations at a projected cost of $1,203 a placement.
In three categories of partnership programs, a variety of activities was conducted for the purpose of strengthening the employment and training delivery system by improving the level and participation of business, labor, and community-based organizations.
In fiscal 1982, a program of small business workshops was conducted on a demonstration basis by local Chambers of Commerce, banks, and private industry councils in six locations: statewide N.H.; Detroit, Mich.
Louisville, Ky.
Salt Lake County, Utah; New Orleans, La.
An estimated 1,250 individuals are expected to use the self-paced multimedia training materials developed for the project, and 625 of them are expected to complete plans to start their own businesses.
During fiscal 1982, the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training (BAT) continued its primary role of providing technical assistance and advisory services to sponsors and potential sponsors of apprenticeship programs.
Work was performed by direct contact with private sector employers, employer associations, and labor organizations at the local community, State, and national levels.
Effective training methods and apprenticeship standards were published and activities coordinated with those of other public and private agencies concerned with skill resource development.
Emphasis was placed on improving the quality of apprenticeship training.
A nationwide program was initiated to conduct a comprehensive review of the quality of existing registered apprenticeship programs.
Seventeen hundred programs were reviewed utilizing a uniform procedure and standardized rating factors.
Based upon these reviews, improvements were made in a substantial number of programs.
A review and analysis of the quality review process was undertaken and modifications and refinements will be made in fiscal 1983.
The Bureau provided assistance to the Department of Defense in establishing apprenticeship programs for military personnel.
The number of military apprentices increased to about 29,000.
About 2,100 new apprenticeship programs were developed and installed during the year.
Approximately 1,200 programs were reviewed for compliance with equal employment opportunity requirements and 27 State apprenticeship agencies' operations were reviewed for conformance to requirements of apprenticeship registration authority recognized by the Secretary of Labor.
BAT published a revised list of occupations recognized as apprenticeable.
The list includes 732 occupations with terms of training running from 1 to 10 years.
Occupations added to the list in fiscal 1982 include field engineer; chimney repairer; assembler, metal buildings; fish and game warden; patternmaker, all-around; and model maker, metal.
The total number of registered apprentices receiving training during fiscal 1982 is estimated to be 400,000.
The number of apprentices in training at the end of the year was about 287,000.
Minority participation increased slightly from fiscal 1981's 18.4 percent to approximately 18.7 percent and female apprentices increased to 6.0 percent.
Ten years ago women comprised less than 0.7 percent of all apprentices.
During the first three quarters of fiscal 1982, the Work Incentive (WIN) program registered 711,000 individuals who were receiving or applying for Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC).
Nearly three-fourths of the registrants were women; a little more than half were minorities, and only 45 percent had graduated from high school.
All are groups that have traditionally been at a disadvantage in the labor market.
More than 156,000 registrants entered unsubsidized employment in this 9-month period.
Sixty-five percent of WIN job entrants were women who, like their counterparts in the mainstream labor force, tended to cluster in clerical and service work.
Two-thirds of the female job entrants found jobs in those occupations.
Men were more likely to find blue-collar work.
A little more than one-fourth of the men took jobs as structural workers or in motor freight handling and transportation.
About three-fourths of the job entrants earned enough at job entry to leave the AFDC rolls after they started work; the others continued to receive some assistance, but at a reduced level.
WIN job entrants earned an average starting wage of $4.33 per hour, but wages varied considerably among the different groups.
Men averaged $5.14 an hour at job entry; women averaged $3.90.
The highest rate was paid to unemployed parents, whose average starting rate was $5.26 an hour.
About one-fourth of the male workers received an entry wage of $6.00 or more an hour, a wage paid to only 1 in 20 women.
Differences in wage rates were at least partly a result of differences in the kinds of jobs entered by men and women.
In general, highest wages were paid to WIN job entrants in structural work, in which large numbers of men but few women were employed, while both clerical and service occupations in which a high proportion of women found jobs, were relatively low paid.
WIN experienced major legislative changes in fiscal 1982.
One of the most significant was the shift of some States from the regular WIN program to the Work Incentive Demonstration program, authorized by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981.
The demonstration programs are administered by the Office of Family Assistance (OFA) of the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), rather than jointly by the Department of Labor and DHHS, as the regular WIN program is.
By the end of the third quarter of fiscal 1982, 10 states had shifted from WIN to the demonstration program, and one other, Illinois, was scheduled to begin operation of a demonstration program in the fourth quarter.
The 10 States operating demonstrations during the first three quarters were Arizona, Delaware, Florida, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas, and Oregon.
During the first three quarters of fiscal 1982 over 10,965,000 persons submitted job applications at the U.S. Employment Job Services offices, and 4,339,000 job openings were listed by employers, 3,331,00 (or 77 percent) of which were filled.
The average wage of job openings received during the first 9 months of fiscal 1982 was $4.84 an hour.
It was $4.42 during the same period in fiscal 1981.
The average wage of openings filled through June 1982 was $4.85 an hour, 11 percent higher than it had been the previous year.
During fiscal 1982, USES sought to increase the involvement of the private sector in helping jobless Americans find work.
A major effort was made to encourage the organizing, strengthening, and maintaining of Job Service Employer Committees (JSEC).
A JSEC is composed of a group of employers who join together to provide a link between the Job Service and the employer community and to recommend changes designed to improve Job Service performance.
More than 22,000 employers are now members of 1,067 JSEC's throughout the United States.
These employers give more than 150,000 volunteer hours each month to help the Job Service improve its delivery and service capability to applicants and employers.
In the counseling and testing area, a new method of using aptitude tests to identify applicant qualificaticns for jobs, known as validity generalization, was pilot-tested in North Carolina.
The results are promising in terms of significant increases in local office productivity (placements per staff year) and in employer job orders.
Based on these results, plans were made to expand the technique to other States.
Additional developments in occupational testing during fiscal 1982 included publication of new tests of occupational interest and aptitude for use in vocational counseling.
Staff of Job Service offices continued to have special responsibilities that concern the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit (TJTC), alien employment certification, and trade adjustment assistance.
Job Service offices issued a total of 162,488 certifications under the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit during the first three quarters of fiscal 1982.
These were issued to employers who had hired worker from one of the eligible groups.
The Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 amended the tax credit to include among other provisions a new target group of lowincome youth who are hired during the summer and extended TJTC through December 1984.
The Immigration and Nationality Act requires the Secretary of Labor to ensure that the admission of aliens for permanent employment will not adversely affect job opportunities, wages, and working conditions of U.S. workers.
The most recent statistics (for fiscal 1981) show that of the total of 32,983 applications received, 25,763 labor certifications were granted.
As in the preceding year, about one-third of the certifications were for jobs in professional and managerial occupations.
A particular emphasis in fiscal 1982 concerned the provision of reemployment assistance to those workers certified as eligible for benefits under the Trade Act of 1974 because increased foreign imports were an important cause of their being separated from their jobs.
The 1981 Trade Act amendments placed increased emphasis on the provision of training, job search, and relocation assistance.
During the year, 25,693 workers from 242 firms were certified as eligible to apply for trade adjustment assistance.
Of these, 4,100 entered federally financed training, 290 received job search allowances, and 315 relocated to another area.
Some 1,925 completed training and 720 of them were placed into jobs on completion of training.
Another 2,700 individuals were placed directly into jobs.
Many workers eligible for trade adjustment assistance had individually tailored reemployment plans developed for them by Job Service staff.
See UI section below for statistics on workers collecting trade readjustment allowances.)
During the year, USES was also concerned with the reemployment of Federal employees and an interstate job matching system which can be used by employers as well as jobseekers.
The former effort was a joint venture with the Office of Personnel Management under which a job referral service was established for Federal workers impacted by reduction-in-force or agency closures.
The service, which operated from June 1981 to June 1982, provided job leads to over 1,500 persons and job placements for 165 workers.
Approximately 5,000 applicants and 4,000 employers used the nationwide automated job-matching network during fiscal 1982.
The network is made available to jobseekers and employers through the USES Interstate Clearance System and helps to correct labor market supply and demand imbalances.
Late in the fiscal year, USES began modifying the system so that it could meet the special needs of mass layoffs and emergency preparedness.
Across the country, over 2,000 local Job Service offices are responsible for giving priority to veterans in counseling, aptitude testing, job development, referral and placement activities.
In the first 9 months of fiscal 1982, Job Services received about 1,401,335 new and renewed applications from veterans and placed about 303,335 veterans (21.6 percent) in jobs.
Established by legislation as a permanent program and inaugurated by approximately 2,000 disabled veterans, the Disabled Veterans Outreach Program (DVOP) helps disabled and Vietnam-era veterans obtain employment and training assistance.
DVOP staff are assigned to local Job Service offices and contributed to the job placement of 17,622 disabled veterans through June of fiscal 1982.
Responsibility for the administration of the DVOP program was transferred to the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans Employment in May 1982.)
Fiscal 1982 saw the continued strengthening of program content and administration begun in 1981.
Special emphasis was placed on State agency improvements in the prevention and detection of fraud, abuse, and waste.
Programs were also developed to improve collection of overpayments.
A new program of Federal Supplemental Compensation (FSC) was included in the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982, signed by the President on September 3, 1982.
First effective under State agreements beginning Sept. 12, 1982, the FSC program was expected to reach 2.3 million long-term unemployed and to pay $2.2 billion in benefits in the period of the law, ending Mar.31, 1983.
Benefits were to be payable in all States, ranging from 6 to 10 weeks, depending upon the level of insured unemployment in each State.
During the first 10 months of fiscal 1982, 25 million initial claims were filed in the State employment security agencies (SESA's).
One hundred sixty-six million weeks of unemployment were claimed and $16.3 billion was paid out in benefits to almost 10 million recipients.
Improving internal security in SESA's continues as a major emphasis in the drive to curb fraud and abuse.
The findings of regional office and SESA completed reviews of internal security and control in UI operations are being analyzed by the national office.
As a result, recommendations for improvement in operations as well as procedural revisions will be issued to all SE-SA's.
SESA's are currently filling their staff allocations for internal security.
During fiscal 1983, SESA's will be required to conduct risk analyses in accordance with the procedures and training furnished by the national office.
In their efforts to curb fraud and abuse, SESA's detected $239.4 million in overpayments during the 12 month period from July 1981 to June 1982, an amount equal to 1.3 percent of benefits paid.
During the same time, SESA's reported recoveries of $116.4 million in overpayments.
To control improper payments, the UIS-implemented random audit program is operational in 15 States.
This audit program has been designed to produce valid rates of detectable overpayments or improper payments on a statewide basis and will serve as a management tool to identify problems and to take corrective action.
It will be expanded to another 20 States in fiscal 1983.
In spite of improvements in the financing structures of many State laws, continuing high levels of unemployment caused heavy drains on State UI funds as a whole.
As a result, at the end of fiscal 1982, 20 States had outstandingloans totaling $8.6 billion, compared to 17 States with aggregate loans of $6.2 billion at the end of fiscal 1981.
During the fiscal year, the States of Iowa, Missouri, and Wisconsin borrowed from the Federal Unemployment Account for the first time.
Loans to States totaled $3.2 billion, of which $2.4 billion went to Illinois, Michigan, Ohio, Wisconsin, and Pennsylvania.
During the same period, 13 states reduced their loans by $823.4 million by repayment from State funds and/or reduction in employer tax credits against the Federal Unemployment Tax.
New loans after April 1, 1982, became subject to interest charges as 1981 legislation became effective for the first time.
Interest charges for the period April to September 1982 totaled $13.9 million.
Of this amount $1.1 million has been repaid.
The remainder is expected to be repaid in early fiscal 1983, or, if deferred under provisions enacted in 1982, over a period of 4 years.
Deferred amounts are treated as new loans, added to the State's outstanding loan balance, and charged interest.
The Continuous Wage and Benefit History (CWBH) project was expanded from 14 to 17 States as a move toward national representation during fiscal 1982.
CWBH plans to expand to 20 States to achieve national representation in fiscal 1984.
CWBH is beginning to implement the State-Federal Policy Committee recommendations on State performance criteria and has successfully implemented the Committee's new questionnaire.
The fiscal 1983 budget has limited CWBH to maintaining the existing 17 States and focusing on State performance.
Under the Redwood Employee Protection Program (REPP) $69.1 million has been paid to affected workers in weekly layoff benefits and severance payments since the beginning of the program.
In fiscal 1982, affected workers were paid benefits for 53, 823 weeks for a total of $14.3 million.
Severance payments were made to 650 workers totaling $9.9 million.
Twenty-two relocation and job search claims were paid for a total of $57,194.
Under the Disaster Unemployment Assistance (DUA) program during the first 10 months of fiscal 1982, there were 10 major disasters declared in 8 different States.
There were 6 disasters during all of fiscal 1981.
Some 2,536 individuals received DUA during the 10-month period, more than double the number of recipients in fiscal 1981.
DUA benefits totaled $733.471 for the current period, up 10 percent over the corresponding total for fiscal 1981.
During fiscal 1981, 281,073 workers received first payments of trade readjustment allowances (TRA); a total of $1.4 billion in TRA benefits was paid to eligible workers.
1981, the trade adjustment assistance (TAA) program was amended to require workers to exhaust their unemployment insurance benefits before receiving TRA and reduced the TRA benefits to the same level as the weekly benefit amount payable under State unemployment insurance programs.
TAA data through June 30, 1982, shows that 22,497 workers affected by imports received TRA first payments; a total of $82.9 million was paid in TRA benefits during this period.
See also USES and TAA sections of this report.)
The Office of Trade Adjustment Assistance (OTAA) conducts investigations of worker petitions in behalf of the Secretary of Labor to determine the eligibility of workers for trade adjustment assistance under the Trade Act of 1974.
In fiscal 1982, investigation time and decision writing on worker petitions for adjustment assistance were influenced significantly by amendments to the Trade Act contained in the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981.
Efforts were made by OTAA to reduce petition processing time to bring it closer to the 60 days provided in the Act and to reduce the backlog of petitions in the Department.
Priority attention was given to older petitions to ascertain whether decisions could be made without further investigative effort.
Other actions were instituted to compensate for reduced staff such as use of computer techniques to help screen petitions, thereby reducing labor intensive analysis activities.
Also, a greater proportion of the staff was assigned to petition investigation and decision writing.
Because of these actions and a reduced number of petitions filed with the Department, the backlog of cases decreased during fiscal 1982 to 632 from 1,380 a year earlier—a 54 percent decline.
Other statistics for the year: 2,368 worker petitions were processed by OTAA; 809 petitions were instituted; 242 were certified or partially certified; 1,258 were denied and 59 terminated.
Nearly 25,700 workers were certified as eligible to apply for trade readjustment allowances, employability services, training, job search, and relocation allowances.
The number of workers covered by petitions that were denied was 136,485.
Responsibility for adıninistering TAA benefits and training allowances is shared by the UI Service and the USES. Information on these benefits is included in their sections of this report.)
In 1982, ETA's Office of Planning and Policy Analysis (OPP) had major responsibilities for ETA's policy activities, legislative initiatives, regulatory reform efforts and emergency preparedness functions.
Much of the activity focused on the development of new job training legislation to succeed CETA.
Staff prepared policy papers on the full spectrum of issues related to the service delivery system, payment of allowances, displaced workers, and activities to be allowed under the new law.
These papers provided background for the development of the Administration's bill and discussions with Congress.
The efforts culminated in enactment of the Job Training Partnership Act of 1982.
To carry out the mandates of the Regulatory Reform and Paperwork Reduction Acts, OPP developed a system designed to reduce the number of ETA regulations, simplify regulatory language, and reduce recordkeeping and reporting requirements.
Designated as ETA's central coordinator for the regulatory reform system, OPP has been the clearance point within ETA for proposals that have identified for recission several hundred pages of outdated and redundant regulations.
A major fiscal 1982 accomplishment in the emergency preparedness area was the preparation of a human resources policy directive signed by the President on July 22, 1982 (National Security Decision Directive Number 47).
ETA through OPP, had an active role in the development of that statement, with ETA's Assistant Secretary chairing the interdepartmental working group where plans for the human resources policy were developed.
Throughout the year OPP provided analytic support on various issues to the Assistant Secretary and other key ETA policy officials.
One primary task involved analyses of the effectiveness of the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit as part of the joint DOL/Treasury report to Congress and as part of Congressional deliberations that resulted in extension of the credit.
Research efforts focused on economic and social issues, including labor market studies on specific population groups, program development and improvement, and the exploration of alternative strategies for addressing labor market problems.
The National Longitudinal Surveys (NLS) continued producing reports of findings on the labor market experiences of selected groups of workers during critical periods of their worklives.
A 10-year followup report was made on young women ages 24 to 34.
This group is notable for its very high rates of employment compared with those of its predecessors.
A 10- year followup report was completed on women ages 40 to 54, concentrating on their labor market reentry decisions.
Another NLS report explored the economic, social, and psychological factors responsible for variations in the employment, earnings, and skill acquisition of young men and women ages 15 to 22.
Special labor force groups were the object of several other studies on the labor market problems and needs of women, Hispanics, Chinese Americans, and disabled veterans.
With accelerated structural economic change in 1982 came increasing concern for workers dislocated from long-held jobs.
The Downriver Community Conference demonstration continued to retrain and place the unemployed, and new displaced worker demonstration program sites were established in six areas where workers were suffering the effects of layoffs.
Research in support of program development and improvement and management assistance and training anticipated transition to new job training legislation, a need to deliver program services more efficiently, and a need to improve the long term job placement performance of employment and training programs.
Progress was made in establishing Job Service demonstration offices, where ideas for improving service delivery can be quickly and inexpensively tested.
One project undertaken by a demonstration office involved testing ways to reduce Job Service staff time required to process job applications, thereby freeing staff to perform job development.
The demonstration, which utilized a new application form for self-completion, was successful in reducing staff time and the estimated resulting cost saving were significant.
It also reduced the number of incorrect, incomplete, or missing items of information.
In addition, placement rates improved during the period the project was in operation.
Research projects exploring exemplary job training programs and private sector on-the-job training sought ways to build involvement of the private sector in guiding training programs and in training and hiring participants.
Stimulating and supporting new small business private sector job creation was the subject of another R&D effort.
Research was completed on the effects on the labor market of policies to combat inflation, on the effects of Department of Labor programs on industrial productivity, and on changing State occupational licensing practices.
Strategic policy studies begun in fiscal 1982 are concerned with the measurement and improvement of private sector productivity, the impact and implications for the economy of new technology, and the impact of macroeconomic policies on the labor force.
Principal evaluation projects during the year examined the effects of the 1978 CETA reauthorization amendments, particularly the extent to which the amendments were successful, as intended, in tightening CETA administrative controls and targeting program enrollment more sharply to the more disadvantaged.
Other projects concerned such matters as the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit program, selected activities of the Work Incentive program for welfare recipients, and special planning/ programming for offenders.
The 1978 CETA amendments established a special title (title VII) to increase involvement of the private sector in the planning and delivery of training services for the disadvantaged.
The title provides for local Private Industry Councils (PIC's), made up primarily of business representatives, to plan and guide activities under the Private Sector Initiative Program (PSIP).
An evaluation of PSIP development in 1979–81, based on a field study of 25 sponsor sites, described the varying ways the program evolved in different settings and analyzed factors aiding and limiting its progress.
Finding that patterns of PSIP development varied greatly by locality, the report emphasized that gaining wide support and cooperation is generally a gradual process.
Businesses are attracted mainly by evidence of practicality and value, and such evidence takes time to accumulate and become known.
A major evaluation of the 1978 amendments assessed the effects of these and other changes by having local analysts examine the 1979–80 experience of a sample of local CETA sponsors.
The study found that the amendments broadly tended to constrain local prime sponsor flexibility and had little effect on sponsor placement procedures or organization.
Whereas the requirements for controls and liability for shortcomings in eligibility determination and financial administration substantially achieved the Congressional objective of making CETA managers devote more attention to protection of the system's integrity, they added considerably to the burdens of program managers.
Under the 1978 CETA amendments, each prime sponsor was directed to establish an “independent monitoring unit" (IMU) to monitor its local programs.
A field evaluation conducted by ETA staff in 1981 concluded that the requirement of an IMU generated more structured monitoring than in earlier years and substantially greater local sponsor commitment to conduct meaningful monitoring of programs they manage.
Periodic reports from the Continuous Longitudinal Manpower Survey (CLMS) provide detailed data on enrollees in the decentralized CETA programs, basically specifying the number of enrollees, their demographic characteristics, and their preentry employment and earnings, with brief narrative highlights and background explanation.
The two most recent reports indicated, among other things, that in fiscal 1980 approximately 1.9 million individuals were newly enrolled in CETA; over half (52 percent) of the nonsummer enrollees were black, Hispanic, or of another minority group; including the summer programs, 70 percent of all enrollees were under the age of 22 (excluding summer programs, 30 percent were youth); as many women were enrolled in adult-oriented programs as men but the proportion differed by type of activity; about 48 percent of the families of new enrollees were receiving some type of public assistance; and in the year before CETA entry, median earnings of enrollees had been $1,120, with 78 percent earning less than $4,000.
The Targeted Jobs Tax Credit (TJTC) program, started in 1979, sought to induce employers to hire from seven “targeted" groups that experience severe employment difficulties.
A report, based on a field study of 25 areas in 1980–81, evaluating how TJTC was applied in practice, found that few changes had occurred in the summer of 1981 from preceding practices.
It concluded that, as designed and administered before amendments made late in 1981, TJTC generally had neither been promoted by the administering agencies nor used by employers in ways, or to the extent, that had been expected.
Three of the year's evaluation studies examined various aspects of the Work Incentive (WIN) program for welfare recipients.
One study, conducted at five demonstration sites, examined the ability and cost of WIN to expand operations to serve its entire registrant population.
A second study took a look at the Intensive Employability Services, the WIN activity that prepares "job-ready"registrants in job search methods.
The third endeavor produced information on the characteristics of the child-care program of WIN Separate Administrative Unit (SAU) offices and the clients they serve.
In 1979, the Employment and Training Administration gave 42 CETA prime sponsors small planning grants to increase the participation of criminal offenders in CETA programs.
An assessment of the impact of these competitively won grants revealed that the consequent activities conducted by the grantees varied widely.
Some concentrated on planning tasks and efforts to join with kindred agencies to assist offenders while others emphasized direct services, largely special outreach efforts and motivational or "job readiness"training.
Despite cutbacks in management assistance and training (MAT) staff and funds at the national and regional office levels during fiscal 1982, efforts in this area resulted in the implementation of improved MAT procurement and fiscal accountability; development and delivery of courses by regional offices and State/local jurisdictions; initial preparation of national and regional staff to implement training and prepare new program operations in anticipation of new job training legislation; and the overall improvement of MAT systems management.
2. Two additional regional offices installed MAT clearinghouses bringing the total with clearinghouse to 9 (out of 10).
3. A training course on contract monitoring was developed and delivered to national office federal representatives.
While many MAT needs will be provided by ETA during the initial transition stages, the strategy is to prepare the States to take a major role quickly in providing MAT to service deliverers.
In fiscal 1982 the Special Review Staff redirected its efforts to emphasize review of nationally administered programs.
Because of severely limited travel funds, field review was restricted to grants with alleged major problems.
Criteria and procedures were developed and implemented to identify problems disclosed in individual grants through the audit, closeout, debt collection, and complaint system.
The information so generated was used in the preprocurement process to resolve the payment of outstanding debts before new grants were issued.
The new grants carried conditions to assure that debt collection agreements would be adhered to and that identified administrative problems would be corrected.
ETA has as a basic objective the resolution of all outstanding audits and the elimination of backlogged contract/grant closeout activity.
During fiscal 1982, the agency resolved 252 audits of contracts and grants, thereby establishing a debt to ETA of $21.9 million.
One hundred and eighty-four of these audits were appealed to a Labor Department administrative law judge.)
In the same period, 505 contracts/grants were closed out.
Federal revenues are enhanced through both audit resolution, which establishes debts owed the Federal Government, and contract/grant closeouts, as a result of which outstanding advances are collected.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics took important steps toward improving the principal economic indicators for which it is responsible, even while trimming a number of programs in response to President Reagan's order to reduce staff and spending.
After encouraging and participating in wide-ranging discussions of the treatment of owner-occupied housing in the Consumer Price Index, the Bureau announced plans to change the CPI homeownership component to a rental equivalence measure.
To assure public understanding of the action, the Bureau provided — in many forums — detailed explanations of the reasons for the change and the need for substantial lead time to protect contractual relationships involving CPI escalator clauses.
The Bureau continued the Producer Price Index revision —which has been under way for several years—and has now produced revised measures for 149 industries which together account for 42 percent of the domestic output in mining and manufacturing industries.
The Bureau continued to expand its program of productivity analysis and research.
BLS staff developed new multifactor productivity measures including labor and capital and completed a new hours-at-work survey to supplement existing measures of hours paid.
The Bureau concentrated considerable resources on improving the quality and quantity of Current Population Survey data, which form the basis for the Bureau's analyses of the labor force.
The Bureau also devoted major attention to the multiyear revision of the establishment survey of employment, hours, and earnings.
Secretary Donovan accepted the recommendation of the National Commission on Employment and Unemployment Statistics that the Bureau publish labor force and employment data that include the Armed Forces stationed in the United States.
Major enhancements to the Employment Cost Index— newly designated by the Office of Management and Budget as a principal Federal economic indicator—included the addition of measures of compensation change for the civilian nonfarm economy, development of index numbers for all published ECI series, and release of private sector compensation change measures by bargaining status and area size.
Working with the Departments of Commerce and Defense, the Bureau assessed the occupational employment requirements of the buildup in defense expenditures.
The Bureau issued improved data on occupational employment by industry and published the 1982–83 edition of the Occupational Outlook Handbook.
Based on an annual survey of employees, the Bureau published national estimates of occupational injuries, illnesses, and fatalities.
Commissioner of Labor Statistics Janet L. Norwood continued to respond to calls by the Joint Economic Committee and other congressional committees for testimony on the economy.
Reduced sharply the coverage for Work Stoppages statistics (Coverage now will be limited to strikes covering 1,000 or more workers.)
Reduced the number of occupations in the Occupational Outlook Handbook.
The Bureau implemented these program reductions in an orderly manner so that regular production of major series could continue.
Despite resource retrenchment, the Bureau pursued initiatives essential to maintain the high quality of its data.
Staff in the Bureau's Office of Survey Design made considerable progress in developing general statistical methods and in improving sample selection and specifications for many of the Bureau's surveys.
The Bureau made its principal news releases available electronically, permitting the press and other users to gain access to the data via computer terminals immediately upon release.
Through use of other new technology, the Bureau has shortened production time for a number of its publications, while reducing the incidence of errors.
In 1982, all major economic price indicators were released in accordance with procedures established by the Office of Management and Budget.
Approximately 2.3 million copies of printed materials were distributed in response to more than 600,000 recorded requests for data and other information.
These figures exclude an extremely heavy correspondence and analysis workload in response to written and telephone requests from the Congress, policymaking agencies in the Executive Branch, private businesses, labor, and the general public.
A program to develop an improved measure of rental equivalence costs of owner occupied housing was begun in fiscal year 1982.
As announced by the Commissioner, a new rental equivalence measure will replace the current homeownership component of the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) in January 1983; the charge to rental equivalence is scheduled for January 1985 for the Consumer Price Index for Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W).
The program to update the CPI outlet sample in one-fifth of the CPI pricing areas was completed on schedule in 1982 and will continue next year.
The revision of the Producer Price Index program continued; publication of revised indexes utilizing scientific sampling and data collection techniques expanded from 98 industries in 1981 to 149 in fiscal 1982.
This effort will expand coverage in 1983 to 243 industries supported by 55,000 price quotations per month.
In the international price program in fiscal 1982, publication of indexes for exports was expanded from 65 percent to 70 percent of the value of products exported from the United States.
Price indexes for imports were expanded from 65 percent to 96 percent of the value of products imported into the United States.
The expansion of coverage was obtained at the expense of level of detail.
Because of the change in funding for this program, it was decided to reduce the level of product detail for both export and import indexes in order to cover 100 percent of the value of products in U.S. foreign trade.
Instead of publishing the approximately 660 detailed and aggregate commodity indexes for both exports and imports as originally planned, the program's current objectives are to publish only about 470.
Expansion to 100 percent of the value of products in U.S. foreign trade, at revised levels of detail, will be completed in fiscal 1983.
Development of the computer system for the review, analysis, and publication of information from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CES) proceeded on schedule during 1982 and will be completed in 1983.
Data from the diary component, which surveys frequently purchased items as part of the larger CES program, were developed in 1982.
Estimates of expenditures from the diary survey will be published in 1983 and thereafter as part of regular publication of data from this program.
During fiscal 1982 a major endeavor was the implementation of budget reductions included in the President's fiscal 1982 revised budget while continuing to produce accurate and timely measures of price change.
Each of the programs of the Office of Prices and Living Conditions decision unit experienced major changes.
Eliminating the family budget program after publishing the Four Person Family Budget in April 1982 and the Retired Couple's Budget in August 1982.
The Bureau gave major attention to several aspects of the multiyear revision of the establishment survey of employment, hours, and earnings.
BLS staff conducted two initial surveys Employer's Record Analysis and Employer's Perception—and analyzed results in order to provide direction for other revision activities.
In addition, the installation of a centralized computer system for processing State estimates was successfully implemented.
Based on data collected through the Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) Survey, the Bureau developed industryoccupational employment estimates for the manufacturing sector of the economy.
Work was completed on a redesigned occupational structure for the OES program based on the new Federal Standard Occupational Classification system.
Staff developed survey questionnaires and provided them to cooperating States for the 1982 OES survey of Transportation, Communications, Utilities, Trade, and Government.
Efforts on the employment and wage program (ES-202) focused on the implementation of improvements that will help alleviate problems of staff shortages in cooperating State agencies.
A newly developed form requests employers to verify existing information on their products and services.
This process ensures that key industry data published by States and by BLS reflect actual changes that occur in the economy.
This new form replaces an open-ended form and will greatly reduce respondent burden as well as staff review time in the States.
In addition, State agencies can use existing edits, thereby allowing their staffs to concentrate on other areas of the program.
Publication resumed for annual employment and wage data.
To determine hospital cost reimbursements under the Medicare program, the Health Care Finance Administration will use the new hospital industry wage indexes that were developed for all Standard Metropolitan Statistical Areas (SMSA's).
The Bureau completed efforts to access State and area labor force data from the 1980 Census.
Staff developed extensive plans for using 1980 Census labor force data obtained via a telecommunication link to conduct a thorough review and analysis of current procedures for estimating State and area unemployment.
A new method for estimating unemployment in metropolitan areas has passed preliminary tests.
The Bureau used new computer software to develop the 1981 edition of Geographic Profile of Employment and Unemployment.
Computerization will lead to substantially earlier issuance of this publication in future years.
As part of the Bureau's effort to identify the costs of the cooperative programs in the labor market information program, staff designed and implemented a survey of the operation and costs of the Employment and Training Administration's 5-210 program.
The Bureau completed the major portion of work required to automate storage and retrieval of statistical data which are used for research and publication.
This new tape-to-disk system of processing CPS data facilitates, among other things, the automated production of State CPS data in the monthly Employment Situation press release.
Initial incorporation of 1980 Census data into the Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS) estimates was accomplished with the use of data beginning with the 1982 benchmark cycle.
Staff began using 1980 Census data in statewide youth population ratios and in population disaggregation of multicounty labor market employment.
Data for areas of substantial unemployment needed for the administration of the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA) were provided to ETA on schedule.
The Bureau devoted a great deal of effort to improving the quality and quantity of Current Population Survey (CPS) data.
Based on 1980 Census population controls, BLS staff revised all seasonally adjusted data series, as well as their unadjusted counterparts, from 1970 forward.
The revised monthly seasonally adjusted series were published.
In addition, work on development of a redesigned CPS proceeded with the Bureau of the Census and a consortium of Federal agencies.
The Bureau continued to meet the labor force data needs of persons in the press, business, academia, Congress, and government agencies.
Analyses issued included the regular monthly summaries of employment and unemployment, as well as the special semiannual and annual reporting, plus quarterly reports on weekly earnings, women in the labor force, and minorities.
Special research projects resulted in articles on youth employment, occupational mobility, job tenure, trends in earnings of fainilies, occupational employment in the 1970's, sex/earnings differentials, a guide to seasonal adjustment of labor force data, and employment in the service and agricultural sectors of the economy, among others.
Also, staff completed two data books, one providing historical data for several thousand labor force series and the other on CPS “gross flows" data.
The Bureau published its first report examining the extent of various employment problems and their effect on family income (hardship).
As part of the President's 12 percent budget reduction, the Bureau eliminated the labor turnover series, reduced research and analysis related to local area unemployment statistics, completed a reduction in the size of the Current Population Survey, and eliminated the May CPS supplement that provided information on work schedules.
In 1982, major enhancements to the Employment Cost Index (ECI) included the addition of rates of compensation plus wage and salary change for the civilian nonfarm economy, which incorporated the existing private nonfarm data with new data covering State and local governments (also published as a separate series); the availability of index numbers (June 1981 = 100) for all published ECI series; and release of compensation change measures by bargaining status and area size in the private sector.
The processing cycle for the quarterly press release was also shortened so that the release is now being issued one week earlier each quarter with further reductions in the cycle expected.
The Bureau delivered the annual survey of Professional, Administrative, Technical, and Clerical (PATC) pay a week ahead of time for use in the Federal pay comparability process.
The survey is on an extremely tight production schedule that calls for a March reference date and an early July release of tabulations.
During the year, staff did substantial research in developing survey efficiencies that permit adherence to the aforementioned deadlines under uncertain budget and staffing conditions.
In the area of improving data quality, staff responded quickly to recommendations in the 1982 GAO audit report on the PATC survey; also, a new Job Match Validation mechanism will be in place for the next survey.
The staff analyzed linkages between white-collar pay and corporate work force size in a May 1982 Monthly Labor Review (MLR) article.
The Bureau released its third annual report on paid leave and employee benefit plans in medium and large firms.
The survey provides a unique source of comprehensive data on detailed characteristics of employee benefit plans—leave, pensions, and a variety of insurance—in private industry.
Published results were expanded from 36 to 47 statistical tables that distribute plan participants according to the detailed provisions.
The 1982 PATC survey again was the vehicle for collecting this year's benefits data; the number of new sample members, however, was held to a minimum and staff made more extensive use of phone collection to conserve resources.
This program produced two special articles for the MLR—one describing the program and its output; the other, an analysis of disability benefits under retirement plans.
Both articles appeared in the August 1982 issue of the Review.
As a result of extensive planning in conjunction with the Office of Survey Design, the Bureau has developed a feasibility test for integrating the benefits program with the Employment Cost Index.
This will be the first phase of a comprehensive integration project to make the wage and benefit plans program more cohesive and cost effective.
The Bureau conducted area wage surveys in 70 areas under its regular program.
For 22 of these areas, data were published for the first time on the proportion of workers “"participating" in health maintenance and insurance plans.
Staff had initiated collection of this information in 1980 and 1981 for the 48 other areas.
An analytical article on changes in office workers' pay differentials among areas over the past 20 years appeared in the July 1982 MLR.
Collection forms, instructions, and computer systems were redesigned for more efficient collection and publishing of data in 1983.
Under contract to the Employment Standards Administration, the Bureau conducted 86 area wage surveys and 104 special industry wage surveys for use in administering the Service Contract Act.
The Bureau also developed plans for testing in 1983 the collection of data on government employee earnings in eight areas and on employer costs of employee benefits in one area.
Fiscal 1982 budget cuts reduced the industry wage survey (IWS) program by approximately 40 percent.
As a result, three new industries scheduled to be introduced into the program this year were dropped and two other surveys were delayed until fiscal 1983.
Annually, the program now will include 8 to 10 surveys—down from about 15 prior to the cut.
Long-range planning took place on two fronts: One for reconstituting the industry wage program in light of reduced resources; and the other, on how to make industry wage surveys a viable part of the office's plan for integrating its various wage and benefit programs.
Comprehensive planning was also completed for a special survey of wages and tips for employees in the hotel and restaurant industries.
Staff will conduct this study in the spring of 1983 for the Employment Standards Administration.
Photocomposition of IWS bulletins continues to trim an average 1 month from the time between survey reference date and publication.
A system for photocomposing locality releases was developed in 1982 and will be tested in 1983.
Improvements in both timeliness and print quality are expected.
Special research resulted in an article on methods of wage payment in manufacturing industries, which appeared in the May 1982 MLR.
Before termination of the contract analysis program, BLS issued an analysis of union security provisions in major collective bargaining agreements.
The Bureau reduced the scope of the monthly series on work stoppages to cover only stoppages involving at least 1,000 workers.
To put the new series in historical perspective, data were published on work stoppages involving at least 1,000 workers, going back to 1947.
As an outgrowth of the widespread interest in strikes in public employment, staff prepared a special article, "Analysis of Work Stoppages in the Federal Sector, 1962–82," which appeared in the August 1982 MLR.
Data collection for the 1982 Directory of National Unions and Employee Associations, which was withdrawn from publication because of the budget cut, were provided to numerous people who telephoned or wrote for the information.
Quarterly publication of data on the size of major contract settlements—a principal economic indicator—reflected heavy collective bargaining activity and an unusually large number of workers affected by unscheduled contract reopenings in private industry.
The Bureau implemented refinements in measuring unscheduled settlements and the effects of cost-of-living adjustments.
BLS issued data on the size of contract settlements in State and local governments on the regular semiannual schedule and reduced production time by 5 weeks compared to the previous year.
1982, and on wage increases and cost-of-living reviews scheduled for 1982.
BLS continued to strengthen and expand its program of measurement, analysis, and research in productivity and technology.
Productivity measures for the United States have been increasingly in the news in the past year, and measurement and analysis of changes in this vital economic indicator have made important progress.
To supplement existing productivity data, staff developed new multifactor productivity measures which use both labor and capital inputs.
These additional series will provide better understanding of changes in productivity movements.
Using a sample selected by the Bureau's Office of Survey Design, staff also completed a survey to obtain information on hours at work in addition to existing measures of hours paid.
The new data provide productivity measures based on improved labor information.
To augment the list of industries for which BLS publishes productivity data, the Bureau introduced new productivity measures for the millwork, cosmetics, office furniture, hand and edge tools, farm and garden machinery and equipment, pumps and compressors, and commercial banking industries.
The Bureau now issues 116 separate productivity measures in the manufacturing, mining, transportation, trade, communication, and service sectors of the economy.
BLS refined and expanded the series on productivity in the Federal Government to cover 455 organizations, up 44 from 1 year ago.
Staff developed indexes for fiscal years 1967 to 1981 for 28 functional groupings of Federal agencies representing 64 percent of the Federal civilian work force.
Staff updated trends in manufacturing productivity and labor costs for 11 countries during the year and completed estimates of the comparative levels of compensation of production workers in 33 countries and 34 manufacturing industries.
In addition, the Bureau updated international comparisons of labor force, employment, and unemployment in nine industrial countries.
These measures provide insights into the changing competitive position of the United States.
The Bureau studied the employment implications of automation and other technological changes and prepared reports appraising the impact of major technological changes on productivity, employment, and occupational requirements over the next 10 years in.
Staff completed reports on Federal office building and hospital and nursing home construction as well as an article on the employment generating effects of construction expenditures.
A report on retail stores and shopping centers is in preparation.
These will be the final studies of construction labor and material requirements because the program has been eliminated as a result of budget reductions.
The Bureau has developed models to make medium- to longrange projections of GNP, industry output, and industry and occupational employment under alternative assumptions about Federal Government policies, labor force participation, unemployment rates, and other factors.
A macroeconometric model provides estimates of GNP and its major components, including consumer expenditures, investment, government expenditures, and net exports.
Various submodels distribute aggregate demand to detailed categories of demand and employment by industry sector.
An input-output model is used in this process to estimate purchases each industry must make from other industries to support its own production.
A projected industryoccupation matrix is used to translate industry employment requirements to occupational employment.
The projections provide insights into changes in the industrial composition of demand and employment by industry and occupation.
They assist industry and State and local governments in anticipating changing market structures and in formulating their own medium and long-term plans.
The occupational projections are designed primarily for use in career guidance and education planning and provide the data for the Occupational Outlook Handbook and other career guidance publications issued by the Bureau.
In addition, the data base and models, which have been developed over time as part of the projections system, provide an important analytical capability to deal with a wide variety of current employment issues of interest to the Department and others.
In fiscal 1982, studies were conducted that analyzed current and projected shortages of machinists and secular, cyclical, and seasonal trends in the construction industry.
The Bureau also provided other Federal agencies with estimates of the effect of their outlays on private jobs.
Such work in fiscal 1982 included studies on the employment requirements generated by changes in defense expenditures.
BLS also prepared current summaries of the principal economic indicators and provided a monthly summary and analysis of short-term economic forecasts.
During fiscal 1982, staff began work that will lead to a new set of labor force, economic, and industry and occupational employment projections to 1995.
In addition, the 1982–83 edition of the Occupational Outlook Handbook was published.
National industry-occupation matrices for 1980 and 1990 based on data from the occupational employment statistics surveys were also made available to the public.
In fiscal year 1982, the Bureau published 1980 national estimates of occupational injuries, illnesses, and fatalities, and conducted its eleventh annual survey of employers covering their 1981 experience.
The Supplementary Data System (SDS), which obtains information on occupational injuries and illnesses not available from the core annual survey program, had 34 States in participation.
In the Work Injury Report (WIR) survey program, work continued on several specialized accident studies.
In November 1981, BLS released national estimates of occupational injuries and illnesses for calendar year 1980.
Detailed occupational injury and illness statistics by industry were published in a bulletin.
Four industry guides—covering construction, manufacturing, transportation and public utilities, and trade—were also published to assist employers in evaluating their injury and illness experience.
The 1980 occupational fatality estimates appeared in an article in the January 1982 issue of the Monthly Labor Review.
In fiscal 1982, 34 States agreed to supply injury and illness data based on workers' compensation first reports of injury through the Supplementary Data System.
The SDS data base provides information on detailed characteristics associated with work accidents and thus supplements the industry-specific trend data derived from the annual survey.
Standard SDS tabulations showing distributions of occupational injuries and illnesses by work characteristics and work situations are generated for each participating State.
Both standard tabulations for each State and records of individual cases are made available to accident preventionists and researchers through the National Technical Information Service (NTIS), and potential users in general are informed of their availability in special announcements.
State microdata files for reference years prior to 1979 were available from NTIS by separate-State file only.
Starting with 1979 microdata, the records are organized into three multi-State files.
Organization into multi-State files makes a larger body of data available at a modest cost and eliminates the need to merge individual State files to obtain multi-State tabulations.
The annual survey estimates and SDS data are routinely transmitted to OSHA and NIOSH for use in meeting their respective program responsibilities.
Both data bases serve a wide variety of analytical applications in the occupational safety and health area.
The October 1981 MLR contained an article in which an index ratio measure of occupational risk based on SDS data was used to identify the relative hazardousness of occupational groups.
Although the index ratio measure does not have the precision of an incidence rate, it does provide a relative measure of hazardousness.
The Work Injury Report survey program obtains directly from injured employees detailed accident information which is not otherwise available.
Results from two studies in this program were published in fiscal 1982: Injuries Related to Servicing Equipment and Back Injuries Associated with Lifting.
Data collection was completed for four additional studies: falls from elevators, falls on stairs, injuries in oil and gas extraction, and injuries in logging.
OSHA and NIOSH use results of these studies to evaluate and develop safety standards, compliance strategy, and training programs.
The Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 requires statistical programs to meet Federal and State needs and encourages State participation in these programs through authorized grants for funding half of State costs.
Recordkeeping, the annual survey, SDS, and the WIR surveys of injured employees are all carried out with State agency participation.
In fiscal 1982, 48 States participated in the annual survey either through grants or contracts, 34 in the SDS and 30 in the WIR.
Administrative management.
Routine administrative services—personnel, budget, computer and other management and operation services—were provided to all Bureau offices.
Initiation of a computerized procurement plan.
Accountability in resource utilization.
Because of the conflicting needs to improve data and reduce resource requirements, the Bureau initiated an on-going program to review funding requirements on a program-by-program basis.
In addition to meeting the funding reductions required in the budget process, in 1982 Bureau managers were required to justify their program expenditure plans on a periodic basis.
Use of modern technology.
The Bureau has over the years used advances in computer science and technology in data collection, processing, and publications.
BLS will investigate further such advances and adopt those changes that represent improvement from either a program or resource use point of view.
Organizational improvements.
To clarify management responsibilities and to consolidate units severely affected by the recent program reductions, the Bureau streamlined its organizational structure to improve operational coordination and efficiency, as well as to strengthen the mathematical/ statistical research and evaluation functions in the Bureau.
Included in the changes was the merger of the Offices of Current Employment Analysis and Employment Structure and Trends into the Office of Employment and Unemployment Statistics.
Survey design.
The Bureau developed and began the first phase of changing the CPI housing component to a rental equivalence measure and designed specific procedures for a new survey to measure the differences in hours worked and hours paid.
In addition, considerable progress was made in the survey design work for revisions of the 790 and Producer Price Index Programs.
Reporting burden reduction.
The Bureau reduced its information collection budget by 0.5 million hours or about 20 percent since fiscal 1980.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), in line with the regulatory reform effort of the administration, provides the high-quality, nonadversarial safety and health services that Congress intended.
To ensure success in helping to reduce job injuries and illnesses at the workplace, the agency employs a balanced mix of all the programs afforded by the OSHA Act; these include standards, enforcement, State programs, training and education, consultation, and voluntary compliance projects.
OSHA makes itself accountable for achieving these goals through a delivery system of safety and health services to every working man and woman.
Initially, the agency set three major goals for itself, equally emphasizing each.
First, better management to assure accountability and to assure that all programs contribute directly to worker protection at the worksite.
Second, responsible regulatory reform to make safety and health standards as protective and cost effective as possible.
And finally, permeating all of OSHA's efforts, a cooperative attitude toward workplace safety and health that offers equal roles to labor, management, and government in eliminating job hazards.
During the fiscal year, OSHA installed an Integrated Management System (IMS).
Statistical indicators were developed to track the agency's progress and achievements in key program areas.
The indicators were used to help establish well-defined goals for the agency; then these goals were translated into performance criteria for measuring the effectiveness of the agency's senior managers.
Some of the objectives set for the agency included better targeting of inspections; faster abatement of hazards; full partnership with States operating their own OSHA plans; comprehensive review of existing major safety and health standards; and voluntary programs.
The indicators are evaluated quarterly to judge the effectiveness of OSHA's policies on citations and inspections, for example, and to verify the consistency of the program among regions.
Where results deviate from expectations, reasons are sought, and if necessary, appropriate midstream adjustments are made.
To complement the IMS, a Regulatory Management System (RMS) was developed and instituted to ensure an orderly process for timely regulatory review, decision, and action as well as to develop new standards.
An Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) was begun which, when fully implemented, will place a microcomputer terminal in all OSHA field offices and in those States operating their own program to collect and report OSHA program and administrative data.
To meet adjusted staff and budget ceilings, the agency realigned its field offices, consolidating some, eliminating some, and downgrading some.
The reorganization of the agency has improved efficiency, and OSHA continues effective geographic coverage while keeping constant its complement of 1,200 enforcement positions.
OSHA faced a double challenge a year ago when key court decisions on agency regulations had to be incorporated into standard setting as did a new executive order on Federal regulation.
To solve the problem, a four-step process governing the issuance and review of OSHA standards was developed.
First it must be shown that the hazard to be regulated poses a "significant risk" to workers.
Next, the standard is studied to verify that, if issued, it would substantially reduce that risk.
Then the data are analyzed to set the most protective exposure limit to the hazard that is both technologically and economically feasible.
And finally, it is determined what combination of methods engineering controls, personal protective equipment, medical surveillançe, training and education—is the most cost-effective way for employers to meet that limit.
In its first formal finding concerning "significant risk," OSHA published for public comment preliminary risk assessments on its inorganic arsenic standard.
These analyses compared exposure under the agency's 1978 standard to that permitted previously; the data predict that the regulation reduces the risk of job-related lung cancer to exposed employees by about 98 percent.
The revocation of almost 200 unenforceable "should/shall" provisions of the OSHA standards was proposed.
Courts did not uphold citations of these standards, which were based on old industry consensus standards originally meant to be advisory and containing the word "should" in directing safety and health measures.
Where necessary these rules will be replaced with specific, defensible standards; cost effectiveness will be factored into the standards as well as the mandatory "shall" language.
Cost effectiveness means that the least costly alternative among equally effective means is used to assure necessary worker protection.
The hazard communication proposal, a top priority for the year, is a good example.
After months of concentrated effort, a new proposed rule on hazard communication was issued on March 19, 1982, to replace the previous administration's proposal which was withdrawn to consider alternatives.
The new proposal would guarantee that workers get the information they need about hazards in their workplace.
The previous proposal would have cost industry $2.6 billion initially and $1.25 billion annually.
The new proposal, which includes worker training and education as well, will cost only about $582 million initially and about $228 million a year.
Currently, many health standards are being reviewed, including lead, cotton dust, respirators, ethylene oxide, ethylene dibromide, and the agency's overall policy on the regulation of workplace carcinogens.
OSHA's rule on access to employee exposure and medical records was streamlined and its focus sharpened in a proposed amendment issued in July.
By clarifying and tightening access provisions, the proposed changes are expected to encourage employers to monitor exposures and maintain records.
Unlike previous administrations, effective safety standards no longer take a back seat to the health standards agenda.
The agency has drawn up a list of 16 safety standards it plans to address by the end of 1984as many safety rules as OSHA has promulgated in its history.
The agency ban on latch-open devices for gasoline nozzles at self-service gas stations was revoked in September.
This was a nuisance requirement that had nothing to do with protecting workers.
In another area, shipyard standards were consolidated in March, reducing their volume by 60 percent.
Also, public comments have been called for to help improve concrete construction standards and rules on commercial and scientific diving operations.
Other upcoming safety standards include grain elevators, single-piece rim wheels, oil and gas well drilling, and electrical safety in construction.
The agency is expected to develop standards on powered platforms, walking and working surfaces, the second part of the electrical standard for general industry, trenching and excavation, and ladders and scaffolds.
During the year OSHA placed great emphasis on area director settlement agreements with employers contesting OSHA inspection citations.
As a result, the contest rate for OSHA is running around 5 percent rather than the 22 percent contest rate of previous years.
Potentially contested cases are being settled before litigation through mutually satisfactory agreements with employers; the agreements always require abatement of the cited hazards.
Employers save time and money; OSHA sends its inspectors to workplaces instead of to the courts; and, most important, workers are protected more quickly.
OSHA's management is oriented to results, and this philosophy has permeated the redirection of OSHA's enforcement policies, as well.
With only 1,200 inspectors to cover 3 million workplaces and 46 million workers, OSHA must make every one of its inspections pay safety and health dividends.
Many initiatives to improve enforcement have been undertaken.
The basic question is, what types of OSHA inspections are most, and least productive.
It had been discovered, for example, that followup inspections are not the best use of OS-HA's limited enforcement resources; about 98 percent of these on-site checks to make sure previous violations have been corrected show the employer to be fully in compliance.
So, logically enough, policy has been set limiting followups to not more than 5 percent of OSHA's total inspections and general schedule inspections now make up 80 percent of the agency's total enforcement effort.
The centerpiece of this enforcement overhaul is the targeting policy for general schedule inspections in the manufacturing sector which focuses OSHA inspections on the most hazardous individual worksites.
This system, in place since October 1981, uses the employer's mandatory log of injuries and illnesses to help identify and inspect those workplaces that really need OSHA.
An individual manufacturer's lost-workday case rate is used as the trigger for a full-scale inspection.
Upon arrival, inspectors consult the mandatory log of injuries and illnesses at the workplace; if the average is higher than the national average for manufacturing, they inspect.
If it's not, they leave, after explaining legal rights and responsibilities to employer and employee representatives, answering all questions, and acting on any worker complaints.
There is flexibility here, however.
A compliance officer has discretion to visit a particular process in the workplace if the log indicates a high proportion of injuries or illnesses are occurring there.
With this system, in fiscal year 1982, OSHA was able to double its visits to high safety hazard workplaces, compared to thé same period a year ago.
Since July 15, 1982, when hazards are found during a workplace inspection, inspectors are directed to offer abatement information to employers as well.
Other changes instituted to improve enforcement included a coherent citation policy for multiemployer worksites, as in the construction industry, to be sure the party responsible for the hazard corrects it; specific criteria for the appropriate use of the "general duty clause" of the OSH Act in citing violations not covered by a specific standard, which require it to be used to cite only recognized, serious, and feasibly correctable hazards; and a uniform policy of citation for repeated violations of OSHA standards.
Agency policy has been clarified on seeking pre-inspection warrants, generally limiting it to cases where the employer has a well-established and recognized policy of refusing entry.
On February 1, 1982, new improved procedures on handling worker complaints were instituted.
A new policy ensures that every employee complaint is evaluated, but only formal written complaints that allege violations likely to result in physical harm will be scheduled for OSHA inspections.
Other kinds of complaints can be handled adequately by employer notification and corrections.
Uniform guidelines governing OSHA's response to referrals similar to those governing response to complaints have also been established.
To improve the agency's allocation of its health inspection resources, the agency at year's end planned to hold a conference with representatives from labor, business, and State-plan States to help identify the essential elements that should be present in any workplace health program.
A pilot study is being initiated in 10 area offices to gather data to supplement this effort.
And finally, in line with the goal of cutting red-tape and unnecessary paperwork requirements, OSHA proposed in June to eliminate recordkeeping requirements for nearly 500,000 employers.
These low-hazard firms are in certain retail trade, finance, insurance, real estate, and service industries.
The proposed exemption would go into effect January 1, 1983, for firms in industrial categories that meet certain statistical safety and health criteria, including a lost-workday case rate at or below 75 percent of the private sector average.
OSHA is determined to be fair and evenhanded in all its action and to instill a cooperative spirit into the regulatory process.
Over a year ago, some lead industries petitioned OSHA for a 1-year delay in lowering the concentration of lead in a worker's blood that triggers his or her removal from high exposure.
The petitioners contended that the lower trigger levels would require the removal of so many skilled workers that production would suffer seriously, even forcing some plants to close.
Organized labor argued that no widespread problem had been documented and that any relief should be considered only for worksites with real difficulties.
OSHA looked at both sides of the issue, called for public comment, and evaluated the data.
OSHA denied industry's request for a blanket postponement of the new levels and put them into effect for nearly all workplaces.
For those plants that demonstrated severe compliance problems, OSHA issued interim variances from the requirement and provided special protection for workers with elevated blood lead levels.
Both business and labor contributed their views to help OSHA put together a reasonable, workable solution in protecting workers from overexposure to lead.
Regulatory cooperation was also exemplified in OSHA's initiatives with ASARCO, the primary lead and copper smelter company, and the United Steelworkers to jointly improve protections for smelter workers exposed to arsenic.
Cooperative assessment at the seven U.S. smelters with significant arsenic exposures are being made to determine appropriate control methods while maintaining the long-term profitability and competitiveness of the industry.
Separate agreements covering all five ASARCO plants were completed in 1982.
In July 1982 OSHA inaugurated nationwide voluntary protection programs to recognize firms with excellent safety and/or health programs.
Some would involve companies with effective labor-management committees in general industry and construction.
Participants are exempt from programmed inspections, though employees and employers retain all rights and responsibilities under OSHA law.
Ortho Diagnostic Systems, Inc., of Raritan, New Jersey, became the first participant.
An agreement was signed in February 1982 to assist American Electronics Association in designing job safety and health programs for companies in the U.S. electronics industry.
And finally, to evaluate OSHA's cooperative approach, a nationwide questionnaire was devised enabling employers and employee representatives at firms inspected by OSHA to evaluate the professionalism of the agency enforcement staff.
Since this went into effect in August 1982 the response has been overwhelmingly favorable and the enforcement staff is almost unanimously cited as being both professional and courteous.
This administration's approach is that governing is best accomplished on the level closest to the people.
OSHA has translated this philosophy into broader and more effective support for State OSHA programs.
OSHA has retained its commitment to maintaining support for State programs.
The States match Federal funding, so that every dollar cut from the State program support means a $2.00 loss from the national job safety and health effort.
Support for State plans is not only good government, it is a good safety and health investment for Federal taxpayer's dollars with a two-for-one return.
Dual Federal State enforcement was eliminated by removing Federal compliance officers from States that operate their own safety and health programs and transferring them to States where Federal OSHA is in charge.
Certification of their programs was granted to Nevada, Arizona, Indiana, the Virgin Islands, Washington, Puerto Rico, and Oregon, bringing the number of certified Štates to 21.
Certification is a necessary prerequisite before final OSHA approval can be granted to a State to operate its own program.
Twenty-four States and territories currently operate their own occupational safety and health programs subject to Federal approval and monitoring.
Operational status agreements were signed with Minnesota, Virgin Islands, New Mexico, Wyoming, Nevada, Arizona, Puerto Rico, Indiana, Virginia, and Iowa thus removing concurrent Federal enforcement in all State-plan States.
Staff assigned to monitor State plans has been reduced by one-half and a new monitoring system has been developed that will use nearly 100 statistical comparison points to judge the States'performance.
Two areas of emphasis for 1982 were OSHA's consultation and training and education grants programs.
Funding increased to almost $28 million in fiscal 1982 for the free on-site consultation program; through this service employers in every State can obtain penalty-free advice from experts on eliminating job safety and health hazards.
About $6.8 million was given in grants to business, labor, and academic groups to provide a wide variety of safety and health services.
For both these programs new methods of accountability were developed to assure high quality and consistency of service.
During fiscal 1982 an experimental program was begun in seven southern States to encourage greater use of on-site consultation services and to augment OSHA's limited inspection staff.
Under the 6-month pilot project, employers who undergo a comprehensive consultation visit, correct all serious safety and health hazards and establish and/or maintain an effective safety and health program will be exempt for 1 year from general scheduled inspection.
OSHA will thus be able to send its inspectors to more hazardous worksites.
Without an increase in funding, OSHA increased the number of on-site consultation visits by State consultants by 33 percent during the first 6 months of fiscal 1982.
Also, a databased monitoring system was developed to track the on-site consultation program.
OSHA reached agreement with the Tribal Council of the Navajo Nation to provide on-site consultation to businesses operating within the Nation, thereby providing enhanced worker protection to 85,000 native Americans.
New Directions" grants for business, labor, and academic groups were reoriented to focus solely on job safety and health and to increase fiscal accountability.
To decentralize and better perform grant oversight, more responsibility has been given to regional offices.
The Training Institute in Des Plaines, Ill., is being reorganized to reflect greater emphasis upon training of OSHA compliance officers and other Federal employees attending the Institute.
The Management Training Institute, a separate entity within the OSHA Training Institute, was established to focus on advanced management topics and to support OSHA management objectives for midlevel managers.
Two training films were developed.
Doin' It Right" deals with safe methods of removing asbestos and is used to inform workers, contractors, school systems and general audiences of techniques for solving asbestos removal problems, precautionary measures for workers, and the use of personal protective equipment.
An accompanying booklet, “Asbestos Abatement Control Guidance Manual,"is designed as a teclinical aid for specification writers, mechanics, inspectors, and designers who work on asbestos-related projects.
The film, "Facts About Vinyl Chloride," is set in a vinyl chloride manufacturing facility involved in the storage, handling, use, and packaging of vinyl chloride.
This film is an important tool in helping workers understand the hazards involved and the necessary measures to be taken to eliminate and reduce hazards associated with the chemical.
For further outreach into the community, 45 vocational safety and health training programs were developed by the Center for Occupational Research and Development (CORD) for use in vocational and secondary schools in the fall of 1982.
And finally, OSHA prepared to move as tlie fiscal year ended to focus on ways to improve Federal workplace safety and health.
The first step being taken to improve the Federal agency effort was to demonstrate that this administration had a strong commitment to a safe and healthful Federal work environment.
In May 1982, OSHA held a week-long Field Managers Conference that focused on the safety and health of Federal workers.
The meeting included all of OSHA's top managers from both the national office and OSHA's 10 regional offices.
Another indication of OSHA's commitment to this effort was the appointment of a Special Assistant for Federal Safety and Health Programs and a permanent Director of the Office of Federal Agency Programs.
In order to advise these officials and other OSHA policymakers, the Federal Advisory Council on Occupational Safety and Health (FACOSH) was given increased attention and status.
The committee, composed of an equal number of management and labor representatives, is a valuable source of advice on Federal workplace conditions.
OSHA was also looking at how to better use and support the 89 Field Federal Safety and Health Councils, voluntary groups of local Federal safety and health experts.
OSHA began developing, with the assistance of the Employment Standards Administration, a data system using the reports required under the Federal Employees'Compensation Act (FECA) to provide uniform, more reliable injury statistics.
When the new system is in place, it will allow the agency to pinpoint not only the most hazardous agencies but also the most hazardous worksites in those agencies.
Other enforcement initiatives under development include new instructions for investigating catastrophes and fatalities in Federal workplaces and better procedures to respond to Federal safety and health complaints.
As part of an outreach program OSHA was establishing a consultation program for other Federal agencies.
In recent weeks, 52 agencies have been contacted.
And almost half of the students instructed at OSHA's Training Institute in Des Plaines, Ill., came from other Federal agencies.
OSHA's evaluations of the Navy, the Postal Service, and the Tennessee Valley Authority have been completed under newly improved procedures.
These evaluations should be particularly useful to the concerned agency heads because OSHA was focusing on the program management process and examining the degree of management support, planning, program implementation, and program self-evaluation that each agency brings to bear on its occupational safety and health responsibilities.
Federal management accountability for worker protection ensures that the Nation's public servants, the 2.8 million employees who get the Government's work done, can perform their jobs efficiently and, above all, safely.
Enforcement of existing standards affecting both employers and employees was a chief focus of Employment Standards Administration efforts in fiscal year 1982.
The Wage and Hour Division, for example, conducted over 75,000 investigations involving wage requirements.
In addition, improved farm labor legislation was sought in the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Workers Protection Act; ESA also issued modified regulations under the Davis-Bacon Act.
Better management of the Federal workers' compensation and contract compliance programs continued to be an ESA goal.
In enforcing the minimum wage, overtime pay and child labor provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), the Wage and Hour Division conducted 73,691 investigations during fiscal 1982.
The investigations resolved 49,545 complaints, thereby reducing the complaint inventory from 19,692 to 15,756 despite the receipt of 46,645 new complaints during the year.
The investigations disclosed $49.4 million in minimum wage underpayments due 290,000 workers and $80.8 million in overtime underpayments due 288,000 employees.
Employers agreed to pay $32.7 million in unpaid minimum wages to 252,000 workers and $54.2 million to 246,000 employees due overtime pay.
The total of $86.9 million in back wages that employers agreed to restore represents a 4 percent increase from fiscal 1981.
The difference between the amount of back wages due employees and the amount that employers agreed to pay reflects, for the most part, sums involved in pending litigation and the refusal of certain employers to pay back wages in cases which the department deemed unsuitable for litigation.
The FLSA permits individuals to bring private suits to collect back wages, liquidated damages, attorney's fees, and court costs.
The Department's enforcement statistics do not include the amounts recovered in such private suits.
The division once again used special targeted enforcement efforts in industries and areas that have a history of noncompliance.
One such effort in Miami, Florida, disclosed more than $1.7 million in back wages due over 6,000 workers in the garment, security, and construction industries.
Employers agreed to pay $774,000 in back wages to 3,900 workers, and litigation is pending in a number of other cases.
Negotiations resulting in the settlement of two major litigation actions were concluded at the close of fiscal year 1982.
The first settlement, involving the U.S. Postal Service, could result in as much as $400 million paid to some 800,000 workers.
The second case involves some $5 million due 5,000 employees of a major restaurant chain.
The Wage and Hour Division found 9,966 minors employed in violation of the child labor provisions of the FLSA.
Almost two-thirds of the illegally employed minors were in retail trades; 3,385 minors were employed in one or more of the nonagricultural occupations declared hazardous; and 49 were employed in agricultural occupations declared hazardous.
The division assessed more than $1 million in child labor civil money penalties against 765 employers who illegally employed 6,536 minors.
Alleging that penalties should not have been assessed and requesting hearings before administrative law judges, 187 employers filed exceptions with the Wage and Hour Administrator.
The Department of Labor and the Environmental Protection Agency continued to study the effects of pesticides on the health of children employed in agriculture in connection with the waiver procedure for employing local 10– and 11-year-old hand harvesters in short-season crops.
A proposed amendment to Child Labor Regulation 3, which sets employment standards for 14 and 15-year old minors, appeared in the July 16, 1982, Federal Register.
Because of substantial public interest in the proposal, the division extended the period for public comment through January 13, 1983.
A new proposed revision will be issued following analysis of those comments.
The FLSA permits employers who obtain certificates from the Wage and Hour Division to pay special lower minimum wages to handicapped workers, full-time students, students in vocational education programs, apprentices and messengers "to the extent necessary in order to prevent curtailment of opportunities for employment."
The division authorized special minimuin wages for approximately 431,800 workers during fiscal 1982, a decline of 17 percent from the previous year.
The largest number of authorizations was for full-time students (58 percent) and the next largest was for handicapped workers (41 percent).
On July 16, 1982, the division proposed a regulatory revision that would allow the Wage and Hour Administrator to designate the period during which certificates authorizing employers to pay special minimum wages to full-time students would be effective.
Under current regulations the certificates must be renewed each year.
A new proposal will be issued following analysis of the comments.
Restrictions on homework in the knitted outerwear industry were removed effective November 9, 1981, after extensive hearings and provision for public comment on the homeworker regulations.
In six other industries—women's apparel; jewelry; gloves and mittens; buttons and buckles; handkerchiefs; and embroideries—homework is permitted only by individuals who cannot adjust to factory work because of a handicap or who are required to remain at home to care for an invalid.
The Wage and Hour Division conducted 4,491 investigations under the Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act (FLCRA), and found violations in 1,790 of these investigations.
The Department assessed $1 million in civil money penalties in 301 cases.
Collections on penalty assessments amounted to over $400,000.
The National Farm Labor Coordinated Enforcement Committee and regional coordination committees continued their functions under the settlement agreement in NAACP v. Marshall.
These committees provide national and regional coordination of the activities of the Employment Standards Administration, the Employment and Training Administration, and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration with respect to migrant farm workers.
Investigations which uncovered evidence of possible criminal violation of other statutes, including the Civil Rights Act, continued to be referred to the Department of Justice.
This cooperation resulted in four criminal convictions for involuntary servitude or peonage of persons who held migrant farm workers in labor camps and forced them to work against their will.
The FLCRA prohibits farm labor contractors from knowingly employing illegal aliens.
Cooperation between the Immigration and Naturalization Service and the Wage and Hour Division has served to deter the use of these workers in agricultural employment.
The Administration introduced into Congress a bill that would reform the FLCRA.
The bill, developed in cooperation with major employer and employee organizations, would establish a new law, the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (MSPA).
It is designed to strengthen essential protections for farmworkers within a rational statutory framework that would eliminate unnecessary paperwork and would reduce the constant litigation which has occurred under the current statute.
The division conducted 4,527 investigations under the various laws that provide labor standards for employees on government contract work, including the Davis-Bacon and related acts, the Service Contract Act, the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act, and the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act.
Wage underpayments found due under these laws totalled $17.8 million, due 42,480 workers.
The total included $15.8 million in minimum wage and fringe benefit underpayments and $2.0 million in overtime compensation underpayments.
Employers agreed to pay $13.3 million in back wages to 39,273 workers.
Additional monies will be restored upon completion of administrative hearings or litigation.
During the fiscal year, the division issued 14,026 determinations of prevailing wages and fringe benefits under the Davis-Bacon and related acts.
Of the total, 1,238 were general determinations published in the Federal Register which apply to many construction contracts in a given geographic area, and 12,788 were issued for specific construction projects.
In an attempt to streamline the process involved in making Davis-Bacon wage determinations, the Department entered into a pilot contract in fiscal 1982 to determine the feasibility of having a private contractor, rather than its own employees, collect the wage data information used to make determinations.
The study was completed early in fiscal year 1983, and the division is in the process of evaluation.
On April 28, 1982, the division issued final regulations under the Davis-Bacon Act which were to become effective on July 28, 1982.
Implementation of the regulations was deferred, however, after the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia issued a preliminary injunction blocking major provisions of the new rules in response to a suit filed by the Building and Construction Trades Department of the AFL-CIO and a number of affiliated unions.
Under the Service Contract Act, the division issued 5,018 determinations of wages and fringe benefits for a wide variety of job classifications.
The wage determinations apply to 35,200 contracts.
ESA's Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) administers Executive Order 11246, as amended, the affirmative action provisions of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and similar provisions in the Vietnam-Era Veterans'Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974 (VEVRA).
Executive Order 11246 requires that Federal contractors refrain from discriminating in employment because of race, sex, color, religion or national origin and that they take affirmative action to assure equal opportunity in employment.
Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act and Section 402 of the VEVRA provide similar protection for handicapped persons, certain disabled veterans and Vietnam-era veterans.
The basic objectives of OFCCP compliance activity during fiscal 1982 were to increase employment, training, and promotion opportunities for minorities, women, handicapped persons, and other protected workers, and to insure that Federal contractors did not discriminate but rather took positive action to include in their work forces qualified individuals of the protected classes.
Although OFCCP may impose sanctions, including debarment as a Federal contractor, against those who are found to be violating the law, it preferred to adopt a positive, nonconfrontational approach emphasizing conciliation to achieve compliance and technical assistance to aid employers in meeting their contractual obligations.
Helping contractors to arrange internal or external training and to locate recruitment and referral sources complemented OFCCP compliance activities.
During fiscal 1982, OFCCP continued to encourage the establishment of liaison groups of industry, employer, and constituency group representatives.
These groups address issues of recruitment, job qualifications, and training involving specific industries or occupations, broaden understanding of OFCCP objectives, and foster a spirit of cooperation between the Government and the contracting community.
OFCCP conducted 3,081 compliance reviews of contractor facilities employing 2,380,722 workers.
The agency placed major emphasis upon more rapid response to complaints alleging discriminatory treatment.
OFCCP conducted 2,589 investigations of complaints or 453 (21 percent) more than during the previous year.
Administrative complaints were filed against five firms.
There were 259 agreements in which contractors committed a total of $7,305,953 in financial outlays for training, future pay increases, back pay and increased recruitment.
Back pay awards of $2,132,354 went to 1,133 women, minorities, disabled persons and veterans.
Linkage" agreements to provide applicants for specific contractor job openings were reached between 676 employers and training service agents or other recruitment or referral sources.
During fiscal years 1981 and 1982, OFCCP proposed à number of regulatory changes to promote equal employment practices by Federal contractors while streamlining procedures.
The basic thrust of the proposed revisions is to simplify and introduce greater flexibility into the compliance process, so that compliance efforts, by both contractors and OFCCP, can better achieve positive results.
During fiscal 1982, the Division of Federal Employees' Compensation (DFEC) made progress in providing better service under provisions of the Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA) to Federal workers injured on the job.
Continuing the pace it set in the last quarter of fiscal 1981, the DFEC processed 88.5 percent of all traumatic injury cases within 45 days of receipt.
Working with the Postal Service, which submits the largest number of Federal employees' claims each year, the DFEC expanded a program to reemploy injured employees as soon as possible in jobs which are modified to suit their physical capacities.
A new joint venture, the Low Back Project, requires claimants reporting back injuries to be screened for early referral to medical specialists, who evaluate them for appropriate care and a timely return to work.
The DFEC modified its medical payment system to increase protection against fraud and abuse by medical providers.
Claimants now are asked to report any discrepancies in payments made on their behalf to medical providers.
In August 1982, the DFEC adopted the American Medical Association's health insurance claim form, used by Medicare and Medicaid, for providers other than hospitals, nursing homes, and pharmacies.
The mandatory form contains information needed for expedited payment, provides protection against fraud, and speeds the entry of data.
The DFEC extensively revised its procedures for recovering overpayments from Federal employees.
This revision was undertaken in accordance with new Office of Personnel Management regulations that permit recovery of employee debts from civil service annuities and with a decision of the Comptroller General that under certain circumstances recovery may be made from the salaries of employed debtors.
Claimant's rights to due process and a hearing on overpayment issues have been expanded following a 1979 Supreme Court decision.
The DFEC gave debt collection a high priority and is considering the use of outside collection agencies and the permissibility of charging penalties or interest on outstanding debts.
The limited use of Wage and Hour compliance officers and Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs equal opportunity specialists to make onsite visits to claimants on the disability and carry out other investigative functions, combined with a continued emphasis on periodic roll review, resulted in monthly compensation savings of some $3,430,000 in fiscal year 1982 and an annual saving of $41 million.
The division recovered approximately $800,000 per month during fiscal 1982 from litigation against third parties for injuries to Federal employees.
The Postal Service agreed to identify and pursue subrogation cases arising out of minor injuries, such as dog bites to letter carriers.
In March 1982, the Administration resubmitted a bill, orginally proposed in June 1981, to reform FECA by emphasizing reemployment and a quick return to work, the setting of benefit rates at 80 percent of pre-disability income, and other measures.
The first budget resolution approved by Congress assumed enactment of the Administration's legislative proposals.
However, the House and Senate Labor Committees were not instructed to make the statutory changes in FECA to achieve the budgetary savings assumed in the first budget resolution.
Thus, the FECA proposals were not adopted in the reconciliation process.
On December 29, 1981, PL 97–119, the Administration's Black Lung Benefits and Revenue Act of 1981, became law.
Its passage was a major achievement both in terms of budgetary impact and of labor-management cooperation.
The amendments removed three presumptions that enabled certain individuals to obtain benefits without providing medical evidence that they suffered from pneumoconiosis (black lung disease).
The amendments also offset benefits by “excess" earnings and made other changes in evidentiary requirements.
To restore the financial integrity of the trust fund, the coal production taxes paid by mine operators were temporarily doubled until 1995.
Regulations to implement the new law were proposed and opened for public comment, prior to publication in final form during calendar year 1983.
The division issued initial findings on approximately 10,900 new claims for black lung benefits.
Over 10,200 cases were also identified, in accordance with the 1981 law, and processed and transferred from responsible operators' liability to trust fund liability.
The division continued to place more emphasis on contested claims.
It prepared some 6,000 individual claims for formal hearings and forwarded them to the Office of Administrative Law Judges.
In addition, the program maintained over 12,000 cases awaiting formal hearings, 117,000 claims for medical benefits only and approximately 90,000 monthly benefit claims.
During 1982, the division began to operate a new all-service contract, part of a new automated approach.
The system processed most medical bills for payment and provided all necessary hardware, software, and telecommunications to support an integrated information and payment system for quicker and more efficient service to the miner community.
Expanded debt collection activities brought in over $22 million from coal mine operators, insurance carriers, beneficiaries, and medical providers.
Approximately $596 million in benefits was paid to 90,000 coal miners or their surviving dependents during the fiscal year.
Total obligations of the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund amounted to $795 million, while income from the increased coal tax and other receivables totalled $478 million.
The deficit required an advance of $314 million from the general revenue fund.
At the end of the fiscal year, the outstanding trust fund debt was approximately $1.8 billion.
The Division of Longshore and Habor Workers' Compensation consolidated the workloads of the Kansas City and Denver district offices into the Chicago and Seattle district offices, respectively.
The consolidation brought about improved management of cases through more efficient use of available resources.
In response to recommendations made in an April 1982 GAO report, the division began to send injured workers a revised informational letter about benefit entitlements.
Other revised reporting procedures enable national office program managers to monitor district office operations more efficiently.
The division implemented an automated system to provide direct payment of adjusted benefits in certain types of cases paid from the Longshore Special Fund to about 1,500 beneficiaries.
Those paid are individuals entitled to adjusted permanenit total disability and death compensation for injuries or deaths: that occurred prior to the amendment of the Longshore Act in .1972.
The change eliminated a backlog and freed staff for other tiasks.
Deputy Under Secretary Collyer testified before Cong:ress in October 1981 and recommended changes in the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act.
The propcsed changes called for a 6 percent cap on annual benefit increa:ses, limits on coverage, elimination of unrelated death benefits, and other restrictions.
On July 27, 1982, the Senate passed a cormpromise version of Senator Nickles' bill, S. 1182.
At the end of the fiscal year, the House Subcommittee on Labor was considering the Senate bill.
The Division of Vocational Rehabilitation improved its services to disabled workers who receive benefits under workers's compensation programs, thus reducing human loss and compensation costs.
During fiscal 1982, 825 injured Federal workers covered by FECA underwent formal rehabilitation involving education, counseling, and retraining, resulting in savings of more than $10,000 per worker in compensation costs and total annual savings of $8.5 million to the Federal Government in compensation costs.
This represents an 8 percent increase in the number of workers rehabilitated over the previous year.
There was also a 21 percent increase in the number of rehabilitated workers who returned to work for their previous government employers.
Under the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act, 335 workers in private industry underwent formal rehabilitation, resulting in savings of more than $8,000 per worker in compensation costs and total fiscal 1982 savings of $2.7 million to employers.
The Office of State Liaison and Legislative Analysis, established in April 1982, enhanced the ability of the Deputy Under Secretary for Employment Standards to provide assistance to the States and to coordinate activities with them.
It also served as a link between ESA programns and related State programs and facilitated cooperation in legislative and regulatory matters.
Responsibilities of the Division of Legislative Analysis included developing testimony and background information for ESA cfficials who appeared at congressional hearings, developing legislative policy materials and preparing materials required under: E.O. 12291 concerning regulatory relief matters.
It playe:d an important role in the Department's efforts to initiate legislative reform in the Federal workers'compensation progranis.
The Division of State Employment Standards Programs pro'ided ESA with expertise on State labor laws that are directly related to all of its programs except workers' compensation.
The division also offered technical advice and information at out State labor standards to State labor departments, management organizations, multistate employers, organized labor, Federal agencies and the general public.
During the fiscal year, the division maintained active working relations with State labor commissioners and program officials and their organizations.
It analyzed some 650 State labor laws and pubhished summaries of approximately 250 of these.
The Division of State Workers' Compensation Programs provided State compensation systems with onsite technical assistance to help them improve their information and administrative systems.
The unit worked closely with State legislatures and advisory committees in preparing and evaluating proposed legislation.
During fiscal 1982, the division provided analyses for 167 amendments to State laws.
The division published the last three volumes of the Research Reports of the Interdepartmental Workers' Compensation Task Force.
During fiscal year 1982, the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) undertook major initiatives (1) to reduce adversarial relations between labor and management over safety and health in the mining community, (2) to eliminate needless regulatory burdens, and (3) to encourage positive efforts by industry and labor to protect miners' safety and health.
A major reorganization of MSHA, completed in May 1982, provided to the agency's district managers (previously chiefly enforcers) means besides inspections for improving mine safety and health.
Specifically, the district managers gained responsibility for discussions of inspectors'findings with management and labor, and for training activities in the field.
In regulatory reform action during fiscal 1982, MSHA revised its rules on penalties for violations.
The new rules reduced administrative burdens and encouraged operators to correct violations through a set $20 penalty for nonserious violations corrected promptly, reduced penalties for prompt correction of more serious violations, and potentially greater consequences for serious and repeated violations.
As part of a comprehensive review of metal and nonmetal mine safety and health regulations, MSHA held public conferences to receive comments from the mining community, and a review of underground coal mine safety standards was initiated with a request for written comments from the public.
The goal of these review projects is to clarify and update current regulations and to eliminate needless regulatory burdens while maintaining or improving the protection provided to miners.
Also during the fiscal year, Assistant Secretary Ford B. Ford suggested legislative changes that could improve cooperation on safety and health in the mining community and give MSHA more flexibility to do a better job.
Communication and cooperation among industry, labor, MSHA, State agencies, and others in the mining community received additional emphasis during fiscal 1982 through the districts'new training functions and through numerous meetings and conferences with mining groups.
In June, MSHA held the First Joint Mine Health and Safety Conference of industry, labor and government at the National Mine Health and Safety Academy.
The conference generated valuable insights on mine health and safety needs and plans for additional conferences on a regional basis.
And in line with the New Federalism, MSHA began establishing new and stronger ties with State mine agencies, community colleges and vocational-technical schools, voluntary safety associations and other grassroots organizations.
Amendments to stopgap funding measures adopted by Congress during FY 1982 exempted many surface nonmetal operations from MSHA jurisdiction from December 16, 1981 until July 18, 1982.
After MSHA resumed jurisdiction, agency officials met extensively with affected operators to explain changes in MSHA rules and procedures during the exemption and to ensure a smooth transition.
At the same time, MSHA strengthened its coal mine safety and health program by hiring additional personnel to compensate for attrition during the previous several years.
In addition, MSHA worked with industry to ensure the availability of new, oxygen-supplying emergency breathing apparatus so that all underground coal mines could have the apparatus on hand by the fiscal year's end.
There were 1,970 underground mines, 2,255 surface mines, and 1,085 other surface facilities under MSHA jurisdiction during the fiscal year.
Coal mine inspectors, supervisors, and specialists operated from 10 district offices, 18 subdistrict offices, and 68 field offices during the fiscal year.
The coal mine safety and health workforce was strengthened during fiscal 1982 by the transfer of training positions to the districts during the reorganization and by the hiring of more than 200 new coal mine inspectors.
The workforce numbered 1,897 at the end of fiscal 1982, compared to 1,698 in fiscal 1981, 1,797 in fiscal 1980, and 1,853 in fiscal 1979.
MSHA conducted 79,977 coal mine inspections and investigations during fiscal 1982, of which 55,448 were at underground mines, 16,082 at surface mines, and 8,447 at other surface facilities.
MSHA inspectors issued 116,645 citations and orders to coal mine operators and independent contractors for violations of safety and health regulations.
Under new procedures adopted in May, mine operators and labor representatives requested 1,207 health and safety conferences with supervisory officials to discuss inspectors'findings; 946 of these conferences were held.
Training specialists made 959 consultative visits to coal mines from June through October 1, 1982.
MSHA investigated three major underground coal mine explosions during fiscal 1982.
The first, which occurred on December 7, 1981, at the Adkins Coal Co.'s No. 11 Mine, Knott County, Ky., resulted in the deaths of eight miners.
The second occurred the following day at the Grundy Mining Company's No. 21 Mine, Marion County, Tenn.
The third occurred on January 20, 1982, at the RFH Coal Company's No. 1 Mine, Floyd County, Ky., taking seven lives.
Other multiple-fatality coal mine accidents investigated by MSHA during the fiscal year included eight roof falls that caused 17 deaths and a structural failure accident that killed three miners.
New regulations requiring self-contained self-rescue devices which provide oxygen for miners who may be exposed to suffocating atmospheres in a mine fire or explosion became effective in June 1981.
During fiscal 1982, MSHA continued its policy of considering operators to be in compliance with this regulation if they made a good faith effort to obtain the devices in a timely manner.
Cooperative efforts with industry, manufacturers and labor led to the successful deployment of these devices in almost all underground coal mines by the fiscal year's end, when it became mandatory to have the devices in place.
MSHA's Coal Mine Safety and Health activity conducted an internal evaluation of its national ventilation enforcement program in fiscal 1982.
Its objectives included determining the uniformity of enforcement of the law, regulations, and policy and guidelines and determining the need to correlate ventilation and roof control plans.
The evaluation team audited district practices, reviewed representative ventilation plans, and interviewed district personnel.
MSHA held meetings with key industry organizations to discuss the evaluation findings and is developing a concentrated internal program to upgrade health and safety efforts in the area of ventilation.
A major coal mine health problem in past years has been high respirable dust levels on mining sections using the longwall mining technique.
During fiscal 1982, there was a significant decrease in the number of longwall sections with continuously excessive respirable dust levels.
Also during the fiscal year, however, results of MSHA's recently revised quartz analysis program indicated that quartz dust is a more prevalent health hazard in coal mines than had previously been realized.
Coal mine operators filed 141 petitions for modification of safety standards with MSHA during fiscal 1982.
A total of 172 petitions, including a number from previous years, were granted, denied, or dismissed.
Coal mine personnel filed 276 complaints of discrimination with MSHA during the fiscal year.
In addition, MSHA in fiscal 1982 opened 86 investigations of possible knowing and willful violations at coal mines.
A restrictive amendment to Public Law 97–92, a continuing budget resolution effective December 16, 1981, precluded MSHA from exercising its authority at sand and gravel, surface stone, surface clay and colloidal phosphate operations.
The resolution was extended by Public Law 97-161 from April 1 through September 30, 1982.
As a result of these actions, 200 Metal and Nonmetal Mine Safety and Health employees were furloughed from January through May 29, 32 field offices were closed, and on May 30, 259 employees were separated under reduction-in-force procedures.
Effective July 18, H.R. 6685 restored jurisdiction to MSHA over the exempt operations.
Ten of the closed field offices were reopened, and one new field office was established.
At the close of fiscal 1982, the Metal and Nonmetal Mine Safety and Health activity was operating from 6 district offices, 12 subdistrict offices and 53 field offices, with a workforce of 550 employees.
During the 1982 fiscal year, 7,551 regular inspections were made at approximately 750 underground metal, nonmetal and stone mines and about 12,900 surface mines, stone quarries and sand and gravel operations.
A total of 7,675 citations and orders for violations of standards and for imminent danger conditions were issued.
In addition to regular inspections, compliance followup inspections were conducted to check the abatement of hazards on which citations or orders were issued, frequent inspections of gassy mines were made, and other inspections were conducted during shaft-sinking activities, during the operation of hoisting equipment, and at electrical installations.
Because of the exempt status of some mining operations during part of fiscal 1982, meaningful comparisons of the numbers of inspection and investigation activities cannot be made with previous years.
Following inspections, mine operators and labor representatives requested 94 health and safety conferences with district managers under procedures instituted in May 1982.
A total of 71 health and safety conferences were held by the fiscal year's end.
Investigations of 99 discrimination complaints and 79 possible knowing and willful violations at metal and nonmetal mines were initiated in fiscal 1982.
Two special emphasis programs continued in fiscal 1982.
One, the Program in Accident Reduction (PAR), is aimed at reducing hazards at mines with injury incidence rates significantly higher than the national average.
The success of PAR during fiscal year 1982 at the selected mining operations with emphasis on good safety programs, job safety analysis, accident prevention and safety awareness on the part of both management and labor, is shown by the 52-percent reduction in the number of lost workday injuries and 37-percent reduction in the injury incidence rate for three quarters of the fiscal year compared with injuries and incidence rate at the same operations during three quarters of fiscal 1981.
A total of 69 MSHA employees and 92 persons from industry were trained during fiscal 1982 in the concepts of PAR at the National Mine Health and Safety Academy.
The Compliance Assistance Visit (CAV) program was begun in fiscal 1980.
Conducted only at the request of a mine operator, CAV's provide an opportunity for a no-penalty inspection of a new mine, section or equipment before it goes into operation or of a seasonal or intermittent mine prior to reopening.
No monetary penalties result from the CAV.
During fiscal 1982, 914 CAV's were conducted and 5,194 nonpenalty notices were written, fewer than in the two previous fiscal years because of the exempt status of surface stone and sand and gravel operations during part of the year.
During past years, the majority of CAV's were conducted at the exempted categories of operations.
In addition to these consultative activities, new district training specialists made 168 visits to metal and nonmetal mines by the close of fiscal 1982.
During the same period, Metal and Nonmetal personnel began work with committees established to review eight sections of mine safety and health standards with the highest priority for review.
This project included review of metal and nonmetal air quality standards in which lists of toxic substances found in mining were compiled, three open conferences were held, and current respiratory protection requirements were reviewed in fiscal 1982.
MSHA and the Health and Human Services Department's National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health also continued to work on developing improved standards for silica, mineral fibers, and radiation.
Several health problems on mining properties that were investigated during fiscal 1982 involved chemicals including cyanide and polychlorinated biphenyls.
An inventory of mining chemicals was being conducted to produce an information resource for inspectors and the industry to include manufacturing information, material safety data sheets, and sampling procedures for numerous chemicals used in the mines.
The Office of Standards, Regulations and Variances, which coordinates MSHA rulemaking, continued work on reviews of existing standards and regulations, intended to improve MSHA's safety and health standards in a manner consistent with the goals of regulatory reform.
The agency encouraged extensive public participation in these projects.
Major efforts were devoted to revising the regulations under which MSHA proposes civil penalties for violations.
During February 1982, public hearings were held in Pittsburgh, Pa.
St. Louis, Mo.
The hearings were well attended by representatives from all segments of the mining community.
Transcripts of the proceedings were taken and made available for public inspection.
After intensively reviewing its own experience and evaluating comments from both the mining industry and the public at large, MSHA on May 21, 1982, published a final rule that revised the existing procedures for proposing civil penalties.
The final rule improved the civil penalty process and provided more effective incentives for operators to comply with the law, standards and regulations.
MSHA was reviewing many of its safety and health standards to eliminate unnecessary reporting and recordkeeping requirements, remove conflicting provisions, delete irrelevant standards, simplify and consolidate existing regulations, update standards to conform to state-of-the-art technology, and clarify and reorganize standards where necessary.
In fiscal 1982, MSHA continued its comprehensive review of metal and nonmetal mine safety and health standards.
On March 9, 1982, the agency published a notice advising the public that MSHA would hold 26 public conferences throughout the country to discuss issues relating to metal and nonmetal mining standards on ground control; fire prevention and control; air quality; explosives; loading, hauling, and dumping; electricity; use of equipment; and gassy mines.
The conferences were well received by all segments of the mining community.
MSHA is now using the information gathered at these conferences to assist in drafting possible revisions of the metal and nonmetal mining standards.
In July 1982, MSHA initiated a comprehensive review of underground safety standards for coal mines and published an advance notice of proposed rulemaking requesting comments from the public.
MSHA specifically solicited comments with respect to possible regulatory action concerning standards for roof support, blasting and explosives, and ventilation plan requirements and criteria.
In addition to these major projects, on March 16, 1982, three final rules were issued and became effective: an amendment of regulations governing approval of electric cap lamps for use in underground mines, a rule governing approval of telephone and signaling devices for use in underground mines, and a rule governing approval of mobile diesel-powered transportation equipment for use in gassy metal and nonmetal mines.
These rules modify requirements for approval of equipment so that MSHA can test and certify equipment that incorporates advanced technology.
Also during fiscal 1982, MSHA worked on drafting proposed uniform standards intended to replace the separate safety standards now governing the use of wire ropes in hoisting miners at coal mines and at metal and nonmetal mines.
The decision to draft new standards was motivated by a legal decision in which the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission held that the current MSHA standard for hoist ropes in coal mines which incorporates a national consensus standard is not a mandatory standard and imposes no duty on mine operators.
The proposed rule would clarify the wire rope standards, update them to accomodate state-of-the-art technology, and provide separate but uniform wire rope standards for the entire mining community.
MSHA also published final rules for implementing the agency's internal reorganization of field responsibilities related to education and training and to citation conference procedures.
When the new civil penalty regulations were issued on May 21, 1982, the assessment program was reorganized.
The assessment conference function was eliminated along with the nine separate assessment conference offices.
Increased emphasis was placed on the inspection closeout conference for resolving differences surrounding a violation.
The inspector was given the responsibility for explicitly determining the gravity of a violation and the negligence of the operator.
A safety and health conference with district supervisory personnel was also provided in the new rules for occasions when issues cannot be resolved at the closeout.
Once any such conference has been held, the violations are forwarded to the Office of Assessments for assessment of a civil penalty.
The new regulations and assessment reorganization were well accepted by the mining industry.
Assessments were timely made and payment continued to be received for most assessments.
During the year 928 assessment cases (about 3 percent) were referred at the operator's request to the Office of the Solicitor for a hearing with the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission.
A commercial credit agency was hired on a pilot basis to assist in the collection of unpaid civil penalties.
This initially successful effort was to be expanded during fiscal 1983.
The reorganization of MSHA in fiscal 1982 placed the field training activities under direct supervision of the MSHA district managers instead of the 10 training centers formerly belonging to the Directorate of Education and Training.
At least one education and training specialist was placed as a staff member in each district office.
These specialists continued to be involved in approval of training plans, monitoring training programs for effectiveness, instructor training and certification, qualification and certification of mine personnel for critical tasks, mine rescue training, and support of voluntary safety associations.
Under the reorganization, they also conducted hazard analysis and consultation at mines that need special assistance to improve safety and training programs.